WT02-B13-1IA088-000636-B045-192http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/cc/8_95.htm 128.120.36.171 19970122192216 text/html 16080HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:23:04 GMTLast-Modified: Tuesday, 21-Jan-97 21:06:52 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 15823 On August 31, 1995 the Comparative Immigration and Integration Program of the UC Center for German and European Studies held a workshop on Immigration Issues in Germany and the US: Challenges and Options. IMMIGRATION ISSUES IN GERMANY AND THE US: CHALLENGES ANDOPTIONS Report of a workshop held August 31, 1995 UC-Berkeley Philip Martin September 1, 1995 Asylum 1 Guest Workers 3 Border Control 5 ON AUGUST 31, 1995 THE COMPARATIVE IMMIGRATION ANDINTEGRATION PROGRAM OF THE UC CENTER FOR GERMAN AND EUROPEAN STUDIESHELD A WORKSHOP ON IMMIGRATION ISSUES IN GERMANY AND THE US: CHALLENGESAND OPTIONS. There are perhaps 125 million immigrants, legal and illegal migrantworkers, and refugees and asylees who are outside their countriesof citizenship, meaning that about 2 percent of the world's populationare "foreigners" in their current countries of residence.However, the distribution of the world's foreigners is not uniform--thereare few foreigners in the world's two largest nations--China andIndia--while the foreign-born are almost 9 percent of the US populationof 265 million, and foreigners are 8 percent of Germany's 80 million. The circumstances over which foreigners enter and stay in industrialdemocracies such as Germany and the US are a major issue at theend of the 20th century, just as they were at the beginning. Amongthe most contentious issues are asylum--how to deal with personswho arrive in a country and ask to stay on the grounds that, ifthey return to their country of citizenship, they will face politicalpersecution--and guest workers, foreign workers who are to liveand work only temporarily in the host country. Dealing with asylum seekers and guest workers is difficult andexpensive because each person and job must somehow be dealt with. Asylum Germany's constitution includes an individual and enforceableright to stay in Germany while an application for asylum becausethe individual would face political persecution at home is considered.The number of asylum applications jumped in the early 1990s, peakingat 438,000 in 1992, as migrant workers joined genuine asylum applicantsin a system that was taking 3 to 5 years to reach the decisionthat 95 percent of all applicants were not entitled to asylumin Germany. A combination of costs, anti-foreigner violence, and the realitythat many foreigners were abusing the asylum process to immigrateto Germany led in 1992 to a political compromise that left inplace an individual constitutional right to apply for asylum inGermany, but added a clause that denied nationals of EU membernations, and persons who transited through a "safe thirdcountry" en route to Germany access to the constitutionalguarantee. The German Bundestag generates the list of safe thirdcountries. Germany also adopted the safe country of origin concept. If anasylum applicant is from a country that is presumed not to persecuteits citizens for political reasons, applicants from such countriescan be sent home while their applications are considered. As soonas the German Bundestag put Poland, Hungary, and Romania on thesafe country of origin list, the number of applications from thesecountries dropped sharply. Since Germany is surrounded by EU nations and safe third countries,the only asylum applicants after this new asylum provision wentinto effect in July 1993 should have been the 6000 applicantswho applied at Germany airports. But almost 140,000 foreignersapplied for asylum in Germany in 1994, and a similar number ofapplications is expected in 1995. There are several reasons why there are still an average 350 applicationsfor asylum daily in Germany is that Germany must prove that theapplicant in fact transited through a safe third countries enroute to Germany. Since many applicants assert that they wereplaced, e.g., in a truck and driven to Germany, and they haveno idea of which countries they transited, German authoritiesmust prove that they in fact transited through safe third countries. One court has gone much further, ruling that asylum applicantsin Germany have the right to present arguments that designatedsafe countries are in fact not safe. If this interpretation ofthe asylum compromise is upheld, then applicants may soon learnthat e.g., it is easy to stay in Germany while their argumentsthat Poland or Greece are in fact not safe countries in whichto apply for asylum. US refugee and asylum practices reflect cold war policies. The1980 Refugee Act was supposed to bring the US into line with otherindustrial democracies in its treatment of refugees and asylumseekers, but experience suggests that, in fact, the US continuesto grant asylum to persons fleeing regimes that the US opposes(Nicaragua in the 1980s), and to deny asylum to persons from friendlynations(El Salvador). There were about 150,000 asylum applications in 1994, one-fourthfiled by Guatemalans. In January 1995, the INS by regulation tightenedprocedures to "prevent abuse" of the asylum system--applicantsare denied work permits for 180 days after their applications(unless they are granted asylum), and more are detained whiletheir applications are considered. The INS believes that these reforms have reduced frivolous applications,but proposals pending in Congress would go much further. Underone proposal, for example, applications for asylum would haveto be filed within 30 days of arriving in the US, and could notbe filed by persons that the US is seeking to deport. In both the US and Germany, one indicator suggests that thesereforms have "worked"--the number of asylum applicationsappears to be dropping. But the discussion that followed producedassertions that these "temporary fixes" will be undoneby events, such as court interpretations in Germany that re-introducelengthy applications procedures. Guest Workers Germany in the 1960s initiated guest worker programs with itssouthern neighbors from Turkey to Italy to Spain. Guest or foreignworker programs aim to add workers to the labor force withoutadding permanent residents to the population, but the world wideexperience with such programs has produced one of the few "principlesof migration" --there is nothing more permanent than temporaryforeign workers. Between 1960 and 1973, some 18.5 million foreigners arrived inGermany, and almost 5 million settled in Germany. This means thatmost guest workers returned to their countries of origin as planned,but employer requests to extend the stay of what were in factprobationary immigrants, plus family unification, produced a stableforeign population in Germany in the 1980s. This changed in 1989. The demise of communism, and an economicboom in Germany, led to a sharp increase in immigration. Germanyresponded, in part with 5 new foreign worker programs. There are three major differences between the guest worker programsof the 1960s that gave Germany a peak 2.6 million foreign workersin a labor force of 26 million in 1973 and the guest worker programsthat in 1995 may add the full time equivalent of 250,000 foreignworkers to a labor force of 40 million. First, in the 1960s, therewas a single program or procedure to bring foreign workers intoGermany, and it responded primarily to the needs of German employers--Germanemployers needed more workers on assembly lines and at constructionsites, and the German Employment Service helped them to find foreignworkers by establishing recruitment and screening offices fromIstanbul to Lisbon. In 1972, some 1 million guest workers enteredGermany. In the 1990s, by contrast, there are at least 5 distinct programsthrough which perhaps 300,000 legal foreign workers enter Germanyfor 3 to 24 months. These programs range from a seasonal programthat permits foreign workers to be employed up to 90 days in Germany,a project-tied program that permits e.g., a German company tosubcontract with a Czech company to complete part of a constructionprogram and the Czech company to send Czech workers to Germany.There are also smaller programs under which border commuters,trainees, and nurses enter Germany to work. Unlike the 1960s program, which were mostly a response to domesticlabor shortages, these 1990s programs respond to two distinctimpulses. First, German employers requests for additional labor--despitean unemployment rate of 9 percent--and second, the need of restructuringeconomies in Eastern Europe to find an outlet for especially youngworkers. Foreign policy played a very significant role in the decisionto establish programs through which seasonal farm workers, constructionworkers sent by their home firms to Germany, and trainees canwork in Germany. In fact, some Germans point to the real bilateralnature of 1990s programs to explain why Poland and the Czech Republicare willing to cooperate with Germany to reduce the movement ofillegal aliens through their countries and into Germany--Polesand Czechs do not need visas to enter Germany. Second, in the 1990s there are several distinct programs. In otherwords, rather than trying to satisfy all of the domestic and foreignconcerns with one guest worker program, there are today separateprograms for very short labor needs, for workers sent abroad bytheir home-country employers, and for trainees and border commuters.Each program has its own rules on recruitment, labor market testing,etc. Third, there is not yet a consensus on whether the current Germanprograms will prove to be a substitute for or an addition to illegalimmigration from Eastern Europe. In the early 1990s, when over200,000 seasonal Poles and other East Europeans worked for upto 90 days in Germany, there was undoubtedly some substitutionof legal for otherwise illegal workers. But it is not yet clear whether Germany's decision to permit perhaps1 percent--(500,000) of the 50 million workers in Eastern Europeto work legally in Germany will in the long run increase or decreaseillegal immigration. If Eastern Europe can develop quickly, offeringjobs and higher wages, supply-push emigration pressures will decrease. However, demand-pull pressures in Germany are likely to increaseas a result of economic integration in Western Europe and aroundthe world. The search for cheap labor by farmers and constructioncompanies is likely to persist, and it is not yet clear whetherthe slowly-deregulated German labor market can continue to keepillegal immigrants a smaller percentage of the German labor marketthan they are of the US labor market. A review of guest worker programs suggests that most were initiatedin response to macro "emergency" or temporary situations--the wartime in the US, what was believed to be the end of a fragilepostwar economic recovery in Europe, and a construction boom inthe Middle East. However, today's US and German programs are respondingto micro labor market shortages, such as in agriculture and construction,or political considerations. Second, employers wanting guest workers usually succeed in gettingthem, largely because they can point to real and measurable benefitsif foreign workers are admitted, while opponents offer hypotheticalarguments against their admission, such as wage adjustments willeliminate the labor shortage easily. Third, guest worker programseverywhere tend to operate close to plan in their initial stages,tending to reinforce employers who want them and to silence critics. Border Control Every day, the INS apprehends about 3500 mostly Mexican aliensalong the Mexican-US border, about 1.3 million per year. In September1993, a local INS Commissioner introduced a new policy of deterringillegal entry rather than apprehending illegal aliens in the US,and in August 1994, the INS officially adopted this preventionof illegal immigration through deterring entry strategy by massingINS resources at the several points along the border where mostaliens attempt to enter illegally. In October 1994, the INS launched Operation Gatekeeper along a14 mile section of the 2000 mile border that typically accountsfor half of all apprehensions. Along the Mexican-US border southof San Diego, a steel-plate wall, lights, and 1300 agents werearrayed in three lines, so as to discourage attempts to enterthe US illegally. If aliens did succeed in entering, agents hopedto apprehend them before they could slip into populated areas. Apprehensions dropped in the San Diego area after Gatekeeper waslaunched in the fall months of 1994, but have risen sharply in1995, and are up 10 percent in the first 10 months of FY95 versusFY94. There were almost 50,000 apprehensions in July 1995. A careful examination of the data indicates that apprehensionsdropped most sharply in the areas of the border where the INSconcentrated its resources, and rose sharply in other areas. Inother words, aliens now make their first attempts at illegal entryat places further east of San Diego, or make a first attempt inthe westernmost section, and subsequent attempts elsewhere. There are no definitive data that indicate whether the preventionthrough deterrence strategy is in fact reducing overall illegalimmigration to the US. The INS is fingerprinting all of thoseapprehended in the San Diego area, and finds that a steady 20to 30 percent are recidivists, aliens who were caught before. Some informal surveys of aliens in the US suggest that about 70percent of them succeed in entering the US illegally on theirfirst try. Surveys of aliens in Mexico find that, even thoughmost of those planning to enter the US illegally know about Gatekeeper,the INS operation is not deterring them from planning to attemptillegal entry. This suggests that the INS can indeed shift aliens attemptingillegal entry along the border, but it is not yet clear whetherthe INS can in fact significantly change the overall flow of unauthorizedaliens into the US. The INS initially asserted that the effectsof Gatekeeper would be apparent within one year, but internalINS documents say that it will take five years to "reassertcontrol" over the border by adding fences, lighting, andagents from west to east. The German data, by contrast, suggest that the major new controlmeasure--the 1993 asylum reform--also reduced illegal entries.There were about 35,000 illegal aliens apprehended in Germanyin the first half of 1993, and 17,000 in the first half of 1994.However, the second half year comparison shows a smaller difference--19,000apprehended in the last six months of 1993, and 14,000 in thelast six months of 1994--suggesting that in Germany aliens andtheir smugglers may be adapting to the new law. The papers presented at the workshop are available from the CGES.Contact Jo Kim at tel 510-642-4508. fax 510-643-5996, or emailcges@uclink.berkeley.edu HomeWT02-B13-2IA088-000636-B045-219http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/cc/4_95.htm 128.120.36.171 19970122192251 text/html 14840HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:23:35 GMTLast-Modified: Tuesday, 21-Jan-97 21:06:52 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 14583 The Comparative Immigration and Integration Program Spring Workshop will be held Wednesday, April 5, 1995 at the Alumni House at University of California at Berkeley. Persons attending the PAA in San Francisco, and others interested in learning about the The Comparative Immigration and Integration Program Spring Workshopwill be held Wednesday, April 5, 1995 at the Alumni House at Universityof California at Berkeley. Persons attending the PAA in San Francisco,and others interested in learning about the activities of theCIIP are invited to participate. Alumni house is located centrally on the UCB campus, just northwestof Zellerbach Hall and Sproul Plaza (i.e. the corner of Bancroftand Telegraph). If you arrive by car, park in the Student UnionGarage, at Bancroft and Dana; if you arrive by BART, exit at the Berkeley stop and walk east on Center Street to thecampus. Take the Cross Campus path through the eucalyptus trees. You willfind Alumni House on the right hand side. If you would like to participate, please contact Patricia LaHayat PML@uclink.berkeley.edu, tel 510 642-4508 or fax 510 643-5996by 5 pm on Monday April 3, 1995. There is no charge to participate,and lunch will be provided. 9:00 AM Update on CIIP purposes and goals, Philip Martin, UCDand Richard Buxbaum/Gerry Feldman, UCB 9:15AM Introductions and 2 minute presentations on each participant'scurrent comparative immigration and integration research. 10:00 AM Roger Brubaker, UCLA, Ethnic Unmixing in Eastern Europeand the ex-USSR Discussant: Susan Larson, UCB 10:45 AM Break 11:00 AM Philip Martin, UCD, Mexican-US Migration after Prop 187and the Peso Devaluation Discussant: Ed Taylor, UCD 11:45 AM Jack Citrin, UCB, Public Opinion and Immigration Reform Discussant: Andres Jimenez, Ca Policy Seminar 12:30 Lunch 2:00 PM Nancy Bolton, UCLA, What Do CA Income Tax Returns tellus about Immigrant Integration? 3:30 PM Adjourn Announcements 1Minutes 1Student RFP 3 The CGES Comparative Immigration and Integration Program heldits Spring Workshop on Wednesday, April 5, 1995 at the AlumniHouse at University of California at Berkeley. Four papers werepresented and discussed by the 18 faculty and students who participated. Announcements 1. Faculty CIIP awards for 1995-96 will be announced by April20, 1995. This year's grant letters will include an explicit statementthat faculty receiving CGES-CIIP awards are expected to be activemembers of the workgroup. Active members are expected to participate in the Fall and Springworkshops, to make at least one presentation to the group, andto submit at least one working paper to Patricia LaHay based ontheir CIIP-funded research, each year that they receive a CIIPaward. 2. These minutes include the announcement of a Graduate StudentRFP for up to $2000 to be spent between June 15, 1995 and July1, 1996. Applications from UC graduate students are due by May7, 1995; awards will be announced by May 25, 1995. 3. There will be a special one-day "invitation only"workshop on recent developments in German immigration and integrationpolicy on Thursday, August 31, 1995. CIIP faculty and studentswho wish to participate should contact Patricia LaHay. 4. The CIIP program will expand to include immigration and integrationissues in Asia. The executive committee (Martin, Cornelius, Waldinger)will be expanded to include a UCB specialist interested in Asianlabor migration. Minutes Rogers Brubaker (UCLA) discussed "ethnic unmixing" inEastern Europe, and emphasized that people can move across borders(migration), and borders can move across people (various formsof "ethnic cleansing"). One of the world's major ethnicunmixings occurred after WWII, when 12 million Germans returnedto shrunken Germany, and Brubaker is interested in how ethnicunmixing might occur in the former USSR, where 25 million Russianslive outside Russia, and in Eastern Europe, as e.g., will ethnicHungarians in Romania stay there? There are many types of ethnic unmixing, so that the reasons for,costs of, speed, and volume of migration varies enormously. Ifan ethnic-dominated government falls violently in a multi-ethnicsociety, than those ethnics most associated with the old governmentare most likely to be pushed out quickly, especially if the ethnicitythat causes them problems in one country gives them a welcomemat elsewhere. Ethnicity can become an economically-valuable good, especiallyif a rich country such as Germany offers automatic citizenshipto ethnic nationals who move "home." The number of "ethnicGermans" has been increasing in the ex-USSR in response tothe opportunity to emigrate to Germany. However, it was notedthat ethnic unmixing may result in a move from isolation to isolation--theethnic Germans in Germany may be thought of there as Russians. Ethnicity can also increase network access to emigration. EthnicHungarians in Romania, for example, may be better able to migrateseasonally for employment to Hungary than other Romanians. Philip Martin (UCD) discussed the probable effects of the pesodevaluation on Mexico-to-US migration. As with many US-Mexicanrelationships, there is an asymmetry in the migration relationship:the US accepts immigrants from many nations, but virtually allMexican emigrants head for the US. Mexico is expected to sendover 3 million immigrants to the United States over the 15 yearsbetween 1981 and 1995, equivalent to 20 percent of Mexicoísnet population growth, and 25 percent of legal US immigration. On January 1, 1994, the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA)went into effect, laying the basis for an eventual free tradearea encompassing 380 million people with a combined GDP of $7trillion. The purpose of NAFTA is to reduce trade barriers andpromote investment in the region, thereby stimulating economicand job growth throughout North America. Mexico has had major devaluations at the end of each of the last4 Presidencies: in 1976, in 1982, again in 1986-87, and in 1994-95.After each de-evaluation, illegal immigration increased, but thereis no consistent relationship between economic troubles in Mexicoand illegal immigration to the US, at least as measured by apprehensions.For example, after the 1982-83 peso devaluation, it took about16 months for the US Border Patrol to notice a significant increasein illegal immigration. In 1987, apprehensions dropped despitea devaluation of the peso, largely because so many Mexicans werebecoming legalized US immigrants. The economic background and US immigration responses to the firsttwo peso devaluations may provide clues about responses to the1994-95 devaluation. The 70 percent peso devaluation of 1982-83lowered real wages in urban areas and put Mexican farmers in acost-price squeeze, but the fact that Mexican workers kept theirjobs and saw their standard of living erode gradually helps toexplain the delayed illegal migration response. The 1986-87 pesodevaluation, by contrast, occurred when the US was offering anamnesty, while the INS was educating employers rather than enforcingsanctions, and during a period of rapid US job growth, all factorsthat encouraged a seemingly ìlegalî migration response. The 50 percent peso devaluation of 1994-95 is occurring in a differentclimate in Mexico and the US. In Mexico, for the first time, itappears that there will be significant layoffs from formal sectorjobs --the Mexican government projects that 1 million workersmay be laid off from formal sector jobs, and that 400,000 werelaid off since January 1, 1995. With more urban workers facing unemployment without a safety net,and most of the relief programs apparently designed to help ruralpeople--Mexico plans to employ 500,000 workers temporarily tobuild and repair rural roads- -poor farmers could be joined inthe northward trek in 1995 by unemployed factory workers. INSCommissioner Doris Meissner, for example, noted that some of theMexican aliens apprehended by INS agents said they crossed theborder because of plant closings or other job losses related tothe peso devaluation. There are three broad options to deal with the increased emigrationpressure in Mexico: develop better border and interior controlsdesigned to deter Mexican and all other illegal immigrants, tryto convert illegal Mexican migrants into legal guest workers,and induce Mexico to cooperate to reduce illegal immigration. Jack Citrin (UCB) discussed the results of opinion polling thatfound widespread sentiment for reducing immigration. Elites--bettereducated and wealthier people--tend to favor current or higherlevels of immigration; mass opinion favors less immigration. There was a remarkable similarity of opinion on immigration regardlessof micro economic circumstances--whether a person was employedor not, his or her feelings about the need for less immigrationwere similar. It was noted that anti-immigrant sentiments seem to be risingin all aging industrial societies and that, in many countrieswith different groups of immigrants, one group--Turks in Germany,Algerians in France, or Mexicans in the US--seem to typify whatthose polled do not like about immigration. Nancy Bolton (UCLA) reported on the results of an ongoing projectthat is using state income tax records to study demographic changein CA. Using returns filed in 1990 and 1993, Bolton and her colleaguesmatched via SSNs a sample of persons who filed returns in bothyears, and this matching suggests that migration out of CA wasmuch greater than previously believed--perhaps a net 400,000 residentsleft CA in 1990. Tax records overcount households because many individuals livingtogether file separate tax returns, but they undercount the populationbecause not all persons are required to file, especially the elderlywith only social security income and those on welfare. However,there has been a significant increase in tax filings by poor peoplewith children to obtain the Earned Income Tax Credit--a maximum$1300 in 1992 if no tax was owed. One noteworthy trend was that non-Hispanics seemed to move outof CA between 1990 and 1993, while Hispanics moved in. CA's payrollemployment in March 1995 was 12.2 million, up a net 54,000 inthe first 3 months of 1995. Student RFP Call for Proposals - Deadline, June 1, 1995 The Center for German and European Studies announces a competitionfor a limited amount of grants of up to $2,000 available to registeredUC graduate students. Grant recipients would be expected to becomeactive participants in the Comparative Immigration and Integration Program,a study group which meets two times a year to discuss economic,political, and socio cultural questions raised by immigration into NorthAmerican and Western Europe, and the integration of newcomers into these industrial democracies. Funds may be used for research relatedtravel, supplies and expense, (excluding equipment). This Comparative Immigration and Integration Program (CIIP) isinterested in the issues raised by migration from developing nations intothe industrial nations of North America and Western Europe, the adaptationof newcomers to industrial societies, and the responses of industrial country populations to third world immigration. The purpose ofstudent research grants is to permit students with comparative migrationand integration interests to do further research of this type, andto enable those with expertise in one area of migration or integration todevelop a comparative perspective in their work. Proposals should indicate whether the questions being addressedare primarily economic, political, or socio cultural. The CIIP definesthese categories broadly, and does not expect, e.g., only economiststo deal with economic questions. Sociologists and anthropologists interestedin the impact of immigration on native born minority workers, oron how immigrants fare in ethnic enclave economies, might for example,also be dealing primarily with economic questions. The CIIP recognizesthat Migration Studies is an inchoate field, and has adopted this three-way economic, political, and socio-cultural taxonomy only for administrative convenience. Applications should consist of a short description of the proposed research, a CV, a budget, and a statement listing the amountsand sources of other funds that have been received or applied for to supportthe proposed research. Berkeley students should submit their applications directly to the Center for German and European Studies at theaddress below. UC Students at campuses other than Berkeley or UCSD needto submit their applications through the Contracts and Grants Office attheir home campus, allowing 2 weeks for processing. Please see your departmental business officer for instructions and information. Applicationsshould be received at the following address by June 1, 1995; awards willbe announced in mid-June. Center for German and European Studies 254 Moses Hall #2316 University of California at Berkeley Berkeley, CA 94720-2316 cges@uclink.berkeley.edu Direct questions to Gia White at gia@uclink.berkeley.edu, tel(510) 642-4555 or fax 510 643-5996. Home WT02-B13-3IA088-000636-B045-240http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/cc/3_95.htm 128.120.36.171 19970122192308 text/html 20365HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:24:01 GMTLast-Modified: Tuesday, 21-Jan-97 21:07:07 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 20108 Recent Immigration Developments in Germany: Recent Immigration Developments in Germany: Lessons and Implications for the US a workshop sponsored by the American Institute for Contemporary German Studies The Friedrich Ebert Stiftung and the Comparative Immigration and Integration Program of the University of California Center for German andEuropean Studies on Tuesday March 28, 1995 in Washington DC About 8 percent of the populations of Germany and of the US areforeigners. Both countries are struggling to manage the influxof foreigners, integrate resident foreigners, and do both in anhumane and durable fashion. Several recent newspaper reports have suggested that the US couldderive both positive and negative lessons from recent Germanyexperience in managing immigration and integration. Asylum applicationsfell from 438,000 in 1992 to about 130,000 in 1994, less thanthe US level. The number of foreign workers arriving under atleast 5 distinct programs aimed at ensuring that such programsadd workers to the labor force but not residents to the populationis between 200,000 and 300,000. Germany has a more generous social welfare system than the USand, at a time of planned US cutbacks in immigrant eligibilityfor welfare benefits, a review of the eligibility of foreignersfor benefits may be useful. Finally, both Germany and the US arestruggling to ensure that resident foreigners are integrated,so a review of German definitions of integration, and integrationpolicies, should be illuminating. The purpose of this workshop is to bring together 40 to 50 Washingtonarea immigration policy experts to review recent immigration developmentsin Germany, and their implications for the current US immigrationpolicy debate. The morning session will review what Germany hasdone to deal with asylum flows and foreign workers. Frank Loy,President of the German Marshall Fund, will provide a comparativeperspective on immigration and integration issues at lunch. Theafternoon session will feature presentations on the access offoreigners to tax-supported social services in Germany, and issuessurrounding the integration of foreigners. Attendance will be limited in order to maximize opportunitiesfor discussion. German speakers will make 20 minute presentations,followed by 10 minute comments by discussants, and then 45 minutesof roundtable discussion. The major items of discussion will besummarized in Migration News. Recent Immigration Developments in Germany: Lessons and Implications for the US 9am Welcome- Jack Janes, Dieter Dettke, Philip Martin 9:15 am Immigration Flows-Dick Buxbaum, University of California-BerkeleyChair Kay Hailbronner, Konstanz University, Asylum Issues in Germany: Current Status and Outlook, Discussant, David Martin, University of Virginia 10:15-10:30 Break Elmar Honekopp, Research Institute of the German Employment Office Germany's New Guestworkers Discussant, Philip Martin, University of California-Davis 11:45 Lunch--Immigration and Integration Issues in ComparativePerspective, Frank Loy, President of the German Marshall Fund 1:00 pm Integration Issues, Dieter Dettke, The FriedrichEbert Stiftung, Chair Wolf-Dieter Narr, Free University of Berlin Access of Foreigners to Welfare Services in Germany Discussant, Michael Fix, Urban Institute 2:15pm Break 2:30pm Olaf Reerman, Integration Issues in Germany Discussant, Ruth Ellen Wasem, Congressional Research Service 3:45 pm Adjourn IMMIGRATION AND INTEGRATION CHALLENGES IN GERMANY AND THE US April 1, 1995 German Immigration 2 Asylum 2 Guest Workers 4 Welfare 6 Both Germany and the US include about 8 percent foreigners intheir populations, both are worried about continuing immigrationand the integration of resident foreigners, and both are searchingfor durable immigration and integration policies for the 21stcentury. Despite their different histories, policies, and goals,can the two countries learn from one another how to better managemigration and integration? A March 28, 1995 conference in Washington DC on immigration andasylum challenges and choices in Germany and the US heard thatthat ìnon-immigrantî Germany has been affected by5 waves of immigrants over the past 50 years. There are proportionatelyfar more newcomers and their descendants living in Germany todaywho arrived since 1950 than in the US, which means that recentmigration may have done more to reshape todayís non-immigrantGermany than it influenced the immigrant US. Neither Germany nor the US is satisfied with the immigration andintegration status quo but, in both countries, there is littleagreement on answers to the three fundamental immigration questions:how many, from where, and in what status should newcomers arrive?Once immigrants arrive, a second set of questions arises: whatshould be done to integrate them? Germany and the US offer an interesting comparison. Germany proclaimsthat it does not wish to become a country of immigration, butprovides a relatively generous set of services to legal foreigners.The US, by contrast, basks in its immigrant heritage, but providesrelatively few public services to help to integrate newcomers. The fact that Germany provides services but not necessarily acceptance,while Americans accept immigrants but provide them with relativelyfew services, is not the only major difference. Non-immigrantGermany is currently one of the worldís major countriesof immigration--newcomers--including foreigners, asylum seekers,and ethnic Germans--account for 100 percent of Germanyíspopulation growth. In the US, by contrast, net immigration accountsfor about one-third of population growth. Managing migration is a tough but not impossible challenge facingindustrial societies. As numbers rise and force action, leadersmust be willing to confront the trade-offs inherent in decidinghow to manage immigration and integration. German Immigration The two parts of Germany have been affected differently by migration.The former West Germany added 13 million net immigrants between1950 and 1993, while the former East Germany lost 5 million residentsbecause emigration exceeded immigration. The former West Germanyincluded in 1993 about 4 in 5 Germans, and virtually all of the7 million foreigners in Germany live in the former West Germany. Germany is unlikely to remain a country in which foreigners arriveand remain foreigners. If a net 400,000 immigrants continued toarrive annually, Germany would in 2030 have a population of about90 million, of whom 30 percent would be foreigners. Major citiessuch as Frankfurt, Stuttgart, and Munich, which are now aboutone-quarter foreigners, would have populations that were halfor more foreign. Since one in six foreigners in Germany todaywas born in Germany--1.2 million of 7 million--and half have livedin Germany for 10 or more years, the status quo of foreignersremaining foreigners is unlikely to continue. Asylum Asylum involves foreigners arriving in a country and requestingtemporary safe haven, or the chance to resettle. In all of theindustrial democracies, the majority of asylum applications arerejected, so that separating genuine and false asylum applicantsis a major objective of all asylum systems. However it is difficultto construct stable systems for making difficult decisions onwho really faces persecution at home, and who is seeking economicopportunity. Since there are no limits on the number of asylum applicants whocan appear and request asylum, asylum has been called the ìwildcardî in immigration systems. When their numbers surge,as they did in 1992 in Germany to about 438,000, the cost of housing,feeding, and deciding asylum cases--some DM 6 to 8 billion or$4 to $5 billion--can equal contributions for development assistance(Germanyprovided $7 billionin ODA in 1991). Both Germany and the US have committed themselves to the 1951Geneva Convention, which obliges nations not to return to dangerpersons fleeing political persecution. However, each nation mustdecide for itself what constitutes political persecution. The number of asylum applicants arriving in industrial countriesrose sharply during the early 1990s, and it was widely agreedthat many of those seeking asylum did not face an individual dangerof political persecution in their country of origin. However,revamping systems that were designed to deal with a handful ofindividuals fleeing what were widely agreed to be repressive communistregimes, led to an ongoing debate over whether priority shouldgo to adding resources to the current asylum system, or whetherthe access of aliens to asylum should be curtailed. Germany didboth, while the US has so far primarily dealt with asylum by addingresources in order to speed up the processing of applications. In 1992-93, there were widely reported attacks on foreigners Germanyat a time when over 1000 foreigners daily were applying for asylum.Germany added resources to speed up the processing of asylum cases,and streamlined the system for determining whether a foreignerwas being persecuted for political reasons in his country of citizenship,and needed the opportunity to start over in Germany. The debatewas contentious in part because it highlighted disagreementsover whether Germany should become a country of immigration. Theimmigration issue was not resolved explicitly, but Germany didpreserve each individualís constitutional right to haveher asylum application considered fully, but amendments preventedaliens who could have applied for asylum in another safe countryfrom applying in Germany. The burden of proof was placed on applicantsfrom ìsafe countries,î and more staff were hiredto make decisions quickly, usually within 4 weeks. Most observers consider the asylum reform a success. The numberof asylum applicants fell by 3/4, reducing the state and localcosts of housing and feeding asylum applicants. Romanians andBulgarians learned that it was not worthwhile attempting to getto Germany and apply for asylum. There does not appear to be anoffsetting increase in illegal immigration from countries thatwere sending asylum seekers. The US during the 1980s also received an increasing number ofapplications from foreigners seeking asylum, and its system fordeciding whether to grant asylum was rightly criticized for beingtoo influenced by political considerations. For example, in aLatin American civil war, if the US government was supportingthe government(El Salvador), few applicants received asylum, whilemost persons were recognized if they opposed governments suchas that in Nicaragua. In the early 1990s, the US faced a huge backlog of asylum applications--over400,000 in 1995, representing over 700,000 individuals. The USdoes not provide welfare services to asylum applicants, but untilJanuary 1, 1995 granted work permits to asylum seekers so thatthey could support themselves while their applications were pending. In January 1995, the US streamlined its system and added morestaff to speed up asylum processing, in the hopes of removingthe attraction of a work permit that seemed to be attracting someapplicants. In the US today, an applicant applies to one of whatwill soon be 327 asylum officers (Germany has 900), and that asylumofficer either grants asylum or refers the case to an immigrationjudge--a non-INS employee. Second, asylum applicants must nowwait at least 180 days to work legally in the US. Most US applicants for asylum enter the country illegally, orenter on e.g., a tourist visa, and then wait 4 to 6 months toapply for asylum. The INS hopes to make decisions on most applicationswithin 6 months, so that few applicants wind up with legal permissionto work. The US is also increasing the resources committed toremoving aliens from the country--the budget has been augmentedto permit the removal of 110,000 aliens in FY96. (In Germany,removing aliens is the responsibility of the Land or state government). Both Germany and the US have invented in-between categories foraliens who are not eligible for asylum, but who nonetheless arenot deported. The US and German acronyms--TPS, DED, ìtoleratedî--reflectthe expectation that these aliens will eventually depart. Mass asylum in industrial democracies is a 1980s-1990s phenomenonthat has been confronted with more staff to decide cases quickly,and by restricting access to the system. How is the asylum systemlikely to evolve? Some believe that the concept of safe havenwill replace resettlement. Under some notions, ALL persons requestingasylum would be offered safe haven, perhaps on extra-territorialislands. Then, as budgets permit, individual cases would be heard,and those deemed in need of resettlement would be granted theright to begin life anew. Guest Workers Germany is practically synonymous with Gastarbeiter--the notionthat foreign workers can be added to the labor force without addinglong-term residents to the population. However, German and othercountry experience has led to one of the few apparently universalaphorisms in migration--there is nothing more permanent than temporaryworkers. Germany recruited guest workers between 1961 and 1973, when theirnumber peaked at 2.6 million, making one in 8 workers a foreigner.Over the next 15 years, these foreign workers united their familiesin Germany, and second and third generation-foreigners joinedtheir parents in the German work force. The year 1989 ushered in a new era. The fall of the Berlin wall,German unification, and the demise of the USSR opened heretoforeclosed societies. Germany responded to rising immigration pressures with 5 distinctforeign worker programs that involve some 350,000 foreigners,and add the equivalent of about 150,000 full-time equivalent workersto the German work force. However, unlike 1960s guest worker programs,1990s foreign worker programs have a different purpose--to copewith micro rather than macro labor shortages, and to make inevitablemigration legal. German foreign worker programs today also havedifferent incentives for the workers involved; today the emphasisis on ensuring return to their countries of origin. The most important program involves project-tied workers. Underthis program, German firms sub-contract with foreign firms, andthe foreign firm supplies the expertise and workers to completea particular phase of a project. There were an average 40,000project-tied foreign workers in Germany in 1994, down from 60,000in 1992 because of scandals that involved German contractors usingproject-tied agreements as a backdoor guest worker program. Most newly-arrived foreign workers are employed seasonally inGermany. A peak 150,000 seasonal foreign workers in 1994 contributedthe equivalent of 40,000 FTE to the German labor force. Seasonalforeign workers can remain 90 days in Germany, and most are employedin agriculture, restauarnts, or construction. If the workers areemployed less than 2 months, the workers and their employers donot have to pay social security taxes on their wages. The third program is for border commuters from the Czech Republicand Poland. If local workers are not available in Germany within50 km of these eastern borders, then employers can request permissionfrom the German Employment Service to employ commuter workersat prevailing wages who can remain in Germany for up to 2 nightsweekly. The fourth program permits about 6000 young East Europeans towork and learn in Germany for up to 18 months, although evaluationsindicate that Czechs, Poles, and other East Europeans learn fewskills in Germany that they use at home. Finally, about 1000 nursesfrom the former Yugoslavia are allowed to work in Germany. In both the US and Germany, there has been a shift in the rationalefor temporary foreign worker programs. Instead of recruiting foreignworkers to deal with macro or widespread labor shortages, mostprograms today are justified as a way to deal with a micro laborshortage, or to channel into legal programs inevitable and otherwiseillegal migrants. However, most of the industrial democracieshave heeded the advice of the OECD and deregulated their labormarkets, and most today play less of a job-matching role in labormarkets--the German ES matches about 35 percent of all job seekersand jobs, the US ES 3 to 4 percent--giving governments less credibilitywhen considering employer requests for foreign workers. Making credible determinations in micro labor markets is not theonly challenge facing governments. Governments may also have topay more attention to programs that admit foreigners for non-employmentreasons, but which add foreign workers to the labor force. Twoexamples are foreign students(almost 500,000 in the US) and thecultural exchange program (200,000), which adds au pair foreignersto US households. Welfare Gemini has one of the industrial worldís most comprehensivesocial welfare systems, and a 3-legged system of the federal,state, and non-profit organizations, including organizations thatrepresent foreigners, delivers these benefits. Foreign workersoriginally did not receive many benefits, but some of those whoarrived as asylum seekers, and many older unskilled foreign workerswho lost their jobs, have become long-term welfare recipients.Just as the US welfare system has been called by some a systemfor Blacks, even though Blacks are less than 40 percent of allcash assistance recipients, so the German welfare system may windup losing popular support if it appears to become a system forforeigners. In the US, the effort to reduce welfare has been motivated bythe search for cost savings and by the perception that minorityimmigrants are getting ìtoo manyî scarce benefits,from affirmative action to bilingual education to cash assistance.Illegal aliens are already barred from most US cash assistanceprograms except education and emergency health care, and legislationapproved in March 1995 by the US House would remove 3/4 of thelegal aliens now receiving federal cash assistance benefits fromthe rolls. Currently, 2/3 of the legal immigrants on welfare,and 3/4 of the costs, are in CA and NY. A complete report is available from AICGS, 1400-16st St NW#420,Washington DC, 20036-2217, fax 202-265-9531. HomeWT02-B13-4IA088-000636-B045-258http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/cc/10_94.htm 128.120.36.171 19970122192320 text/html 15619HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:24:14 GMTLast-Modified: Tuesday, 21-Jan-97 21:07:07 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 15362 Center for German and European Studies Center for German and European Studies International and Area Studies University of California Comparative Immigration and Integration Program Fall Workshop October 7, 1994 held at the Center for US-Mexican Studies University of California at San Diego 9:00 AM Review of CIIP purposes and goals, Professor Philip Martin,Agricultural Economics,UCD and Dean Richard Buxbaum, Internationaland Area Studies, UCB 9:15AM Introductions and 2 minute presentations on each participant'scurrentcomparative immigration and integration research projects. 10:00 AM Roger Waldinger, UCLA, Black/Immigrant Labor Market Competitionin Los Angeles. Discussant: Ed Taylor, UCD 10:45 AM Break 11:00 AM Jeanette Money, UCD, Comparative Perspectives on theMaking of Immigration Policy. Discussant: Manuel Griego y Garcia, UCI 11:30 AM Rafael Alarcon, UCB, Immigrants or Transnational Workers?The Settlement Process Among Mexicans in Rural California. Discussant: Philip Martin, UCD 12:15 Lunch 1:00 PM David Howell, Research Director, Commission on ImmigrationReform, Washington DC, The CIR's Recommendations and ResearchAgenda 1:30 PM Panel Reaction: Richard Buxbaum, UCB, Wayne Cornelius,UCSD, Philip Martin,UCD, Moderator 2:00PM General Discussion 3:00 PM Adjourn October 10, 1994 To: CGES Comparative Immigration and Integration Program(CIIP)Colleagues From: Philip Martin re: October 7, 1994 Fall Workshop at UCSD The Fall Workshop brought 30 UC faculty and graduate studentsinterested in Comparative Immigration and Integration issues tothe Center for US-Mexican Studies at UCSD to discuss 3 papersand to hear a presentation on the Commission on Immigration Reform'srecommendations and research agenda. The CIIP is funded by the CGES with funds from a 10-year grantfrom the German government to promote German and European studies;CIIP affiliates were reminded to volunteer to present their papersat the program's Spring and Fall Workshops and to submit papersto Martin at UCD or Patricia LaHay at CGES, 254 Moses, UCB. Afterreview by the CIIP Executive Committee, they will be issued asCIIP Working Papers. Ed Taylor (UCD) discussed a paper by Roger Waldinger (UCLA) thatasked why low-wage employers, once they begin to hire immigrantworkers, permit and encourage immigrants to "take over"particular workplaces. Taylor emphasized the advantages of immigrantnetworks to employers: current workers know exactly what the jobrequires, current workers have an incentive to recruit only goodworkers; current workers transfer existing friendships, etc intothe workplace, and networks are a cheap and efficient way to obtainnew workers. Waldinger analyzed trends in US employment, noting that many newjobs either require higher or lower skills. As the economyevolves, the job distribution develops an hourglass shape, withimmigrants at both extremes. Waldinger focused on jobs filledby immigrants at the bottom of this distribution. Using employer survey data, he described how employers ask currentworkers to bring friends and relatives to fill job vacancies.When the current workforce includes immigrants who can draw froma seemingly endless pool of friends and relatives here and abroad,then network hiring tends to exclude e.g., native-born Blacksand Whites, because they do not learn about job vacancies. Why don't employers who are hiring a number of new workers tryto initiate a network of Black or white workers? Many LA employersbelieve that immigrants work harder, complain less, and in generalhave the "right attitude" toward managers while "gettingalong" with co-workers. Interestingly, the "right attitude"was considered more important for many jobs than education orEnglish. Waldinger concludes that his study does not make a definitivecase for the hypothesis that immigrants adversely affect Blacks,but it pushes him toward that conclusion. His survey supportsthe hypothesis that most of the displacement due to immigrationis indirect rather than direct, a result of cumulative causationin the labor market. Non-immigrants do not learn about many jobopenings at the bottom of the labor market because the immigrantnetwork assures that job vacancies are filled by immigrant friendsand relatives, including those still abroad. Many do not wantto learn about these jobs, since many want more than employersare willing to pay. Such indirect displacement is a sharp distinction from the 1970sview of, among others, Labor Secretary Ray Marshall, that employershave separate queues of immigrant and Black workers. In that theory,employers select from the immigrant line, it is argued, becausethey believe that the immigrants will work "hard and scared." The logical next step is to professionalize networks, as occurswhen labor contractors make it their full time job to recruita particular type of worker. This has long been the case in thefarm labor market, and is increasingly the case in the nonfarmlabor market for "temps" of all types. One comparativequestion is the extent to which the labor market deregulationbeing urged on the Europeans by the OECD will, in a time of highmigration, also promote network recruiting and labor contractingin a manner that takes some jobs out of the public employmentsystem. In Germany, e.g., the public ES normally makes 30 to 40percent of annual job placements, versus 3 to 4 percent in theUS. The discussion emphasized that immigrants are diverse, and notall are unskilled and entering the US job market on the bottomrungs. Some questioned the native-born--immigrant distinction.As to whether unskilled immigrants are "necessary" forthe CA economy, it was noted that many non-tradeable jobs arebecoming tradable, and that, in agriculture, there is often adistinction between a short-run need or inelastic demand for unskilledworkers, and a much more flexible or elastic long-run demand forlabor. Jeanette Money (UCD) linked immigration policy changes with economicvariables over the 1955-85 period in the US, UK, Sweden, Franceand Germany. It is clear that total foreigner inflows varied fromyear-to-year and across countries, but the data do not permitprecise counts of nor distinctions between immigrants, probationaryimmigrants(European guestworkers), non immigrants, and illegalaliens. For this reason, the US is pictured as having a generallylower immigration rate--the annual inflow as a percent of thepopulation was about 2/10 of one percent in 1970, when there wereabout 375,000 immigrants and the pop was 200 million--while inGermany the rate was almost 10 times higher. The US immigrantscould stay indefinitely, but most of the German entrants wereguestworkers admitted with one year renewable work and residencepermits. Money regressed these annual immigration flows against country-specificeconomic indicators such as interest rates, manufacturing employment,and unemployment rates, but found none of them statistically significant.After separating out the US as a traditional country of immigration,she concluded that "nonimmigrant" European nations hadhigher immigration rates that immigrant US. The paper next turns to the hypothesis that it is local reactionsto immigration policy that explain changes in it. Immigrants aregeographically concentrated. In thumbnail sketches of immigrationpolicy changes in UK, F, and the US, she concludes that immigrationtends to be restricted when a concentrated immigrant populationis combined with high local unemployment rates. Local oppositionto immigration in tough economic times generates pressure forimmigration restrictions, which is most likely to lead to immigrationpolicy changes if electoral margins are small and political competition. Manuel Garcia y Griego (UCI) noted that it is hard to evaluatethe relationship between immigration policy changes and immigrationflows because of the "gap" between immigration goalsand outcomes. Regression analysis implicitly assumes that thereis no such gap, and that there are no or uniform lags in implementingimmigration policy changes. It was also note d that, in the US,many of the most restrictionist legislators are from districtswith few immigrants, while admissionist politicians often representdistricts with many immigrants. Rafael Alarcon (UCB) reported on a study tracing Mexicans whohad moved from Central Mexico to several areas of CA, includingMadera. These workers originally came as solo men, but more andmore are settling with their families in CA. Philip Martin (UCD)noted that leakage into permanence is an inevitable side effectof temporary worker programs because of the growing mutual dependenceof employers and immigrant workers, and the complex cumulativecausation processes this dependence sets in motion. However, settlementrates for Mexican immigrant workers in CA seem to have been lowerthan were settlement rates for guestworkers in non- immigrantEurope. The Alarcon paper also raised other issues. Was the upward mobilityexperienced by these workers, from seasonal to more permanentworker, atypical or likely to be repeated in the 1990s and after2000? Most European guestworkers started higher on the job ladderthan do the typical immigrants from rural Mexico--how do theirmobility patterns differ? Finally, why are naturalization ratesfor these settled immigrants so low--Alarcon suggests that theimmigrants see few advantages to US citizenship, and that somethink that becoming a US citizen is being disloyal to Mexico. During the afternoon session of the workshop, CIR senior policyanalyst David Howell reviewed 2 major recommendations of the CIRissued September 30, 1994, those dealing with enforcement andbenefits. The CIR's report is based on the theory that the USmust above all restore credibility of immigration policy by makingimmigration easier for legal immigrations, making it harder toillegal aliens to enter, and locating and removing persons notauthorized to be here. CIR recommendations include support for Operation Hold the Linein El Paso and Operation Gatekeeper, efforts to put additionalBorder Patrol agents near the border to deter illegal entriesand expedite legal entries. The most visible recommendation isto test in 5 states a registry that would combine SS and INS data.Under the proposal, an employer would request the SSN of eachnew hire after the person begins to work, check it, along witha personal identifier such as mother's maiden name, and then recordthe verification number to prove that the employer complied withIRCA's employer sanctions provisions. If there is no match, thenthe employee would continue to work while the apparent error isinvestigated. The CIR recommended that more efforts be made toeducate employers to avoid discrimination, and more funds be madeavailable for labor law enforcement. The CIR asserted that illegal aliens should not get any more benefitsthan they are currently eligible for, primarily public educationand emergency health care. The CIR also recommended that legalimmigrants not be denied access to welfare for 3 to 5 years, asoccurs under some programs today, but that sponsors who agreeto support the family members they ask the US government to admitshould be required to honor these commitments. Further, accessto social services should be decided when new immigration categoriesare created. The CIR agrees that the states which have the mostimmigrants should obtain federal aid, but only for their actualadditional expenditures due to illegal immigration. The CIR also urged that illegal aliens convicted of crimes shouldbe deported ASAP, and that the immigration data base be improved.The CIR is urging that an independent critique be conducted ofexisting benefits and costs of immigration, and is the lead agencyto explore ways to cooperate with Mexico to reduce emigrationpush pressures. CIIP participants expressed reservations about the registry andthe denial of benefits noting, for example, that denying benefitsmay not reduce the incentive to come to the US illegally becauserelatively few illegal aliens say that they come here for suchbenefits. The CIR was urged to rethink the treat all countriesequally in an effort to give Mexico a larger quota. Gustavo de la Vina and Ann Summers (INS) provided several CIIPparticipants with an explanation of Operation Gatekeeper. UnlikeEL Paso, where 70 percent of the illegal entrants were destinedfor the El Paso area, over 95 percent of those apprehended southof San Diego are headed for destinations outside the area, usuallyto Los Angeles, 120 miles north. This means the reaction to saturatingthe border with agents is likely to be different--in El Paso,reducing illegal entries and expediting legal entries was supportedby 90 percent of EL Paso. In San Diego, most aliens pay smugglers$300 for the trip to Los Angeles, and many have a mindset thatthey must attempt illegal entry repeatedly until they succeed. The goal of Operation Gatekeeper is to make it impossible foraliens to avoid capture along a 14 mile stretch of border. Thereis a fence, high intensity lights, and 3 lines of agents, alldesigned to get the message out that if you attempt illegal entry,you will be apprehended. All those apprehended are fingerprintedelectronically, and between October 1 and 6, about 6 percent ofthe 6000 aliens apprehended were recidivists caught for the secondor third time. Alien smugglers have been able to evade some pastcontrol efforts--using cellular phones to know when the BorderPatrol checkpoints on Highways 5 and 15 are down, for example,to smuggle aliens through, and using juvenile drivers and nearlyworthless vehicles to cope with smuggling penalties and vehicleseizure. The Spring workshop of the CIIP will be held on a Friday in Aprilat UCB. We will select a date and notify you of the meeting, aswell as the 1995 CIIP RFP, at the beginning of the January orFebruary Migration News. Please volunteer to present a paper atthe Spring workshop, and send in your working papers. HomeWT02-B13-5IA088-000636-B045-279http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/cc/4_94.htm 128.120.36.171 19970122192336 text/html 4615HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:24:28 GMTLast-Modified: Tuesday, 21-Jan-97 21:06:52 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 4359 Agenda Agenda for the CGES Research Group on Comparative Immigrationand Integration Meeting UC-Berkeley Friday, April 22, 1994 ______________________________________________________ 9am Philip Martin/Dick Buxbaum: Review of purposes and goals ofthis group 9:15 am Introductions and 10 minute presentations on current comparativemigration and integration research 12:15 Lunch with the other CGES groups 1:15pm Current Immigration Issues 4:00pm Adjourn April 23, 1994 To: CGES Comparative Immigration and Integration Program(CIIP)Colleagues From: Philip Martin re: April 22, 1994 Spring Workshop at UCB The Spring Workshop brought together 16 UC faculty and graduatestudents interested in Comparative Immigration and Integrationissues. CGES Director Gerald Feldman explained that the fundsthat support the group are from a 10-year grant from the Germangovernment to promote German and European studies; he stressedthe need for CIIP affiliates to acknowledge CGES in their workingpapers and scholarly publications. CIIP affiliates are invitedto submit papers to Patricia LaHay, CGES, 254 Moses, UCB and,after review by the CIIP Executive Committee, they will be issuedas CIIP Working Papers. Dean of International Studies Dick Buxbaum noted that immigrationand integration issues provide an opportunity to do what universityleaders want to promote--interdisciplinary problem-oriented research.Andres Jimenez of the California Policy Seminar explained thatthis is exactly how the CPS is treating immigration and integrationissues in California, and that CPS may be able to provide supplementalfunds for CIIP projects. CIIP affiliates have diverse interests. The issues being addressedrange from the apparent "structural demand" for immigrantlabor in industrial democracies--meaning that there is a demandfor foreign workers even during recession--to how immigrants arebeing integrated in the relatively rich (parts of)countries withnationalist movements. Several CIIP affiliates are asking howthe industrial democracies dealt with immigrants in the past,and what lessons historical experience provide for today's debates. CIIP affiliates are examining the growing global importance ofthe international labor market--remittances from citizens abroadare the number one source of foreign exchange from Algeria tothe ex-Yugoslavia. Many CIIP affiliates are interested in thetransnational linkages that arise between areas of origin anddestination, and how these linkages affect the economies, politics,and social organizations of both areas of origin and destination. The CIIP group agreed to hold its Fall Workshop Friday October21, 1994. We have preliminary approval to meet at UCSD, so thatthose who can arrive on Thursday October 20 can take a field tripto the US-Mexican border. At the Fall Workshop, the morning session will be devoted to 2or 3 presentations by CIIP affiliates on recently-completed researchprojects. A notice will be circulated in the September 1994 MigrationNews asking who would like to make a 20 to 30 minute presentationon their research; CIIP affiliates receiving support from CGESare expected to make one presentation per year. The afternoon session will feature a presentation on the Commissionon Immigration Reform's report, due to be released in September1994. It is expected to guide the Clinton Administration's immigrationreform proposals. The minutes of the Spring Workshop will be distributed by (intercampus)mail, along with a list of the faculty and graduate students whopariticipated in the January and April workshops, and those whorecieved CIIP research awards. Please send corrections and additionsto Patricia Lahay. HomeWT02-B13-6IA088-000636-B046-2http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/cc/1_94.htm 128.120.36.171 19970122192355 text/html 3558HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:24:45 GMTLast-Modified: Tuesday, 21-Jan-97 21:07:07 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 3302 The CGES Research Group on Comparative Immigration and Integration met at UCB January 14, 1994 to formulate its plans. The Group reached consensus on three points: The CGES Research Group on Comparative Immigration and Integrationmet at UCB January 14, 1994 to formulate its plans. The Groupreached consensus on three points: 1. A Steering Committee of Philip Martin(UCD), Wayne Cornelius(UCSD),and Roger Waldinger(ULCA) will prepare a RFP and plan the April29, 1994 meeting of the Group. Richard Buxbaum or his designeewill also be part of the Steering Committee. 2. The Group considered organizing the research activities ofparticipants (1) by topic(flows, short-run impacts/integration,and long-run impacts/integration), as well as(2) by type of questioninvestigated(economics, politics, and integration/culture). Thegroup decided to organize the RFP and the April meeting by typeof question investigated. 3. The Group's RFP will be issued by early February, in the hopethat Faculty Research Awards can be made by early March. The SteeringCommittee will write the RFP and screen proposals received, includingthose of Committee members. Funding should be sufficient to supportall worthy Faculty proposals received. 4. The April 29, 1994 meeting of the Group will be held at UCBin conjunction with other CGES groups. At that meeting, the expectationis that there will be 2 or 3 presentations by Group members onEconomic questions, and 2 or 3 on Political issues. The Groupplans to hold three one-day meetings annually, with at least oneincluding a field trip for those who can arrive a day early. The Group also intends to invite one or two representatives ofother institutes/commissions to act as discussants and/or to makepresentations on the structure and content of their work. Possibilitiesinclude Mark Miller of CMS, Michael Teitelbaum/Susan Forbes Martin(USCommission on Immigration Reform), Jeff Passel and Michael Fixof the Urban Institute, F Heckmann and K Bade(German migrationinstitutes), and Roger Böhning and Jonas Widgren of the ILOand the Intergovernmental Consortium. 5. Martin at UCD and Giselle at UCB will create an email network/bulletinboard to post news, data, and bibliographic items for the Group;all group members are asked to post items as well. Buxbaum willmake $1500 available to Martin for the UCD part of the network;its usefulness will be evaluated at the April meeting. The Group appreciates and understands Buxbaum's desire tosee the ideas and implications of the Group's research evolveinto a "California perspective" on immigration and integrationissues. It is hoped that the Group can evolve so that it can,in conjunction with migration institutes in Europe and elsewhere,secure $3 to 5 million to do comparative research on fundamentalimmigration and integration issues in a manner that helps to shapethe emerging field of migration studies. HomeWT02-B13-7IA088-000636-B046-26http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/cc/cpsip.htm 128.120.36.171 19970122192439 text/html 11719HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:25:15 GMTLast-Modified: Tuesday, 21-Jan-97 21:07:07 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 11462 CA Policy Seminar Immigation Panel CA Policy Seminar Immigration Panel What hath Congress Wrought? The Implications of Immigration and Welfare Reformfor the US and CA Susan Martin, Executive Director, Commission on ImmigrationReform October 4, 1996 Illegal Immigration 2 Removing Aliens 2 Legal Immigration 2 What's Next? 3 California Implications 4 In 1996, three major laws that had their origins in the 1994 and1995 recommendations of the Commission on Immigration Reform wereenacted that affect immigrants and immigration: The Anti-Terrorismand Effective Death Penalty Act, signed into law on April 24,1996, the Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity ReconciliationAct, signed into law on August 22, 1996, and the Immigration Controland Financial Responsibility Act, signed into law on September30, 1996. Susan Martin, executive director of the CIR, emphasized duringthe October 4 discussion of their likely effects on the US andCA that there is never a "good time" to make immigrationpolicy, but that 1996 was particularly difficult because of theneed to find savings in government expenditures, and Americaninsecurity and frustration. The CIR's recommendations were based on two principles. First,the US should do more to reduce illegal immigration. To accomplishthis goal, CIR recommended that the borders be "managed"to prevent the entry of illegal immigrants, increasing penaltiesfor smuggling, and testing systems to help employers determinequickly and reliably who is legally authorized to work in theUS. Second, the CIR recommended that the US strike a "grand bargain"on legal immigration--reduce the growth of immigration, but maintainlegal immigrants' full access to the social safety net. Specifically,CIR recommended that the US speed up the admission of immediatefamily members of immigrants living in the US, but eliminate theright of brothers and sisters of US citizens to immigrate. Congress adopted many of the CIR's recommendations to reduce illegalimmigration, but rejected the CIR's grand bargain proposal. Illegal Immigration The CIR urged a three prong effort to reduce and deter illegalimmigration: prevent entry over borders, prevent those insidethe US from getting jobs or benefits and, if detected, quicklyremove illegal aliens from the US. Congress agreed to add Border Patrol agents and support personnelto deter illegal entries over US borders, and also agreed to addstaff to expedite legal entries. However, Congress did not addsignificantly to efforts to prevent illegal aliens in the US fromgetting jobs: US employers may, but do not have to, participatein experimental employee verification systems. The INS will get1200 more inspectors, including 900 whose primary responsibilityis to deal with employer sanctions and alien smuggling. However, at the last minute, Congress refused to authorize thehiring of 350 more labor inspectors to the DOL. Removing Aliens The anti-terrorism bill made it easier to remove from the US alienswho are convicted of felonies in the US. Once apprehended, criminalaliens must be detained, and they have fewer opportunities toappeal to stay in the US and, under the new immigration law, theymay be required to serve their sentences in their country of origin,if the US negotiates agreements with other countries. The immigration bill also made it easier to exclude foreignerswho enter the US without valid documents. If an unauthorized alienapplies for asylum to remain in the US, she must make a credibleclaim to an INS asylum officer. If the INS officer rejects herclaim as not credible, then she has one appeal to an immigrationjudge, who must make a decision within 7 days. Unauthorized aliens in the US for seven or more years may applyfor "suspension of deportation," an acknowledgment that,over that time, the alien may have developed US roots. However,Congress adopted a tougher standard for suspension of deportation,and limited the number of foreigners who can obtain this reliefto 4000 per year. The new immigration law allows the US Attorney General to deportwithout any judicial review any illegal alien apprehended insidethe US, who has been in the US for less than two years. Legal Immigration According to Susan Martin, the US legal immigration system, whichmanages immigration by backlogs or waiting lists, needs a majoroverhaul. Over 1.1 million spouses and children of legal immigrantsliving in the US are waiting--up to 10 years--to come to the US.Many do not wait; they come illegally. Similarly, there are 1.7million siblings, such as the adult brothers and sisters of UScitizens, in the Philippines, Mexico, and other countries waiting,sometimes 20 to 30 years, until they receive permission to migratelegally to the US. The CIR recommended that the US eliminate immigration slots forbrothers and sisters of US citizens. However, an unusual alliancebetween business and religious and ethnic groups prevented changesto the legal immigration system, but not changes to the US welfaresystem that make most legal immigrants ineligible for benefits. The CIR recommended that the US draw a firm line between the accessof legal and illegal immigrants to welfare and other public assistancein the US. The CIR recommended that illegal immigrants receiveonly emergency services, and those authorized by the US constitution,including K-12 education for illegal alien children. The CIR recommended that legal immigrants be eligible for thesame public assistance services as US citizens, but that sponsorshipagreements be made legally binding--if a US citizen or legal immigrantagreed to support a relative, and that relative, after arrivingin the US, applied for welfare, the applicant would be assumedto have access to the income and assets of the sponsor, and thuslikely not be eligible for benefits. In order to sponsor the admission of an immigrant, a US residentwould have to earn at least 125 percent of the poverty line forthe sponsor and the immigrant(s) who would arrive, and sign anaffidavit promising to support the immigrant in the US. The US-sponsorcould have another US-cosponsor. The welfare law makes newly-arrived legal immigrants not eligiblefor most welfare benefits for at least five years after theirarrival in the US. What's Next? Susan Martin believes that immigration, which accounts for about40 percent of US population growth, will continue to be a prominentissue in the US and California. Four issues not addressed in 1996are likely to get attention: legal immigration, refugees, immigrantpolicy, and the administration of US immigration. Martin believes that the US will eventually have to strike sometype of Grand Bargain of the sort recommended by the CIR because.With legal immigration rising, and welfare services ending, poorimmigrants may become more vulnerable and visible. Second, the end of the cold war has eliminated the major rationalefor refugee admissions over the past 50 years--providing a havenfor those fleeing communism. The US must rethink what it wantsto accomplish with refugee policy--just who among the world's25 million refugees should US admit to start over in the US? Third, the US has admitted about 15 million immigrants since 1980,and many of them are not faring well in the US economy. As immigrantsand US citizens compete in a labor market crowded by ex-welfarerecipients, the US may have to consider immigrant integrationpolicies. Fourth, the INS is one of the few federal agencies whose budgethas doubled in a time of reduced government spending. The US needsto study what has become a large and expensive system for managingimmigration. California Implications Phil Romero explained why Governor Wilson in the early 1990s leda campaign to reduce illegal immigration. The 1991-92 recessionincreased the demand for state-funded services, but made it impossibleto pay for more state services. However, immigration continuedto bring large numbers of people into the state who needed state-fundedservices, including unauthorized aliens. According to Romero, Wilson thought that the federal governmentshould either reimburse CA for the cost of providing servicesto illegal aliens, or prevent their entry. When the federal governmentdid neither, Wilson endorsed a state effort to reduce servicesto unauthorized aliens, Proposition 187. David Illig explained that the major assistance programs affectedby 1996 immigration and welfare legislation include AFDC, whichhad about 380,000 legal immigrants on the rolls in summer 1996,Food Stamps, with about 436,000 non-US citizen recipients, SSI,with 331,000 immigrant recipients, and in-home supportive services,with 55,000 non-US citizen recipients. Perhaps 500,000 non-UScitizens now receiving one or more welfare benefits may lose themunder 1996 legislation. The major fear in CA is that, as non-US citizens are removed fromwelfare rolls, state and local government may have to provideassistance to them. Under CA law, county governments must providelocally-paid-for General Assistance to persons not eligible forany other benefits who need assistance, and in July 1996, about150,000 persons in CA were receiving assistance that cost countygovernments $300 to $400 million per year. CA politicians are waiting until after the November 1996 electionsto decide how to respond to the non-eligibility of most newly-arrivedimmigrants for welfare benefits, and the removal of immigrantsfrom the welfare rolls. Among the options are to prolong the eligibilityof current immigrant recipients--non-US citizens currently receivingFood Stamps can continue to do so until April 1, 1996, encouragenaturalization, or simply ignore federal sanctions that are threatenedif CA does not remove immigrants as the law requires. One proposal is to have parallel welfare programs in CA--a 100percent federally-funded program that meets all federal criteria,and a 100-percent state-funded program that would permit e.g.people to draw benefits longer than five years, and perhaps servesome immigrants. WT02-B13-8IA088-000636-B046-59http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/cc/ap.htm 128.120.36.171 19970122192518 text/html 21948HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:25:59 GMTLast-Modified: Friday, 30-Aug-96 22:35:32 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 21692 Immigration Seminar Accomplishments and Plans of the CA Policy Seminar Immigration Panel June 10, 1996 January 26, 1996 1 March 1, 1996 2 Does Gatekeeper Deter Illegal Immigration? 2 US Immigration Reforms 4 3. June 7, 1996 5 Domestic and Unauthorized Migration 5 Dealing with Alien Offenders 6 4. September-October, 1996 7 Education and Immigration: Challenges for CA-- September 13 or20, 1996 7 CIR--An Update--October 4, 1996 8 Gatekeeper--An Update--October 18, 1996 8 Health and Immigration: Challenges for CA-- November __, 19968 Crime and Immigration: Challenges for CA 8 Estimating Immigration: the CPS and other methods 9 Guestworkers and Mexican Cooperation in Border Control? 9 Employment and Immigration: Challenges for CA 9 1. JANUARY 26, 1996 Who's doing what? The Current Status of Research on Immigrationto CA--UCLA. 26 participants Roger Waldinger (UCLA) noted that an analysis of Census data forLos Angles for 1970, 1980, and 1990 emphasizes that there arefar more immigrants arriving at the bottom than at the top ofthe job ladder, and that especially Mexicans at the bottom arenot enjoying rapid upward mobility. A fifteen chapter book onEthnic Los Angeles will be published in 1996. Waldinger, Rogerand Mehdi Bozorgmehr (Eds). 1996. Ethnic Los Angeles. New York:Russell Sage. Dowell Myers (USC) reported on his double cohort method--by ageand year of entry-- of analyzing what happened to immigrants arrivingin the seven southern CA counties after 1980. His analysis showsthat especially young immigrants make considerable economic progressafter their arrival--as measured by their total incomes--and thatsome of their behavior converges rapidly to that of natives, e.g.,they rapidly abandon buses and drive cars to work. In southernCA, one-third of all bus riders are recent immigrants. Myers noted that immigration is raising other issues, includingovercrowded housing. The US definition of acceptable housing wastwo or less persons per room until 1960, when the definition waschange to one or less per room. However, as immigrants moved intosouthern CA, overcrowding jumped, raising questions about howaggressively cities should enforce housing codes developed duringa non-immigrant era. George Vernez (Rand) outlined an ambitious project that is dealingwith the question of whether immigration is, on balance, a plusor minus for CA by examining the effects of immigration on internalmigration, on wages, and on public sector finances since 1960.These studies show that immigrants from most countries do catchup to similar natives in average weekly earnings after 10 to 20years, but not immigrants from the major country of origin--Mexico.Furthermore, immigrant children tend to follow in their parents'footsteps, meaning that the children of Asian immigrants tendto do well in school, etc., while the children of Mexican immigrantsdo not. The Mexican lag may be even more severe if Mexicans tend to reporta more recent arrival date than they actually arrived. For example,many Mexicans who may have arrived in the US before 1987 reportedin the 1990 Census that they arrived in 1987, the year that theyapplied for legalization. It was also noted that, in the threemajor industrial democracies of France, Germany, and the US, thelargest immigrant group--Algerians, Turks, and Mexicans--seemto do "worst" on most integration measures. Hans Johnson (CA PPI) reported that the institute has a numberof immigration projects underway, including an examination ofinternal migration patterns, Mexican return migration, and theeffects of Prop 187 on prenatal care. 2. March 1, 1996 Operation Gatekeeper and other Border Control Efforts? How wellare they working? CA Research Bureau 28 participants Does Gatekeeper Deter Illegal Immigration? Mexico devalued the peso in December 1994, and 1995 was a yearof economic crisis in Mexico. More Mexicans attempted illegalentry into the US, and the US responded with a series of bordercontrol operations designed to prevent illegal border crossings--Operation Gatekeeper in California, Operation Hold-the-Line inTexas, and Operation Safeguard in Arizona. As one result, apprehensionsincreased sharply in 1995-- some 1,381,465 foreigners were apprehendedby the US Border Patrol in calendar year 1995, up 43 percent from965,144 in 1994. Do increased apprehensions reflect the success of the Border Patrolin apprehending a stable or declining number of aliens attemptingentry, or do they reflect more aliens attempting unauthorizedentry? Most surveys suggest that the probability of apprehensionon any attempt to enter the US without inspection is about 30percent--in the Westat survey of 6,200 newly legalized aliensconducted in 1989, for example, 74 percent of those in the USillegally before January 1, 1982 reported that they had neverapprehended. Manuel Garcia y Griego showed that the probability of successfulentry is very high for persistent aliens despite stepped up bordercontrols. Assuming that each entry attempt is an independent effort--meaningthat the probability of apprehension does not change from oneillegal entry attempt to the next-- if the probability of apprehensionis 30 percent on any attempted illegal entry, then 99 percentof the aliens attempting entry will succeed after four attemptedentries. Apprehensions and Entries for 1000 Persons Probability of apprehension is 30 percent on any entry attempt Attempted Attempted Apprehended and Entered Cumulative Entry # Entries Returned US Entries 1 1000 300 700 700 2 300 90 210 910 3 90 27 63 973 4 27 8 19 992 Total 1417 425 992 Suppose that more Border Patrol agents, fences, and lights increasethe probability of apprehension to 70 percent on any attemptedentry. In this case, about 73 percent of the aliens who attemptto enter will succeed after four attempts, and 78 percent afterfive attempts. In other words, border control efforts work onlyif they change the behavior of aliens--if those apprehended "giveup" and return home, thereby discouraging others from attemptingillegal entry. Total 1417 425 992 Probability of apprehension is 70 percent on any entry attempt Attempted Attempted Apprehended and Entered Cumulative Entry # Entries Returned US Entries 1 1000 700 300 300 2 700 490 210 510 3 490 343 147 657 4 240 168 72 729 5 168 118 50 779 Total 2598 1819 779 The Border Patrol's Gatekeeper operation fingerprints and photographsall aliens apprehended, so that apprehension data for the firsttime can be used to estimate recidivism rates. Unofficial Gatekeeperdata in the winter of 1995-96 suggest that about 30 percent ofthose caught once are caught again, which suggests that the probabilityof successfully entering the US on any attempt may be as highas 70 percent, especially if most aliens who are apprehended keepon trying, as empirical studies suggest they do. If border controls were deterring aliens, then there should bereports of labor shortages and rising wages in the industriesthat are known to employ recently arrived unauthorized immigrants.But there are few such reports. For example, reports from thesingle most labor-intensive activity in North American agriculturein Fall 1995--the harvest of about 200,000 acres of raisin grapesaround Fresno, California from mid-August to October-- found thatnewly arrived workers were getting into the US and going to workdespite Gatekeeper. Unauthorized raisin harvesters reported in September 1995 thatsome are still entering the US illegally on their first attempt.Of those apprehended, most persisted, and succeeded after twoor three attempts. Aliens who used smugglers reported that smugglers'fees rose from $200 to $300 in 1994 to $300 to $400 in 1995. However,the workers major complaint was not the higher smuggling fees--itwas the fact that they lost days of work in the US because ofdelays in crossing the border. Higher smuggling fees may not be much of a deterrent because,in most cases, the unauthorized border crossing is financed byfamily members in the United States, rather than by the migrantsthemselves. US Immigration Reforms Philip Martin summarized the status of immigration reform pendingin Congress. The House was set to take up in March a bill thatwould beef-up-the-border and add new bars to access by illegalaliens to education and welfare. The bill as approved would doublethe Border Patrol from 5,000 to 10,000 agents by the year 2000,authorize the construction of a 14-mile triple fence on the US-Mexicanborder south of San Diego, and set up a five-state pilot projectthat would permit employers to verify the work eligibility ofall new hires by checking a computer data base. To cut down on the use of false documents, the bill would reducefrom 29 to six the documents that workers can present to employersto prove their legal status, and treats document forgers as harshlyas money counterfeiters. The bill would also permit the impositionof fines of $50 to $250 on people caught inside the US illegally,and permits state and local law enforcement officials to detainillegal aliens until the INS can take custody of them. The House was also scheduled to debate a proposal by CA growersto enact a new guest worker program. Under the Pombo proposal,growers, labor contractors, or associations wanting to employforeign farm workers would have to file at least 25 days beforethe job was to begin a labor condition attestation (LCA) withtheir state Employment Service office listing the number of foreignersrequested and when work was to begin. Local ES offices would reviewthese LCAs "only for completeness and obvious inaccuracies"within seven days after they are filed. Employers violating theirattestations or program rules can be assessed civil money penalties,and be debarred from the program. To encourage returns, 25 percent of the foreign workers' wageswould be placed into a federal trust fund managed by the INS,which foreign workers could reclaim with interest in their countryof origin. Foreign workers would be limited to a maximum two yearsin the US. Program costs would be financed by employer contributionsequivalent to Social Security and unemployment insurance taxesthat would not be paid by growers. 3. June 7, 1996 Internal Migration and Unauthorized Immigration, and Dealing withCriminal Aliens--CA Research Bureau 26 participants Domestic and Unauthorized Migration California in July 1995 had an estimated 32 million residents,reflecting 569,000 births in 1994-95, 222,000 deaths, 260,000net foreign immigrants, and a net 334,000 CA residents who movedto other states. According to the CA Department of Finance, thenet number of CA residents moving to other states exceeded thenet number of immigrants to CA in 1992-93, 1993-94, and 1994-95. CA projects the population of each of the state's 58 countiesby asking counties to report any changes that are likely to significantlyaffect their growth rates. The last series of projections wasdone in 1993; a new series is planned for 1997. During the 1980s, California gained a net 1.25 million residentsfrom the other 49 states. Between 1990 and 1995, California losta net 1.55 million residents to other states. CA thus experienceda "turning point" in domestic migration--switching froma net recipient of domestic migrants to a source of domestic migrants. Hans Johnson of the PPI examined patterns of migration to andfrom CA between 1980 and 1993 and, contrary to some earlier estimates,found that US-born residents began to move out of CA in the late1980s, but that CA's population kept growing during this economicboom period because of previously underestimated unauthorizedimmigration--a peak 200,000 unauthorized aliens are believed tohave arrived in CA in 1989, versus the 125,000 per year estimatedby Bob Warren for the 1989-1992 period.. Between 1985 and 1990, CA residents with lower than average levelsof education and income moved to nearby western states, whilecollege graduates from the east coast and midwest moved to CA.These domestic migration patterns continued in the early 1990s. Johnson's research raises three issues: What is the best method for estimating unauthorized migration.Johnson uses a residual technique, in which unauthorized migrationis the unexplained part of population change after births, deaths,and net domestic and legal migration are accounted for. The mostcommon alternative methods for estimating illegal immigrationare apprehension methods--assuming that the number of personsdetected by the INS is a partial measure of an underlying flow. Patterns of domestic and foreign migration change over timein response to changing conditions in CA, other states, and othercountries. Which models provide the best estimates at inflectionpoints, e.g., when CA turns from being a net recipient to a netsource of domestic migrants? WHY do US residents enter and leave CA? Are the persons atthe bottom of the education and income ladders pushed out of CAby immigrants, as Bill Frey suggests? Does CA continue to attractcollege-educated US residents because the unskilled immigrantsare complements to such labor in the CA economy, as many productionfunction models suggest? Dealing with Alien Offenders Every year, hundreds of millions of people enter the US via landports of entry, and the INS each year apprehends over 1.3 millionaliens at or near the border. Over 90 percent of those apprehendednear the border are Mexicans, and some who enter the US legallyand illegally are carrying drugs into the US. The US Attorney for San Diego, Alan Bersin, was named "borderczar" in October 1995, and given responsibility for coordinatingUS law enforcement efforts along the 2,000 mile US-Mexican border.Bersin implemented a Deferred Prosecution Program that, undercertain circumstances, permits aliens who have been apprehendedwith drugs--so-called drug mules-- to be subject to an administrativeexclusion proceeding in which green cards, border crossing cards,and other entry documents are seized, and the alien is prohibitedfrom re-entering the US. If the alien does re-enter the US and is apprehended, then thealien is subject to prosecution for the new offense, as well asthe original offense that led to the exclusion--the deferred prosecution. The intent of the DPP is to preserve limited federal prosecutors'funds for "serious" offenses, including prosecutingaliens who return after being excluded in the DPP process. Experienceso far indicates that DPP is successful in deterring the re-entryof "drug mules;" of those excluded, very few have beenre-apprehended in the US. In May 1996, the DPP was criticized sharply by Republican politiciansfor allegedly returning to Mexico aliens with up to 125 poundsof marijuana; the Los Angeles Times reported that 1,000 smugglingsuspects had been returned to Mexico under DPP since 1994. Mostlaw enforcement officials support DPP's policy of seizing immigrationdocuments of first-time, small-quantity offenders, rather thanprosecute them for misdemeanors. It is not yet clear what the long-run effects of DPP will be.Loss of legal border crossing documents can be a serious economicloss to a Mexican national, and immigration lawyers may pointout to those apprehended that they should take their chances witha US jury rather than surrender their greencards etc. Such a tactic may doom the program's deterrent effects, since,in most cases, the sentence for a first offense on drug smugglingis 90 or 120 days, which is typically the time already servedby an alien held over for trial. If this were to happen, federal prosecutors would need more resourcesto deal both with aliens who elect to contest the charges againstthem, and to pursue felony prosecutions of aliens who return afterbeing excluded in DPP proceedings. Home WT02-B13-9IA088-000636-B046-88http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/By-Month/MN-Vol-1-94/MN_February_1994_ToC.html 128.120.36.171 19970122192552 text/html 2316HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:26:39 GMTLast-Modified: Thursday, 27-Apr-95 22:55:15 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 2059 NORTH AMERICA Immigration and Internal Migration Promote Balkanization U.S. Asylum Granted on Basis of Chinese Sterilization Policy Economic Uncertainty Motivates Rethinking Immigration Policy INS Issues New Visa Requirements for Skilled Foreign Workers Nicaraguans Work in Neighboring Costa Rica EUROPE New EU Immigration Rights Proposed Workers from CIS Flood Russia; New Controls Announced Illegal Immigration to Russia Continues to Grow Illegal Immigrants Returned to Slovakia German Labor Market Deregulation Proposals Hungary Needs Authority to Halt Illegal Immigration European Birth Dearth and Foreign Workers Poland Reports on Foreign Workers ASIA Massive Internal Migration Expected in China Rise of Foreign Workers in Malaysia Philippines 2000 and Filipino Migrants Taiwan Restricts Foreign Workers, Allows Some Vietnamese Thailand Considers Legitimizing Illegal ImmigrantsWT02-B13-10IA088-000636-B046-113http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/By-Month/MN-Vol-1-94/MN_March_1994_ToC.html 128.120.36.171 19970122192605 text/html 2894HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:27:02 GMTLast-Modified: Thursday, 27-Apr-95 23:40:02 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 2637 North America Immigration's Costs and Benefits Administration's "Comprehensive Response" to Immigration Operation Hold the Line in Texas Los Angeles Earthquake and Illegal Immigrants Governors Ask for Federal Reimbursement of Immigrant Costs; Budget Director Says Don't Count on It US Labor Department Scrutinizing Temporary Foreign Workers Devaluations Increase Mexico-to-US Migration Multiculturalism under Fire in Canada Aristide Threatens US With Haitian Boat People Immigrant Children in US Schools EUROPE EU Commission Approves Communication on Immigration and Asylum Germany to Return Croats Kohl Postpones Revisions of Citizenship Laws Greece Deploys Police to Stop Illegal Entry Russia has 400,000 Foreign Workers ASIA Technical Jobs Increase for Foreigners in Japan Taiwan Revises Guestworker Program False Document Seller Arrested in Singapore Philippines Proposes Labor Agreement South Korea Compensates Injured Foreign Workers Vietnam: A Changing Picture for Emigrants OTHER Devaluation Prompts Migration to Nigeria Saudiisation Expected to Reduce Foreign Worker Employment Israel: Replace Arab Workers with Foreign Workers? RESOURCESWT02-B13-11IA088-000636-B046-128http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/By-Month/MN-Vol-1-94/MN_April_1994_ToC.html 128.120.36.171 19970122192613 text/html 2537HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:27:09 GMTLast-Modified: Friday, 28-Apr-95 00:07:10 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 2282 NORTH AMERICA Immigration Reform Bills Flood Congress Immigration Contributes to Inequality Eliminating SSI for Immigrants LA Quake Aid for Legal Immigrants Canada Revises Nanny Immigration Operation Hold the Line Immigration Costs in Texas and Florida Chinese Smuggled to U.S. Via Thailand Immigration to Wisconsin Temporary Foreign Workers EUROPE Hunger Strike by Asylum Seekers in UK Council of Ministers Discussion Germany Postpones Return of Yugoslavs Sweden: Tighter Restictions on Africans? ASIA Japan and Foreign Worker Pensions Taiwan: New Limits on Foreign Workers Rural-Urban Migration in China Hong Kong and the Migration Transition Illegal Immigrants in Thailand Philippine Immigration Crackdown Malaysia: A Special Report OTHER Illegal Immigrants Ordered Out of Nigeria United Arab Emirates Tightens Sea Access RESOURCESWT02-B13-12IA088-000636-B046-149http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/By-Month/MN-Vol-1-94/MN_May_1994_ToC.html 128.120.36.171 19970122192626 text/html 3030HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:27:19 GMTLast-Modified: Friday, 28-Apr-95 00:08:36 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 2775 NORTH AMERICA States Sue Federal Government Illegal Immigration: Numbers, Benefits, and Costs in California Jordan on US Immigration Policy "Furor" UFW Marches in California 50 Million Californians in 2020 Aristide to Cancel US Return Policy Living With NAFTA Immigration Fraud EUROPE France: Foreigners and Immigrants Kohl Calls for Expulsion of Violent Kurds U.S. Criticizes German Treatment of Foreigners Russia's Guestworkers Czech-Polish Border Agreement Signed Sweden Gives Asylum to 20,000 Albanians Illegal Immigrants in Netherlands Misunderstand New Law Polish Immigration Britain Excluded from US Immigration Lottery UK Needs Professional Immigrants ASIA Foreign Workers Protest in Japan Taiwan Evaluates Guestworkers Filipina Maids in Malaysia Malaysia Grapples with Labor Shortages 100 Million Migrants within China Foreign Workers in South Korea Chinese Professionals in Demand in Hong Kong OTHER Ethnic Tensions Rise in Australia Israel Recruits Guestworkers GATT and Labor Migration Dubai Tries to Curb Visa Overstays Bahrain Deports Expatriate Workers RESOURCESWT02-B13-13IA088-000636-B046-179http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/By-Month/MN-Vol-1-94/MN_June_1994_ToC.html 128.120.36.171 19970122192701 text/html 3076HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:27:57 GMTLast-Modified: Friday, 28-Apr-95 00:09:38 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 2821 NORTH AMERICA Clinton Changes US Policy on Haitian Refugees Immigration and Campaign 94 in California Incomplete Amnesty Asian Immigrant Poverty Texas, Arizona Sue Federal Government Canadian Immigration Targets for 1994 US Revises Asylum Policies International Population Conference to Discuss Migration US Public is Anti-Immigrant Federal Appeal for Chinese Immigrants Denied EUROPE European-American Immigration Convergence? Increased Anti-Immigrant Rhetoric in the Netherlands British Immigration: Rules Changed, Numbers Up Asylum in Europe Update UN Reports on Transit Migrants Hungary Changes Immigration Rules Illegal Immigrants Brought to Russia by Criminals Permits and Temporary Stays Restricted in Former USSR State ASIA South Korean Guestworkers China Loosens Internal Migration Controls Effects of 1997 Vary Taiwan Changes its Foreign Worker Program--Again Malaysia: Mixed Signals on Immigration Illegal Immigration Arrests Up in Japan OTHER Immigration Quota Increased in Australia Fiji Wants Professionals to Return India Wants Illegal Immigration from Bangladesh Halted Africa: Laden with Refugees and Displaced Persons RESOURCESWT02-B13-14IA088-000636-B046-203http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/By-Month/MN-Vol-1-94/MN_July_1994_ToC.html 128.120.36.171 19970122192718 text/html 2657HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:28:12 GMTLast-Modified: Thursday, 27-Apr-95 23:11:45 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 2400 NORTH AMERICA Wilson-Clinton Spar over Immigration Monies First Haitians Processed at Sea Immigrant Day Laborers Immigration and the California Election '94 Public Opinion on Immigrants Immigrant Self-Employment--A Two-Edged Sword English-Only Rules in the Workplace Immigration Enforcement EUROPE Border Controls and Foreign Workers in the EU Immigration in Germany Immigration in European Elections Sweden Attracts Illegal Immigrants from Baltic States No More Seasonal Yugoslavs in Switzerland Estonian and Russian Migration Greece, Romania Sign Immigration Accord Irish Immigration Policy Nonexistent Emigration from Portugal ASIA Taiwan Threatens to Halt Importation of Filipino Workers Japan: Chinese Illegal Immigrants and Guestworkers Bangladeshis and Indonesians in Malaysia OTHER The US Immigration Lottery New Zealand's Business Migrants Not Creating Jobs Australia: Immigration and Housing Guatemalans Sign Refugee Deal RESOURCESWT02-B13-15IA088-000636-B046-226http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/By-Month/MN-Vol-1-94/MN_August_1994_ToC.html 128.120.36.171 19970122192746 text/html 2727HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:28:28 GMTLast-Modified: Friday, 28-Apr-95 00:10:31 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 2472 NORTH AMERICA Haitian Zig-Zags Commission Recommends Better Verification Los Angeles Times Calls For A New Bracero Program California Update Illegal Immigrants Diverted to Arizona New Jersey Sues U.S. Government Immigration and Welfare Reform Immigration and Balkanization Immigration Corruption in Mexico Illegal Americans in Mexico US Migrants Refugee Status Granted In Gender Mutilation Case Nine Million People Enter US Lottery Citizenship Applicants on the Rise Canada Plans to Attract Business Immigrants EUROPE Germany's Lead on European Immigration Foreigners Still Under Attack in Germany Immigrants in Italy Russia's Foreign Workers Czech Republic: Foreigners Fees Increase Syndicates Smuggle Chinese to US and Europe ASIA China's Great Migration Foreigners and Labor Shortages in Japan Housing Foreign Workers in Malaysia Hong Kong Residents Rush for Foreign Citizenship OTHER RESOURCESWT02-B13-16IA088-000636-B046-256http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/By-Month/MN-Vol-1-94/MN_September_1994_ToC.html 128.120.36.171 19970122192801 text/html 2920HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:28:56 GMTLast-Modified: Friday, 28-Apr-95 00:12:14 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 2665 NORTH AMERICA Clinton Reverses Policy on Cubans Commission Recommends That States Test Employee Verification Haitians Begin To Return Home Immigration and Politics in California Court Decisions Changes INS Policies Texas Sues over Costs of Illegal Immigration EUROPE Five-year Low in German Asylum Seekers Decline in Illegal Immigration to Czech Republic Greece to Beef Up Border Patrol EU Immigration Proposals Worry House of Lords French Interior Minister Popular with Immigration Stand Belarus and Ukraine Promote Export of Workers Attacks on Foreigners in Italy ASIA Foreign Worker Fees in Taiwan Japan Cracks Down on Illegal Foreigners Development and Migration in Asia Malaysia Proposes Fines for Employers Hiring Illegal Workers Domestic Workers in Hong Kong More Foreign Workers in Korea No Foreign Workers in Singapore Retail Cambodian Immigration Law Under Consideration Illegal Immigration To and Through Thailand OTHER Refugees and UNHCR Australia's Refugee Costs The Kuwaiti Minority RESOURCESWT02-B13-17IA088-000636-B046-273http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/By-Month/MN-Vol-1-94/MN_October_1994_ToC.html 128.120.36.171 19970122192816 text/html 2755HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:29:09 GMTLast-Modified: Friday, 28-Apr-95 00:13:05 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 2500 NORTH AMERICA Immigration and the California Election US Sets Quota for Cuban Immigrants No Haitian Invasion INS Mismanagement Immigration and Farmworker Unions Immigration and Welfare in Canada Immigrants and the US Labor Market Studies Continue to Dispute Immigration's Benefits and Costs SOS in California English-only Rule Upheld by Supreme CourtDOL Immigration PolicymakingUnions and Immigration Policy Foreign Students in the US EUROPE Berlin Declaration Includes Statement on Illegal Immigration Foreigners in France Russian Immigration Controls Immigration and Germany's Elections Czech Republic Releases Report on Permanent Residents EU Court on Work Permits Cyprus Claims Mass Importation of Turkish Workers ASIA Illegal Foreigners Decline in Japan Malaysia Recruits 17,000 Indonesian Workers South Korea Assists Illegal Foreign Workers Taiwan Deports Filipinos Migration in China OTHER Cairo Population Conference and Immigration Tariffs and Foreign Workers Effect Australian Wages Venezuela Seeks Money for East European Immigrants RESOURCESWT02-B13-18IA088-000636-B046-295http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/By-Month/MN-Vol-1-94/MN_November_1994_ToC.html 128.120.36.171 19970122192832 text/html 3010HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:29:26 GMTLast-Modified: Thursday, 27-Apr-95 23:17:49 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 2753 NORTH AMERICA SOS Dominates California Campaign Commission on Immigration Reform Issues Report Operation Gatekeeper in San Diego Judge Stops Return of Cubans Agricultural Labor Shortages Chinese Alien Smuggling Immigrant-Native Tensions in Wisconsin EUROPE Immigration's Role in European Elections Identity Checks in France Greece and Albania Americans on German Immigration Controls Canadian Immigration Minister Signs European Agreements ASIA Taiwan Allows More Foreign Workers Malaysia to Continue Import of Bangladeshi Workers Labor Shortages in Asia Philippine Overseas Workers Cambodia- No Expulsions of Vietnamese Asian Games Draw Illegal Immigrants to Japan Hong Kong Prepares to Face Post-1997 Singapore Reviews Need for Foreign Workers Illegals in Korea Thailand Cracks down on Illegal Aliens OTHER Israel Replaces Palestinians with Guestworkers South Africa Fights Illegal Immigration Australia's Multicultural Policy Criticized Oman Imposes Income Tax on Foreign Workers Lebanese-Syrian Migration Agreement RESOURCESWT02-B13-19IA088-000636-B046-313http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/By-Month/MN-Vol-1-94/MN_December_1994_ToC.html 128.120.36.171 19970122192842 text/html 1948HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:29:38 GMTLast-Modified: Friday, 28-Apr-95 00:14:53 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 1693 NORTH AMERICA Prop. 187 Approved in California Immigration and Welfare Reform Operation Gatekeeper in San Diego Cuban and Haitian Refugees End of TPS for Salvadorans? Canada Reduces Immigration Chinese Alien Smuggling to US EUROPE Immigration in Germany Few Bosnian Refugees Given Asylum Russia "Threatened" by Immigration Moslem Girls Suspended in France ASIA Foreign Workers in Japan Philippines Protests Malaysian DeportationsEducation and Migration in AsiaForeign Workers in Taiwan Immigration Advice on InternetCambodian-Vietnamese Dispute OTHER Citizenship and Islam in AustraliaIsraeli GuestworkersSaudi Crackdown on Illegal Foreign Workers RESOURCESWT02-B13-20IA088-000636-B046-331http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/By-Month/MN-Vol-2-95/MN_January_1995_ToC.html 128.120.36.171 19970122192850 text/html 3588HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:29:46 GMTLast-Modified: Thursday, 27-Apr-95 23:22:29 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 3331 NORTH AMERICA Salvadorans TPS to Expire US Changes Asylum Regulations Prop. 187--Enforcement Stayed Illegal Immigrants and Devaluation in Mexico Another Bracero Program Considered Gatekeeper Reduces Apprehensions Immigration at the Summit of the Americas Cubans Riot in Panama Florida Lawsuit Thrown Out Immigration in the 104th Congress H-1B Final Rules Changes to Au Pair Regulations Foreign Baseball Players Cannot Replace Strikers EUROPE Immigration and Population Change in Germany Asylum Seekers in Germany EU Immigration Priorities IOM Reports on Trafficking, Transit Migration Switzerland to Detain Aliens Austria's Haider Demands Action on Illegals Belgium Fines for Transporting Aliens Russian Migration, Chechen Refugees Britain Asylum Applicants Polish and Hungarian Immigration Foreigners in Spain Immigration to the Netherlands Cubans seek asylum in Sweden ASIA Managing Migration in JapanForeigners in JapanPlanters--Open Malaysia to Foreign WorkersSingapore Levies on Foreign WorkersExport and Import of Workers in Thailand Chinese Migrants200,000 Foreign Workers Needed in S. KoreaMigrants Return to Vietnam Striking Filipinos Deported from TaiwanLaotian Work Permits for Foreigners OTHER Illegal Immigration into South Africa Asylum Applications in Australia Wage Cuts in UAE RESOURCES The Key to Europe NEH Immigration SeminarWT02-B13-21IA088-000636-B046-350http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/By-Month/MN-Vol-2-95/MN_February_1995_ToC.html 128.120.36.171 19970122192857 text/html 2996HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:29:54 GMTLast-Modified: Friday, 28-Apr-95 00:15:55 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 2741 NORTH AMERICA Devaluation and Mexico to US Migration President Clinton Endorses Registry Immigration in the 104th Congress Haitians in Guantanamo Returned Farm Labor Shortages and Guest Workers Minimum Wages, Jobs, and Immigration Illegal Overstayers and Criminal Aliens Prop 187 Aftermath Prop. 187 Moves Across the Nation Immigration and Affirmative Action More Blacks Leaving Los Angeles DOL Issues H-1B Final Rules English-Only Legislation EUROPE Integration of Muslims in France German Citizenship Changes Proposed UKJudge Rules Asylum Detention Illegal EU Combats Xenophobia Dutch Amnesty Alien Smuggling in Europe Tamil Asylum Seekers in Europe ASIA Chinese Migration Malaysian Foreign Workers Thai Concern About Influx of Foreign Workers Hong Kong Emigrants Return from Canada South Korea Sets Up Court for Foreign Workers Taiwan Steps Up Anti-Smuggling Efforts OTHER Boat People to Australia Migrants to South Africa Fiji Opens Door to Chinese Business MigrantsWT02-B13-22IA088-000636-B047-25http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/By-Month/MN-Vol-2-95/MN_March_1995_ToC.html 128.120.36.171 19970122192942 text/html 3136HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:30:27 GMTLast-Modified: Friday, 28-Apr-95 00:16:47 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 2881 NORTH AMERICA Clinton's Budget Targets Illegal Immigration Budget Bolsters Interior Enforcement Calls for Guest Workers Mount Evaluating Stepped-Up Border Controls Legal Immigration and Naturalization in 1994 Peso Devaluation, US and Mexican Jobs, and Migration Welfare, Taxes, and Immigrants Wilson Says Let State Courts Rule on 187 Cubans Returned EUROPE British Uproar over Abolition of EU Border Controls Dual Citizenship Initiative Fails in Germany France Fears Algerian Migration, Sees Increase in Deportations Immigration in Austria No Mass Migration From Russia Estonia Passes New Citizenship Law ASIA Vietnamese Refugees To Be Repatriated Foreign Worker Rights in South Korea Hong Kong Fears Mass Immigration after 1997 Chinese Unemployment and Migration Earthquake forces Japan to deal with Illegals Malaysia Tackles Illegal Immigration Again OTHER Migrants Expelled from Gabon Israel Zigzags on Palestinian Workers South Africans Claim Illegal Immigrants Steal Jobs Gulf States Face Unemployment Problems Australia to Deport Chinese Refugees RESOURCES Benefits and Costs of Immigrants Characteristics of US Farm Workers DBSB RFPs InvitedWT02-B13-23IA088-000636-B047-42http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/By-Month/MN-Vol-2-95/MN_April_1995_ToC.html 128.120.36.171 19970122192951 text/html 2397HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:30:48 GMTLast-Modified: Friday, 28-Apr-95 00:17:26 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 2142 NORTH AMERICA Illegal Immigration and the Peso Devaluation INS: Naturalization, Greencards and Family Unity Congressional Immigration Reform US and California Population Growth Illegal Alien Numbers Revised CIR Considers Immigration's Impacts on US Labor Markets State Activities to Deter Illegal Immigration California Farm Workers German Immigration and Integration Challenges Muslim Immigrants in France Britain Considers Tightening Asylum Rules, Employer Sanctions Schengen Free Movement Begins Greece and Albania Agree on Seasonal Workers Turkey and Germany Struggle with Racial Tensions ASIA Philippines to Restrict Overseas Workers Korean Guest Workers US Taiwanese Return to Homeland Vietnamese Linger in Camps OTHER Migration at the Social Summit Venezuela Rounds Up Colombian Illegal Immigrants Australian Migration Bill RESOURCESWT02-B13-24IA088-000636-B047-67http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/By-Month/MN-Vol-2-95/MN_May_1995_ToC.html 128.120.36.171 19970122193024 text/html 2591HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:31:01 GMTLast-Modified: Friday, 28-Apr-95 00:18:06 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 2336 NORTH AMERICA Illegal Immigration Pressures Mexican Economic Prospects Naturalization Crunch Labor Market Adjustments to Less Immigration Anti-terrorist Legislation Welfare Reform, SSI, and the American Poor California Farm Workers Prop 187 and California's Economy Early Intervention to Prevent Mass Emigration Immigration History EUROPE Anti-immigrant Platform Helps French Right Germany Returns Vietnamese, Discusses Legalization Britain-No More Welfare For Asylees Austria Joins Schengen Czech Immigration ASIA Philippines to Protect Migrants South Korea Increases Industrial Trainees Chinese Fear Weak Economy Will Lead to Migration Hong Kong: Domestic Workers to Vote, Fraudulent Passports Vietnamese Protest Return Foreign Workers in Taiwan Indonesian Workers Complain of Extortion OTHER Australia Reduces Immigration South Africa May Limit Foreign Job Seekers Egypt Complains of Migrant Treatment WT02-B13-25IA088-000636-B047-90http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/By-Month/MN-Vol-2-95/MN_June_1995_ToC.html 128.120.36.171 19970122193043 text/html 2962HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:31:39 GMTLast-Modified: Thursday, 27-Apr-95 23:29:25 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 2705 NORTH AMERICA Clinton Proposals to Reduce Illegal Immigration Western Growers to Ask for Guest Workers Guantanamo Cubans to enter the US Republicans Divided on Immigration Women and Asylum Mexican Dual Citizenship and Devaluation House Solicits Immigration Suggestions TV News Show Tackles Migration Nicaraguans Protest Bilingual Education and Immigrant Integration EUROPE Italy, Albania Take Measures to Control Illegal Immigration Over 10 Million Muslim Immigrants in Europe Asylum Seekers in Germany British Immigration Crackdown Immigration in French Elections Migration Into Russia Illegal Aliens in Bulgaria ASIA Asian Maids Foreign Workers in Singapore More Foreign Workers for Taiwan Japan's Worker Training Program Malaysian Reliance on Foreign Workers Philippine Economics and Migration Vietnamese Refugees Riot in Hong Kong OTHER Illegal Immigrants on the Subcontinent Palestinian Workers and Refugees Saudi Legalization RESOURCES Urban Institute Workshop on Guest Workers Immigration in the AmericasWT02-B13-26IA088-000636-B047-102http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/By-Month/MN-Vol-2-95/MN_July_1995_ToC.html 128.120.36.171 19970122193055 text/html 2424HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:31:52 GMTLast-Modified: Thursday, 27-Apr-95 23:30:25 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 2167 NORTH AMERICA Congress Moves on Immigration Reform CIR Recommends Less Immigration Pros and Cons of Guest Workers Gatekeeper Enters Phase 2 Prop 187 Trial Scheduled Detained Aliens Riot Births and Naturalizations Mexican President Predicts Economic Growth EUROPE France: Immigration and Local Elections Employment and Asylum in Germany UK Detention Camps; Marriage Rules Russians Top Europe's Migrants Alien Smuggling Turkey: Haven for Immigrants? ASIA Vietnamese Riot in Asia Philippines Approves New Migrant Worker Act Countries Lure Hong Kong Migrants Hong Kong Debates Migrant Workers Japanese Migrants Chinese Migrants Malaysia Considers Fewer Migrants OTHER Egyptian Guest Workers in the Gulf Australia Raises Immigrant Quota Child Labor in IndiaWT02-B13-27IA088-000636-B047-115http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/By-Month/MN-Vol-2-95/MN_August_1995_ToC.html 128.120.36.171 19970122193102 text/html 2831HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:31:59 GMTLast-Modified: Friday, 28-Apr-95 00:19:21 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 2576 NORTH AMERICA August 31 Workshop on German-US Immigration House Subcommittee Approves Immigration Reform New Asylum Rules Hearing on Prop. 187 Policing the LA Garment Industry Reaction to CIR Proposals INS to Open Shelter for Undocumented Children Agricultural Guest Workers Economics, Education, and Immigration Mexico Stabilizes and Reforms EUROPE EU Border Controls Regulating the German Labor Market British Crackdown on Immigrant Benefits France Deports Illegal Immigrants Spainish Illegal Immigration Alien Smuggling ASIA Philippines Tries to Protect Overseas Workers Taiwan: Foreign Workers to Get Equal Pay Malaysia Loses Foreign Workers Remittances Surplus of Chinese Farmers Hong Kong Unemployment Singapore: Foreign Workers and Pensions Illegal Workers in Korea OTHER Illegal Immigration to South Africa Riots in Bahrain RESOURCES DOL Releases Immigrant Data OECD Releases Migration Trends ReportWT02-B13-28IA088-000636-B047-133http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/By-Month/MN-Vol-2-95/MN_Sept_1995_ToC.html 128.120.36.171 19970122193113 text/html 2906HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:32:09 GMTLast-Modified: Friday, 28-Apr-95 00:23:06 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 2651 NORTH AMERICA US Foreign-Born Up, Immigration Down Regulating the Immigrant Labor Market Politics and Immigration INS: Apprehensions and Naturalizations Up TPS Extended for Salvadorans Integrating Immigrants Mexico: Recovery and Dual Citizenship Reaction to Immigration Proposals Immigrants and Welfare Immigration to Canada Official English EUROPE Returning Yugoslavs Austrian Immigration Germany: Asylum, Illegals, and Ethnics Alien Smuggling France Increases Border Checks, Deportations Illegal Alien Apprehensions Rise in Britain Russia Sets Quotas for Kyrgyzstan Immigration Foreign Workers in Poland ASIA Foreign Residents in Japan Malaysia: Detentions and Foreign Workers Thailand Debates Foreign Workers OTHER Libya Expels Foreign Workers South Africa Attracts Migrants RESOURCES World Bank Deals with Labor Threatened People, Threatened Borders CIIP Workshop Asylum Guest Workers Border ControlWT02-B13-29IA088-000636-B047-147http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/By-Month/MN-Vol-2-95/MN_Oct_1995_ToC.html 128.120.36.171 19970122193125 text/html 2770HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:32:18 GMTLast-Modified: Friday, 28-Apr-95 00:24:32 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 2515 NORTH AMERICA Presidential Contenders Discuss Immigration Congress Moves on Immigration Reform Family Permanent Economic/Employment. Senate Action House of Representatives Action Immigration Reform and Guest Workers High Technology and Foreign Workers Farm Workers Welfare Reform and Immigration Immigration and Sweatshops INS Evaluates Gatekeeper, SouthPAW NAFTA and Mexico New York Unions Organize, Los Angeles Unions Protest Immigration and Internal Migration Women and Asylum Job and Income Trends and Immigration EUROPE Muslims In France Europe Discusses Harmonization Dutch Immigration and Asylum Germany: Asylum Seekers and Foreign Workers ASIA Hong Kong Residents Want UK Passports Korea Becomes the Land of Opportunity Taiwan Concerned About Guest Workers Vietnamese Returnees Find Little Persecution Another Filipino Maid Sentenced to Death OTHER Libya Expels Guest Workers Ethiopia and Botswana Expel Illegal ImmigrantsWT02-B13-30IA088-000636-B047-168http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/By-Month/MN-Vol-2-95/Nov_MN_95_ToC.html 128.120.36.171 19970122193216 text/html 2699HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:33:00 GMTLast-Modified: Thursday, 01-Jun-95 23:09:25 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 2442 NORTH AMERICA Congressional Action on Immigration Welfare and Immigration INS Trumpets Gatekeeper Temporary Skilled Immigrants Prop 187 Hearings Pending Mexico: Immigration and NAFTA Migration in the Americas EUROPE British Immigration Reform France: Ban Immigrants? Italian Immigration Reform Czech Republic Looks for Workers Austria: Immigration and Elections The Netherlands: Return Bonuses ASIA Hong Kong to Reduce Foreign Workers Migrant Workers and Growth in Asia Taiwan Fights Illegal Workers, Increases Foreign Workers Singapore Sees Rise in Illegal Alien Employment Migration within China OTHER Libya Expels Guest Workers Israeli Immigration and Guest Workers Pakistan Arrests Illegal Bangladeshi Workers New Zealand Restricts Immigration Foreign Mineworkers in South Africa Get Vote; Residency UAE Spares Philippines Maid RESOURCES Comparative Migration Policies Immigrants and Urban Renewal Ebert Stiftung PublicationsWT02-B13-31IA088-000636-B047-178http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/By-Month/MN-Vol-2-95/Dec_MN_95_ToC.html 128.120.36.171 19970122193235 text/html 3260HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:33:32 GMTLast-Modified: Thursday, 01-Jun-95 23:13:47 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 3003 Migration News Home Page NORTH AMERICA House and Senate to Take on Immigration Bills Parts of Prop. 187 Unconstitutional INS: Employee Verification and Gatekeeper Quebec Rejects Separation Mexican Economic Uncertainty Thai and Chinese Alien Smuggling to US Skilled Foreign Workers in US Cuban/Haitian Immigration EUROPE EU Immigration British Immigration Plan Italian Immigration Decree Germany: Asylum, Construction, Voting, and Vietnamese Asylum Seekers Foreign Workers in Construction Voting Vietnamese Repatriation Swedish Guest Workers and Refugees Immigration: Top Priority in France Asylum in Europe: Numbers and Costs Swiss Referendum to Restrict Foreigners ASIA Labor Exporters Plan for Emigration Taiwan To Import More Foreign Workers Japan's Foreign Population Malaysia Issues Guidelines on Foreign Workers Singapore Passes Foreign Worker Bills Thailand's Immigrant Workers Hong Kong Residency Chinese Migrants OTHER Gulf States Australia RESOURCES Environmental Emigration from Mexico UNHCR on Refugees Immigration Materials Regulation of Local and Foreign NGOs Race in Urban AmericaWT02-B13-32IA088-000636-B047-196http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/By-Month/MN-Vol-3-96/MN_Jan_1996_ToC.html 128.120.36.171 19970122193255 text/html 2285HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:33:45 GMTLast-Modified: Tuesday, 01-Aug-95 20:48:10 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 2029 NORTH AMERICA Agricultural Guest Workers INS Congress Debates Jus Soli Prop. 187 Judges Urges Speedy Appeal Mexico Works on Dual Nationality South Koreans in Argentina Welfare, Health, and Poverty EUROPE Reducing Immigration in Italy and Britain Germany: Bosnians, Illegals, and Immigration France: Not Yet on Schengen EU: Free Trade with Turkey Latvia and Lithuania Deal with Immigration Immigration in Remote Russia Austria/Czech/Slovakia Immigration ASIA Professional and Skilled Migrants in Asia Thailand: Immigration Controls Not Working Vietnamese Refugee Resettlement APEC, ASEAN, and FDI China: Foreigners Employment Malaysia: Foreigners and Politics Japan Continues Fingerprints OTHER Foreigners in the Middle East RESOURCESWT02-B13-33IA088-000636-B047-214http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/By-Month/MN-Vol-3-96/MN_Feb_1996_ToC.html 128.120.36.171 19970122193308 text/html 2383HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:34:00 GMTLast-Modified: Tuesday, 01-Aug-95 23:56:20 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 2127 NORTH AMERICA Clinton: Illegal Aliens = No Contracts INS: Apprehensions, Asylum and Deportation Immigrant Integration US Naturalizations Continue to Increase Employers Criticize H-1B Program Alien Smuggling Foreign Students in US Mexican Maquiladoras Filipino and Korean Integration in the US Salvadoran/ Guatemala Asylum EUROPE France: Youth, Schengen, and Asylum UK: Deportation and Asylum Germany: Asylum and Unemployment Hungarian Immigration ASIA Japan: Unemployment and Foreign Workers APEC Tackles Migration China's Internal Migrants Vietnamese Refugees Indonesia Foreign Work force Grows Korea: Foreign Workers and Mail-Order Brides Foreign Workers in Hong Kong OTHER UN Migration Summit? Gulf States Foreign Workers Indian Immigration RESOURCESWT02-B13-34IA088-000636-B047-228http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/By-Month/MN-Vol-3-96/MN_Mar_1996_ToC.html 128.120.36.171 19970122193318 text/html 2471HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:34:15 GMTLast-Modified: Saturday, 26-Aug-95 17:58:37 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 2214 NORTH AMERICA INS: Budget and Apprehensions Up Presidential Candidates on Immigration Agricultural Guest Workers Congress Moves on Immigration Reform Unions and Immigrants Canada Cracks Down on Immigrant Sponsors Mexico Steps Up Southern Border Enforcement Argentina Beefs Up Employer Sanctions Caribbean Immigration EUROPE EU: Schengen and Asylum Germany: Bosnians and Jobs Britain: More Safe Countries Spain's Grand Bargain Italy: Immigration Decree Not Enough Czech Republic Faces Labor Shortages ASIA Thailand Proposes Guest Workers Indonesian Workers in Malaysia Taiwan: Foreign Workers Hong Kong Emigration Drops Filippino Recruitment OTHER Migration in Africa Israel's Foreign Workers Libya Expels Foreign Workers Immigration in Australian Elections Gulf States' Foreign Workers RESOURCESWT02-B13-35IA088-000636-B047-240http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/By-Month/MN-Vol-3-96/MN_Apr_1996_ToC.html 128.120.36.171 19970122193325 text/html 2255HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:34:22 GMTLast-Modified: Wednesday, 27-Sep-95 23:02:44 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 1997 NORTH AMERICA Congress Moves to Curb Illegal Immigration Presidential Candidates and Immigration INS: Sanctions, Apprehensions, Immigration, and Naturalizations US and California Population Growth Mexico Professionals Being Drawn to US Immigration and Voting EUROPE Europe: Asylum, Aging, and Tourism Germany: Ethnics, Kurds, and Construction France: African Immigrant Sit-in Asylum in UK Immigration in Poland Turkey: Economic Meltdown? ASIA Japan: Managing Migration Singapore: Debate on Foreign Workers Hong Kong and the UK Korea's Foreign Trainees China Experiences Immigration Thailand: Foreign Worker Zones Indonesia: Too Many Foreigners? ILO Report on Migrant Workers OTHER Israel Replaces Palestinians Immigration in New Zealand ElectionsWT02-B13-36IA088-000636-B047-253http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/By-Month/MN-Vol-3-96/MN_May_1996_ToC.html 128.120.36.171 19970122193333 text/html 2371HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:34:30 GMTLast-Modified: Sunday, 29-Oct-95 00:50:35 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 2116 NORTH AMERICA Senate Tackles Illegal Immigration Immigrant Beatings, Numbers and Naturalization DOL Reports on Temporary Workers California: Initiatives and Wages Florida's Growth, Arizona's Prop. 187 Anti-Terrorism and Asylum Independent Mexican Unions Central American Immigrants EUROPE EU--Illegal and Internal Migration Germany: Bosnians, Kurds, and Construction French Commission Recommends Immigration Restrictions Greece Offers Albanians Amnesty Italian Candidates Ignore Immigration Issue Poland/Romania Emigration ASIA Vietnamese Boat People Chinese Crackdown on Migrants Malaysia Foreign Workers Are Security Threat Japan to Train Foreign Workers Hong Kong Prepares Residents for 1997 Taiwan: Foreign Workers and Illegal Immigration Philippines Remittances Up OTHER New Zealand/Australia Immigrants Foreigners in the GulfWT02-B13-37IA088-000636-B047-267http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/By-Month/MN-Vol-3-96/MN_June_1996_ToC.html 128.120.36.171 19970122193341 text/html 2539HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:34:37 GMTLast-Modified: Friday, 22-Dec-95 00:29:12 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 2284 NORTH AMERICA Immigration Reform Advances INS: Numbers, Criminals, Sanctions California Migration Florida: No Federal Reimbursement Mexico-US Agree on Migrant Rights Regulating the Immigrant Labor Market Immigrants and US Business EUROPE EU: 1997, the Year Against Racism German Court Upholds Asylum Reforms French Debate Immigration Restrictions UK: Debate on Asylum Russia/Ukraine ASIA Migration at Asian Summits Japan: Accept More Refugees? Thailand: Two Million Illegals? Singapore: Reduce Dependence Vietnamese Boat People: Repatriation and Rioting China Restricts Foreign Workers Malaysia: Detained Foreigners Can Work in Ag Hong Kong Cuts Age Restrictions on Chinese Children Taiwan: Maximum Foreigners OTHER Chinese to Australia Israel's Foreign Workers Libya To Expel More Palestinians Liberian Refugees RESOURCESWT02-B13-38IA088-000636-B047-286http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/By-Month/MN-Vol-3-96/MN_July_1996_ToC.html 128.120.36.171 19970122193350 text/html 2153HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:34:47 GMTLast-Modified: Friday, 22-Dec-95 00:31:07 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 1898 NORTH AMERICA Congress Works to Revise Immigration Law INS: Enforcement and Asylum Mexico: Voting Rights and Emigration California: Internal Migration and Strikes Immigration Update in New York, Florida and Illinois Caribbean/Central American Immigration EUROPE Asylum and Immigration Controls in EU Germans Consider Immigration Policy British Court Strikes Down Ban on Welfare France Criticized on Asylum Asylum in Netherlands and Sweden Seasonal Workers in Switzerland ASIA Foreigners in Japan at Record High Filipino Overseas Workers Foreigners in Hong Kong Face Uncertainty Taiwan Calls for Limits on Foreign Workers Malaysia Has Skilled Labor Shortages OTHER Australian Government Reacts to Immigration Poll Immigration Affects New Zealand ElectionsWT02-B13-39IA088-000636-B048-4http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/By-Month/MN-Vol-3-96/MN_Aug_1996_ToC.html 128.120.36.171 19970122193358 text/html 1861HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:34:55 GMTLast-Modified: Monday, 22-Jul-96 20:43:08 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 1606 NORTH AMERICA Congress: Immigration, Welfare, Minimum Wages INS: Enforcement, Asylum, and Naturalization Mexico/US Immigration Immigrant Integration EUROPE Britain Debates Asylum Change German Immigration Reforms Expected Foreign Workers in Eastern Europe Asylum Seekers in the Netherlands ASIA Thailand Offers Amnesty Camps for Vietnamese Close Female Migrants in Asia Japan: Foreign Residents, Opposition Up OTHER Australia Cuts Immigration 10 Percent Palestinians Lose Israeli Jobs Lebanon's Foreign Workers RESOURCES US- Mexican Cooperation on Immigration?WT02-B13-40IA088-000636-B048-26http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/By-Month/MN-Vol-3-96/MN_Sep_1996_ToC.html 128.120.36.171 19970122193447 text/html 2247HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:35:28 GMTLast-Modified: Saturday, 31-Aug-96 00:40:20 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 1990 NORTH AMERICA Welfare Overhaul and Minimum Wage Changes Immigration and Official English Legislation Presidential Politics and Immigration SOS in other States INS: Enforcement, TPS and Naturalization Hispanic Unemployment-Immigrant Self-Employment Regulating the Immigrant Labor Market EUROPE French Police Remove Immigrants from Church Bosnians and Construction in Germany Hungarian/Czech Foreign Workers Moscow's Foreigners Poland Drafting Refugee Bill ASIA Thailand To Legalize Illegal Foreign Workers Japan: No to Unskilled Workers Hong Kong: Crime and Airport Workers Philippines Maid Returns Home Singapore: Managing Migration Malaysian Economic Growth and Foreign Workers Taiwan Freezes Worker Imports OTHER Israel and Jordan Debate Foreign Workers Gulf State Foreign WorkersWT02-B13-41IA088-000636-B048-41http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/By-Month/MN-Vol-3-96/MN_Oct_1996_ToC.html 128.120.36.171 19970122193514 text/html 2361HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:36:03 GMTLast-Modified: Tuesday, 01-Oct-96 22:56:50 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 2105 NORTH AMERICA Immigration Overhaul Naturalization Controversy Welfare Changes Implemented Mexico: Polls, Remittances and Economy INS Enforcement Canadian Immigrants EUROPE Germany Begins to Return Bosnians UK: Welfare for Asylum Seekers France: African Immigrants Sweden Tightens Asylum Italy: Amnesty for Enforcement Assistance? Illegal Immigration into Spain Immigration in Austrian Elections Kurds and Refugees Illegal Immigration into Poland ASIA Internal Migration and Stability in China Singapore: Illegals in Construction Foreign Workers in Malaysia Taiwan Considering Freeze on Foreign Worker Permits OTHER Saudi Arabia and Kuwait: Reduce Dependence on Foreigners? Immigration into Argentina 100,000 Immigrants to Australia RESOURCES Slate on ImmigrationWT02-B13-42IA088-000636-B048-57http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/By-Month/MN-Vol-3-96/MN_Nov_1996_ToC.html 128.120.36.171 19970122193532 text/html 2585HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:36:23 GMTLast-Modified: Tuesday, 05-Nov-96 21:48:23 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 2329 NORTH AMERICA Naturalization Controversy Continues Immigration in the Election Assessing 1996 Immigration Changes INS: Enforcement and Management Welfare Reform's Uneven Impacts California: Population, Housing and Labor Mexican Views on Immigration Nonimmigrants/US Business/Inequality Canadian Immigration Falls Dominican Republic Immigration EUROPE EU: Majority Voting on Migration Issues Germany Returns Bosnians France: New Immigration Legislation? Morocco and Spain to Fight Illegal Immigration Netherlands Expects Increase in Immigration ASIA Migration between Two Koreas Singapore: Foreign Workers and Productivity Malaysia: Recruitment Ban Continues Thailand: From Illegals to Guest Workers Vietnam Restricts Foreigner Workers OTHER UAE Expels Migrants Immigration in Africa Australian Race Debate Heats Up RESOURCES Slow Advancement for the Newly-Legalized Working Papers on Immigration Issues WT02-B13-43IA088-000636-B048-76http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/By-Month/MN-Vol-3-96/MN_Dec_1996_ToC.html 128.120.36.171 19970122193540 text/html 2667HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:36:37 GMTLast-Modified: Tuesday, 03-Dec-96 00:12:17 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 2411 NORTH AMERICA Voting and Naturalization Welfare/Immigration Reform Implementation Mexican Migrants on the Chicken Trail Legal Immigration Changes? INS Enforcement Mexico and Guatemala Religion and Immigration Immigrant Integration EUROPE EU Immigration Germany: Bosnia, Asylum and Vietnamese France Amends 1993 Immigration Law Immigrants in Eastern Europe Migrant Smuggling Russians Seek Asylum in Norway Austria Tightens Border Controls Ireland's Immigrants Sweden's Refugee Law ASIA Japan Copes with Illegal Foreigners China-Hong Kong Border APEC Meets in Manila Foreign Workers in Singapore South Korea Contends with Foreign Workers Taiwan Struggles to Control Foreign Workers OTHER Child Labor and Slavery Population Growth, Urbanization and Tourism India/Bangladesh Foreign Workers in the Middle East RESOURCES The Atlantic: Can the US afford immigration?WT02-B13-44IA088-000636-B048-89http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/Default.html 128.120.36.171 19970122193547 text/html 2439HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:36:44 GMTLast-Modified: Tuesday, 21-Jan-97 21:06:52 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 2183 Migration Dialogue Migration Dialogue Migration Dialogue promotes an informed discussion of the issues associated withinternational migration by providing unbiased and timely information on immigration andintegration issues. Four Migration Dialogue activities are summarized below: thenewsletters Migration News and Rural Migration News, the work of University ofCalifornia researchers, and seminars for European and American opinion leaders. Migration News Rural Migration News Migration Dialogue Briefs, Seminars, Speakers University of California CIIP-CPS More About Migration Dialogue What's New January 7, 1997 - January issue of Migration News is avaiable. December 2, 1996 - December issue of Migration News is available. Try the Migration News search engine. November 5, 1996 - November issue of Migration News is available. October 17, 1996 - October issue of Rural Migration News is available. A total of people have accessed thispage since October 1, 1995. [ Feedback (migrant@primal.ucdavis.edu) ] WT02-B13-45IA088-000636-B048-164http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/rmn/iow.htm 128.120.36.171 19970122193723 text/html 32580HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:37:58 GMTLast-Modified: Tuesday, 21-Jan-97 21:06:52 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 32323 Immigration and the Changing Face of Rural America Immigration and the Changing Face of Rural America Focus on the Midwestern States Thursday, July 11, 1996 - Saturday, July 13, 1996 Gateway Holiday Inn US 30 and Elwood Drive, ISU Center Ames, IA 50014 tel-515-292-8600 or 1-800-Holiday fax-515-268-2224 June 25, 1996 The purpose of this conference is to explore the evidence to supportor disprove the hypothesis that: "The United States risks re-creating rural poverty throughimmigration. This rural poverty may be even more difficult toextirpate; since it requires overcoming language and educationbarriers in an economy that penalizes with low earnings workerswithout education and skills." This is a working conference; we expect the 40 to 45 participantsto participate actively with researchers and local governmentofficials to discuss immigration and integration developmentsin rural communities. A conference to discuss the policy implicationsof the community studies is planned for 1997 in Washington DC. The presentations will each be about 20 minutes long, permittingtime for discussion. Please note that not all of the speakershave been confirmed. ____________________ Wednesday, July 10, 1996 Arrivals. The ISU van will be markedwith ISU, and it will depart from the Des Moines airport, outsidethe baggage claim area, at 6pm, 8pm, and 9:30pm. Thursday, July 11, 1996 7AM Continental breakfast at the Holiday Inn 8:15AM Conference purposes: Philip Martin, UC-Davis andMichael Fix, The Urban Institute Introductions 8:30AM Immigration Patterns in the US and the Midwest How is immigration changing the population of the rural Midwest? Chair, Philip Martin, UC-Davis US and Midwestern Immigration Patterns Jeff Passel, Urban Institute The Browning of the Midwest Robert Aponte, Julian Samora Research Institute, Michigan StateUniversity Discussants, Ed Taylor, UC-Davis; Peter Orazem, Iowa StateUniversity 10:15AM Break 10:30AM Immigrant or Integration Policies What is US immigrant or integration policy, what should it be,and should allocation formulae, eligibility, and delivery systemsbe different for rural areas? Chair, Ed Taylor, UC-Davis Federal Immigrant Policy Michael Fix, Urban Institute Implications for the Rural Midwest Philip Martin, University of California, Davis Discussion 11:45AM Lunch in the Lobby Bar and Grille at the Holiday Inn 1PM Immigration, Trade, and Meatpacking, Wally Huffmanand John Miranowski, Iowa State University 1:45PM Break 2PM Iowa Community Studies, Chair, Cornelia Flora, IowaState University Lenox, IA: Nancy Naples, UC-Irvine Storm Lake, IA: Mark Grey, University of Northern Iowa Marshalltown, Iowa: Antonio Ybarra-Rojas, Iowa State University Discussion 3:30PM Break 3:45PM Midwestern Community Studies, Chair, Will Rochin,Michigan State University Garden City, KS: Janet Benson, Kansas State University Holland, MI and Toledo, OH: Rene Rosenbaum, Michigan StateUniversity Lexington, NE: Loudres Gouveia, University of Nebraska-Omaha Pennsylvania Mushroom Industry: Victor Garcia, IndianaUniversity of Pennsylvania Discussion 5:30PM Adjourn 6:30PM Vans depart Holiday Inn for dinner at the Broiler, 6008Lincoln Way, tel 515-292-2516 ____________________ Friday July 12, 1996 6AM Vans depart hotel for field Trip to Waterloo and Marshalltown,IA 8AM Breakfast with IBP managers at the Starlight Village,a Best Western motel/restauarnt about 10 minutes from the IBPplant at 214 Washington St, tel 319-235-0321 9AM Tour of IBP plant, 501 N Elk Run Road, Waterloo(East edgeof city). 319-236-2636 10:30AM Depart IBP for Marshalltown 11:15AM Tour of Swift/Monfort plant,402 W 10th Ave, Marshalltown, Bary Carl, 515-752-3527 12:45PM Lunch at Ernesto's restaurant, 31 North FirstAve, 515-753-0920 Father L.Paul Oudenkirk will introduce severallocal leaders, each of whom will discuss how immigration is affectingMarshalltown for 5 to 8 minutes. We will eat at about 1:15pm 2:15PM Walking tour of Marshalltown, led by FatherPaul Oudenkirk and Antonio Ybarra Rojas. Marshalltown isa city of about 25,000 that in 1990 had an estimated 250 Hispanics,and today has 2,000 to 4,000 Hispanics. 3:30PM Depart for Ames, or optional tour of a large hograising facility 4:30/5:30PM Arrive at Holiday Inn in Ames 6:30PM Vans depart Holiday Inn for dinner at Hickory Park,121 S. 16th St, tel 515-232-8940 ____________________ Saturday July 13, 1996 7AM Continental breakfast at the Holiday Inn 8:30AM Western States' Community Studies, Chair, PhilipMartin, UC-Davis Immigration to Rural Utah Communities, Dawn Thilmany, UtahState Immigration Issues in Rural Washington, Richard Carkner,WSU and Dawn Thilmany, Utah State Discussion 9:45AM Break 10:00AM Policy Implications of Community Studies, Chair,Michael Fix, Urban Institute Iowa Lt Governor Joyce Corning Discussion 11:45AM Adjourn Immigration and the Changing Face of Rural America Focus on the Midwestern States Thursday, July 11, 1996 - Saturday, July 13, 1996 Summary Report of the Conference held at the Holiday Innin Ames, IA July 11-13, 1996 Philip Martin, J. Edward Taylor,and Michael Fix July 22, 1996 Themes 1 Immigration Patterns and Integration Policies 3 Meatpacking 4 Community Impacts 6 Next Steps 8 Themes The ìfaceî of rural America is changing, in partbecause of immigration from Latin America and Asia. In many smallcities and towns in middle America, refugees arrived in the late1970s and 1980s, and immigrants from Mexico and Central Americabegan arriving in ever-larger numbers in late 1980s and 1990s. We have held several changing face conferences in California toassess the prospects for integrating the immigrantswho have arrived since 1980 to fill agricultural and farm-relatedjobs. Agriculture is a traditional port of entry for Mexican immigrants,but economic and social mobility for immigrant farm workers hasin the past usually required geographic mobility--to get ahead,many rural residents moved to cities. This was the first seminar outside California. One way to highlightthe midwestern experience is to emphasize the similarities anddifferences between "Latinization" in CA and the ìbrowningîof the midwest. There are three major points of contrast: 1. A major magnet attracting immigrants to rural Iowa is foodprocessing including meatpacking, which offers year-round jobsthat pay at least $6 to $7 per hour, or $12,000 to $18,000 peryear, enough to support a family in the US. In many cases, theimmigrants moving to fill jobs in midwestern meatpacking are notsettled out migrant farm workers. This means that there are fewer solo males, and more families,in meatpacking towns than in the farm worker towns that surroundfields and orchards elsewhere in the US. Seasonal farm workersearn only half as much as meat packing workers--$5000 to $7000per year. The presence of families raises a number of issues --housing,schooling, health care. Unlike California, where settled Hispanicmigrants often provide many services to newcomers, and where immigrantsare often segregated in particular towns or parts of cities, immigrantmeat packing workers in the midwest often obtain public and privateservices from non-Hispanic providers, making them more "visible"in the communities in which they live and work. This visibility can lead to problems, as when law enforcementofficials harass Hispanics, or lead to extra services, as whenbanks and newspapers add Spanish-speaking personnel to serve newcustomers. In Marshalltown, Iowa, for example, immigrant meatpacking workers can and are buying homes for $30,000 to $50,000with the help of bank loans; few seasonal farm workers can getloans to buy houses. 2. The Hispanics and Asians in midwestern meatpacking are notalways immigrants, and they often work alongside US-born Whiteand Black workers in meatpacking plants. In many workplaces, Latinoimmigrants are only 20 to 50 percent of the labor force, but everyoneagrees that their presence has increased sharply over the past10 years, and is likely to continue to increase in the 1990s. The fact that some of the Latino workers are US-born, and thatthey often work alongside US-born White and Black workers in plantsthat have unions, means that work and family integration may evolvedifferently in the midwest. In California, immigrants typicallyhad to move to cities to enjoy upward mobility, and they wereslow to develop home-grown institutions such as the United FarmWorkers union to help them to improve wages and working conditionsin the fields. In the rural midwest, by contrast, there are non-immigrantworkers who also have a keen interest in higher meatpacking wagesand fringe benefits, making it more likely that existing unionsetc will accommodate newcomers so that they do not have to formtheir own organizations. 3. Neither the industries that have and are attracting immigrantsto the rural midwest, nor the communities that often providedsubsidies to attract plants, planned for the immigration and integrationof the minority and immigrant workers that they in some casesrecruited to fill jobs. Indeed, some argue that programs thatgive employers wage subsidies for some workers during their firstsix months of employment, plus the meatpacking industryíspolicy of not offering fringe benefits to workers for the firstsix months, encourages worker turnover in a manner that minimizeslabor costs and maximizes migration in a labor-intensive industry. Meatpacking may turn out to be a mobile industry that moves intorural areas, changes the size and composition of the populationin 25 to 50 midwestern towns, and then, in some cases, moves on,with perhaps pork moving to North Carolina, and beef to Mexico.In some cases, the plants were attracted to the rural midwestwith the help of subsidies, rather than paying the impact feesthat might be expected to be imposed on industries that generatesuch externalities. Immigration Patternsand Integration Policies The number of newly--arrived immigrants who have low levels ofeducation, little or no English, and low US earnings is increasing,while federal support for poor people, and especially poor immigrants,is decreasing. This disjuncture between immigration flows andwhat is often termed ìimmigrant policy,î in lightof pending proposals to further reduce the access of immigrantsto federal means-tested programs, raises questions about how wellimmigrants and perhaps their children will be integrated throughoutthe US. Immigrants in the US are concentrated--over half live in particularsections or neighborhoods of six cities in six states. This concentrationmagnifies the effects of immigration. About eight percent of theUS population is foreign-born, but 95 percent of all US residentslive in places that have less than eight percent foreign-bornresidents. Until the 1980s, immigrants roughly replicated the US-born populationin the single-best predictor of earnings--years of education.Immigrants arriving since the 1980s, however, have a differentdistribution of years of schooling. When arrayed by years of education,immigrants are concentrated at the extremes of the distribution.In this way, immigration joins globalization and technologicalchange as a factor that is adding people to the top and bottomof the income distribution, not the middle class. The ten midwestern states had about 2.1 million foreign-born residentsin the 1990 Census, including about 800,000 in the Chicago metroarea. About three-fourths of the 156,000 Mexican immigrants whoarrived in the midwestern US in the 1980s moved to Chicago. Chicagois to the midwest in immigration matters what Los Angeles is toCA--the home of most of the midwestís Hispanics and immigrants.Minnesota had 113,000 foreign-born residents in 1990, Kansas 63,000,Iowa 43,000, and Nebraska 28,000. As in the rest of the US, most immigrants to the midwest go tocities--about 93 percent of the foreign-born residents in theUS, but only 76 percent of all US residents, live in urban areas.Welfare rates are low in the rural midwestern states, and foreign-bornresidents are not disproportionate users of welfare. There were are about 2 million Hispanics in the ten midwesternstates, but many are US citizens who are moving to Iowa and Nebraskafrom border states such as Texas and California. Not all of theseinternal US migrants speak English, so there is a tendency toassume that all Hispanics are immigrants, and thus exaggeratethe number of immigrants in some towns. Illinois has about half of the Hispanics in the midwest, and mostlive in the Chicago area. Kansas had the most Hispanic residentsof the meat packing states in 1992--about 100,000, followed byMinnesota with 62,000, Nebraska 42,000, and Iowa 37,000 Meatpacking The US meatpacking industry has experienced four major changessince World War II. First, there has been a change in dietaryhabits--the average per capita consumption of chicken increasedto 70 pounds per person per year in 1995, while that of beef andpork fell to 67 and 52 pounds per person. Second, there have been technological changes that permitted meatpacking to move from urban consumers of meat toward farmer producersof cattle and hogs. Boxed beef, vacuum packing, and lower wagesin rural areas were among the reasons why it became preferableto prepare retail packages of meat close to where animals areslaughtered. Third, there were important changes in the labor force, especiallyafter 1980, that led to more unskilled workers, women, and immigrantsin the plants--women traditionally have played a more importantrole in poultry processing than meatpacking. Meatpacking has alwaysbeen an industry in the US that offered relatively high wagesto unskilled and non-English speaking workers, but employers inthe past may have had more incentives to develop and retain askilled meatpacking work force that lived in the town where theplant was located. Unions represented most meatpacking workers, and they had a masteragreement between 1950 and 1979 that "took wages out of competition"by requiring relatively uniform wages and benefits throughoutthe industry. The real hourly earnings of meatpacking workerspeaked in 1979, when meatpacking workers earned almost $15 perhour in 1992 dollars, and almost 20 percent more than the averagemanufacturing worker; in 1994, by contrast, real earnings wereless than $10 per hour. Meatpacking earnings fell as unions and master agreements faded,and as skill levels fell due to more automation and technologicalchanges. These changes may have made worker turnover less costlyto employers, and turnover may also have been encouraged by two-tierwage systems that developed in the early 1980s and offered lowerwages and fewer fringe benefits to newly-hired workers. Fourth, both the raising and slaughter of animals became concentratedin fewer and larger operations. In some cases, meatpacking plantswere located next to huge feedlots that were owned by the majorpackers. The cost of the animal remains the largest single partof the cost of meatpacking--cows cost slaugherhouses $0.60 to$0.70 per pound, and hogs $0.40 to $0.50 per pound, and "disassembling"these animals into meat products costs $0.05 to $0.10 per poundfor beef, and $0.20 to $0.25 per pound for pork. In 1990, Iowa had a labor force of 1.3 million, including 12,200Hispanics and 10,100 Asians. Most Hispanics and Asians in Iowawere not employed in meatpacking--there were about 41,000persons employed in food manufacturing in Iowa in 1990, including2000 Hispanics and 1000 Asians. About 25,000 Iowa workers wereemployed in meat and poultry processing. The 11 pork processing plants in Iowa--IBP operates 5 of them--in 1996 paid $6 to $7 per hour to entry-level workers. Most porkprocessors restrict benefits such as health insurance to workersemployed for at least six months. Most plants are hiring workersconstantly to fill job vacancies --it is not unusual to issue200 W-2 statements at the end of the year to keep 100 jobs filled. In plants visited by seminar participants, five month old hogsweighing 250 pounds each were ìdisassembledî at therate of about 1200 per hour, or 16,000 to 18,000 per day on twoeight hour shifts. The hogs are stunned, hung by one leg, stuckwith a knife, and then carried through washing and singing machinesto remove hair. Carcasses are then split, internal organs removed,and then various cuts of meat are removed as the carcass travelspast workers armed with knives. Meat is packed in vacuum bags, large paperboard bins, or othermeans for transit, and then chilled before being sent in refrigeratedtrucks to retail outlets--vacuum packing meat increases its shelflife from 3 days to 3 weeks. Some meat processors specialize incuring hams and preparing sausages. Within the industry, meatpacking is sometimes known as a ìkilland chillî industry. About one production worker is required for each 10 hogs slaughteredon a daily basis, so a plant that slaughters 16,000 to 18,000hogs daily has 1600 to 1800 production workers. Most of them wieldone of a variety of knives, and most workers have jobs that requirethem to make a particular cut as a carcass moves by at the rateof about one every three seconds. The job hierarchy in most plants is relatively flat, meaning thatthere are relatively few production jobs that pay twice the entry-levelwage. This is one reason why especially young men may be proneto quit one plant for another in order to have an extended vacation,to get away from a particular supervisor, or to find better housing,thus contributing to high worker turnover. Most rural areas in the midwest have unemployment rates underfour percent, so meatpacking plants advertise in local media,some offer bounties of e.g., $200 for each new worker referred,and some have recruiters who recruit locally, and persons whotravel to e.g., TX or CA, to seek workers. In many cases, theworkers who arrive to go to work are "vulnerable workers"in midwestern towns. Community Impacts Iowaís manufacturing sector was restructured in the 1970sand 1980s. Many old-line companies that offered ìblue collareliteî jobs were sold or restructured, and local mainstaysof the community were often replaced on the shop floor by ìvulnerableîworkers paid lower wages and sometimes recruited from outsidethe community. As one result, the ìlocalî factorybecame something more alien or foreign in many communities--nolonger a place where son followed father through the plant gates. The Iowa state government and local communities have struggledwith economic restructuring and the changing work force sincethe 1980s. On the one hand, many companies were persuaded to stayin or move to Iowa with tax breaks and other subsidies. However,when it became clear that many of the workers brought to Iowato staff the plants were non-English speaking immigrants, Iowasought to prevent at least the worst abuses associated with therecruitment of non-English speaking out-of-state workers by requiringemployers to pay their return transportation if they quit soonafter arrival under some circumstances. In many Iowa communities, the arrival of immigrants and US-bornHispanics beginning the 1970s followed a three-step process thatlimited the ability of state and local governments to regulatenewly-restructured industries such as meatpacking. First camesolo men, including those who were recruited by employers in borderregions or in Mexico. Then came families, either Asian refugeefamilies who had settled in the midwest, or the families of thesolo male Hispanics who learned that they could afford to bringtheir families to rural Iowa because wages were relatively high,and housing and other living costs were relatively low. The third step was unauthorized immigrants, including friendsand relatives of earlier settlers, who used social networks toget jobs with employers willing to hire immigrants with no Englishand little education. However, the arrival of more Hispanics,and more unauthorized immigrants, made many local residents wronglybelieve that most Hispanic residents were recently-arrived illegalworkers. In some cases, local law enforcement officers acted onthis belief, and perhaps unlawfully detained or harassed Hispanics. From the point of view of CA researchers familiar with seasonalfarm workers, the striking difference between meatpacking andCA agriculture is that meatpacking offers year-round jobs andannual earnings that are high enough to support a family, so thatthe issues associated with the arrival of families--such as housing,schooling, health care-- become important community issues earlyin the migration process. In most cases, meatpackers, like farmemployers in CA, are interested more in getting workers on theline than they are in ensuring that there is housing in the areafor new arrivals, schools for their children, or bilingual policeand other service personnel to deal with the newcomers. A few profiles illustrated these differences. Storm Lake is acity of 8800 in 1990, and is home to two meat-processing plantsthat employ almost 2000 workers. Storm Lake had three major waves of immigrants over the past 15years to the IBP plant there--two types of Lao immigrants, MexicanMennonites, and other Mexican immigrants. The Lao immigrants wererecruited via private networks, and the Mexican Mennonites andthe other Mexican immigrants were recruited with the active supportof IBP. The local community is divided over the influx of immigrants.About 24 percent of the children in K-12 classes are minorities,and the school system says that it must spend money on Englishas a Second Language and bilingual teachers, perhaps reducingservices to local children. Pork processor IBP counters that ithas a $36 million annual payroll in the area, and that schoolsmight close if the plant closed. Garden City, Kansas underwent similar demographic changes thatwere traced to meatpacking operations. The opening of one of theworld's largest meat packing operations was associated first withthe secondary migration of Southeast Asians into the area, andlater Mexican immigrants. Some of the meat packing workers livedin mobile home parks that were expanded to accommodate them. Utah provides some of the most striking examples of demographicand economic change. On the one hand, Utah has relatively rapidpopulation growth, and the Mormon church is expanding fastestin Latin America, so that there may be more receptivity to hardworking Mexican immigrants in Utah than in many other states.However, even in Utah, there are questions raised by the arrivalof Limited English Proficient children in schools etc. The operation/expansion of meatpacking in rural communities seemto generate externalities that were not planned for, and are nowthe subject of contention. Among the options that might be consideredare local impact fees, such as those that CA developers must payon new housing developments. Next Steps The "Changing Face" title of this project is meant tosuggest that the demographics of rural America are changing rapidly,as Mexican, Central American, and Asian immigrants take jobs inagriculture and agriculture-related industries. The federal governmentspends over $600 million annually on farm worker services, andadditional funds on rural development, but many of these programsremain rooted in the 1960s philosophy that the best solution forrural poverty is rural-urban migration. This project will be extended in two directions. First, we willexamine the policy recommendations outlined above in more depthwith federal and state policy makers, with planned conferencesin the Spring of 1997 in Sacramento, and in the Spring of 1998in Washington DC. These conferences will address issues such as:How much awareness is there of the speed with which the demographicsof rural America are changing? To what extent have policymakersthought about the need to revamp programs begun in the 1960s tohelp persons trapped in agriculture to deal with the integrationof immigrants in the US? Second, we plan to hold conferences in other areas of the US inwhich it appears that the composition of the farm and "nearfarm" labor forces began to change very rapidly in the 1980s.We plan to hold a conference/field trip in North Carolina in theFall of 1997 that focuses especially on Black-Hispanic interactionsin the labor force. Conference Questions and Guidelines This is a working conference; we expect the 45 participants toparticipate actively with researchers and local government officialsto discuss developments in these communities and what might bedone. A conference to discuss the policy implications of the ruralcommunity studies presented at this conference is planned for1997 in Washington DC. Community Studies Discussion Questions 1. What are the major issues--pluses and minuses--associated withhigh rates of immigration--adding one percent or more to the populationevery year via immigration, or doubling the population of thecommunity when seasonal workers arrive? How would these issuesbe affected if the inflow of new immigrants were stopped or significantlyreduced into your community, the aim of current border controlefforts and immigration reform legislation? 2. There is no generally accepted definition of immigrant integration.However, when two or more distinct groups share a geographic area,two extremes delineate their possible interaction--integrationor assimilation means eliminating boundaries between groups,encouraging convergence in language, values, earnings etc. Pluralismor multiculturalism, on the other hand, means encouragingthe maintenance of cultural diversity, and tolerating or welcomingethnic enclaves. These are sometimes referred to as the meltingpot versus the salad bowl approaches to accommodating immigrants. Which type of integration is occurring in your community/region?Why? What are the major factors affecting integration in thiscommunity/region, e.g., jobs, housing, schooling, governance?What public policies are most important in regulating the speedand extent of integration in your community/region, e.g., housingfor families, jobs for adults, or education for children? 3. Many newly-arrived immigrants find jobs with the help of ethnicnetworks. Do immigrant networks in rural communities confine immigrantsto low-wage jobs, or give them a hand up the job ladder? Somehave speculated that rural communities are distinguished fromimmigrant cities such as Los Angeles--where immigrants are concentratedat the top and the bottom of the skill and earnings distribution--because,in rural areas, the top or the role models are missing--thereis a pyramid-shaped distribution of skills and earnings, i.e.,a wide base of low-skill people and jobs that tapers off abruptly.Is this true in your community/region? 4. Federal and state governments are considering decentralizationand block grants--giving less assistance to communities, but allowinglocal leaders to decide how to spend assistance funds. How woulddecentralization and block grants--plus new restrictions on theeligibility of legal and unauthorized immigrants for public benefits--affectimmigration patterns in your community/region? Policy Implications 1. Are there any particular communities/regions or public or privatepolicies that stand out in promoting successful integration, orin impeding immigrant integration? What are the communities thatcurrently have a majority of foreign-born residents, and continueto grow by one to five percent per year via immigration, likelyto look like in 10 years if current trends continue, i.e., arecurrent immigration patterns sustainable? 2. What seems to be the most variable affecting the success ofintegration--number of immigrants, characteristics of migrants,situation and attitudes of the community in which they settle,or some combination of these? What does this variable suggestabout prioritizing government efforts to accelerate integrationin immigrant communities in agricultural areas--should housing,jobs, education, crime etc.-- be tackled first, and why? 3. Federal and state governments are considering decentralizationand block grants--giving less assistance to communities, but allowinglocal leaders to decide how to spend assistance funds. How woulddecentralization and block grants--plus new restrictions on theeligibility of legal and unauthorized immigrants for public benefits--affectimmigration patterns in your community/region? Home WT02-B13-46IA088-000636-B048-189http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/rmn/riv.htm 128.120.36.171 19970122193753 text/html 24541HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:38:46 GMTLast-Modified: Tuesday, 21-Jan-97 21:06:52 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 24284 Immigration and the Changing Face of Rural California Immigration and the Changing Face of Rural California: Implications for Southern California Wednesday April 17, 1996 - Friday April 19, 1996 Mission Inn 3649 Seventh St Riverside, CA 92501 tel 909-784-0300 or 800-843-7755 fax 909-683-1342 April 12, 1996 The purpose of this conference is to explore the evidence to supportor disprove the hypothesis that: "The United States risksre-creating rural poverty through immigration. This rural povertymay be even more difficult to extirpate; since it requires overcominglanguage and education barriers in an economy that penalizes withlow earnings workers without education and skills." ____________________ Wednesday April 17, 1996 8AM Continental Breakfast in the meeting room 9:00AM Conference purposes: Philip Martin, UC-Davis andMichael Fix, Urban Institute Introductions 9:30AM Immigration Patterns in the US, California, and RuralCalifornia, JV Palerm, Chair US and California Immigration Patterns Jeff Passel, Urban Institute Immigration into Rural California Ed Taylor, University of California, Davis 10:30AM Break 10:45AM Immigrant or Integration Policies Federal Immigrant Policy Michael Fix, Urban Institute Implications for Rural California Philip Martin, University of California, Davis 11:45AM Lunch at Ashley's 3789 Mission Inn Ave, tel 369-9574(one block from Mission Inn) 1:15PM Southern California Community Studies-Chair,Ed Taylor North San Diego County,Fred Krissman, University of California, San Diego Santa Paula1, Al Guilin, Santa Paula Santa Paula2, Theo Majka and Linda Majka, University of Dayton 2:15PM Break 2:30PM Slides and discussion of Huron: Richard Steven Street 3:30PM Beak 3:45PM Coachella Valley Overview: Juan Palerm, ManoloGonzalez-Estay andTravis Du Bry, University of California,Riverside 4:45PM Adjourn 5:30PM Vans depart Mission Inn for optional tour of UCR campus 6:30PM Vans depart Mission Inn for dinner at El Gato Gordo,1360 University Ave, 787-8212 (about 20 blocks from hotel) ____________________ Thursday April 18, 1996 6:45AM Vans depart Mission Inn for field trip to the CoachellaValley 8AM Arrive at Elmer's restaurant for breakfast with Mark Draperand Jose Aguiar, 81-539 Highway 111, Indio, tel 619-347-3923 9:15AM Vans depart Elmer's restaurant to tour Draper harvestingactivities 11AM Tour citrus packing operations in Coachella 12noon BBQ and discussion with local leaders at the Oasis DateGardens, 59-111, Hwy 111, Thermal, tel 619-399-5665 2PM Vans depart for tour of Coachella Valley farm worker communities 4PM Vans depart for one-hour tour of Palm Springs (return about6PM) or return directly to Mission Inn (arrive 5PM) 6:30PM Dinner at Riverside Brewing Company, 3397 Mission InnAve, 784-BREW (two blocks from the Mission Inn) ____________________ Friday April 19, 1996 7:30AM Continental Breakfast in the meeting room 8:30AM Californiaís New Rural Poor: Next Stop LA? RogerWaldinger, University of California, Los Angeles 9:30AM Break 9:45AM Northern California Community Studies: Chair, EdTaylor, University of California, Davis San Joaquin Valley cities: Will Rochin and Elaine Allensworth,Michigan State,University; Madera: Bonnie Bade, CSU-SanMarcos; and Watsonville: Dave Runsten, University of California,Los Angeles 10:45 Break 11AM Policy Implications of Community Studies, Chair,Michael Fix, Urban Institute Charles Eadie, City of Watsonville, Juan DeLara, Coachella ValleyCouncil of Governments; Ed Kissam, Aguirre International; and,Philip Martin, University of California, Davis 12:30PM Lunch at Ashley's 3789 Mission Inn Ave, tel 369-9574(one block from Mission Inn) 2 PM New Border Control Strategies: How are they working? AlanBersin, US Attorney 3:30PM Adjourn Immigration and the Changing Face of Rural California Summary Report of the Conference held at the Mission Innin Riverside, CA April 17-19, 1996 Philip Martin, Michael Fix, and Ed Taylor April 30, 1996 Themes 1 Policy Recommendations 2 Next Steps 5 Themes This conference was motivated by three "facts:" The populations of many cities and towns in agricultural areasof CA are increasing, often by 3 to 5 percent per year, versus1 percent per year for the US as a whole, and this rural populationgrowth is driven largely by youthful immigrants and their children. 2. There is almost a 1 to 1 relationshipbetween the number of immigrants arriving in rural areas and thenumber of poor adults with few years of education. There are moreuncertain and lagged effects of population growth near major centersof labor-intensive crop production and growth in the number ofchildren in K-12 education, the number of persons on AFDC andother welfare programs, and the number of persons in criminaljustice and other systems. Some data suggest that growth in the number of poor immigrantsin rural California is NOT associated with indicators of welfareuse, both because unauthorized immigrants are not eligible forsuch assistance and because many are in intact families that arehoping to succeed in the US through hard work. Other data suggestthat many immigrants seek public assistance for their eligibleUS-born children and themselves, and that social service usagecan be expected to increase in an S-curve fashion as settled immigrantsdevelop networks that take them from low-wage and seasonal USjobs to the social service system. 3. There is agreement that the rural poverty of the 1990s in ruralCalifornia is DIFFERENT from the rural poverty of the south andthe midwest in the 1940s and 1950s that shaped social scientistsperceptions of rural poverty, and federal government solutionsfor rural poverty. The conventional wisdom in the 1960s concludedthat the best way to eliminate lower-than-average rural wagesand incomes was by helping farmers and farm workers to move tourban jobs. Moving excess human resources out of agriculture,it was hoped, would set in motion a series of adjustments thatwould ultimately improve the economic status of those who movedand those who remained behind. There is widespread agreement that an "encourage movementto urban areas" policy will not "cure" rural ORurban poverty in the 1990s. First, the number of rural poor inrural CA seems to increase in lockstep with job opportunitiesthere--despite stepped-up border controls, migrants continue toarrive to fill jobs vacated by settled persons who abandon seasonalfarm work, and new jobs created in an expanding labor-intensiveagriculture. Second, urban areas such as Los Angeles do not offer the blue-collarmanufacturing jobs that permitted 1950s rural-to-urban migrantsto use unions and prosperity to achieve upward mobility. Unlikethe 1950s, there is today a significant immigration from abroaddirectly into urban areas such as Los Angeles, and there are fewerblue collar jobs that can deliver upward mobility to immigrantadults with typically less than six years of schooling. This suggests that, while the 1960s promised "virtuous circle"types of adjustments--federal assistance programs reinforced economicfactors to promote migration and upward mobility in both ruraland urban areas--in the 1990s, "vicious circles" maybe created, in which adults "used up" in the seasonalfarm labor market after 10 to 15 years find few alternatives inrural areas other than providing services to new arrivals, andtheir children educated in often weak rural school systems rejectthe seasonal farm jobs of their parents, but do not have the skillsneeded to succeed in local or distant nonfarm labor markets. Policy Recommendations The roots of the rural poverty being created near centers of agriculturalproduction in California lie in the US and Mexico. In the US,an ever-increasing wedge has been established between seasonalfarm workers and those who benefit from their services--in manycases, the multi-tiered production system involves packer-shippers,who buy from operators, who in turn lease land from owners, andwho rely on custom-harvesters and farm labor contractors to recruitand manage seasonal workers. It is difficult to regulate thislayered production system, and very difficult for farm workerorganizations to effectuate lasting changes that would improvetheir conditions. In Mexico, there are millions of farmers and farm workers withvery low incomes, and little hope of achieving even the $3000per person per year average Mexican income by staying in the placewhere they now live. Thus, migration is an integral part of theincome-earning strategies of many rural Mexican residents, bothtemporarily and permanently, and within Mexico and to the US.However, there is general agreement that events in Mexico in the1990s are encouraging especially young Mexicans to "go north"for opportunity, either in the expanding factories in border areas,or in the US. Opportunity in rural America at a time when Mexico is poised toundergo its "Great Migration" promise a continued influxof newcomers to the towns and cities surrounding California'sag production centers. There are four possible policy responses--atthe border, in US fields, in US towns and cities, or in ruralMexico. 1. Reduce especially unauthorized entries at the border. Thisis the strategy of the Clinton Administration, reflected in thebuild-up of the border patrol and new fencing and lighting. Apprehensionsare up sharply in 1996, and so are smuggling fees, but it doesnot appear that enough migrants are being stopped at the borderto put upward pressure on wages or working conditions in Californiaagriculture. Indeed, there is pessimism that unauthorized immigration can beslowed unless a far more effective employment verification systemis developed, something that Congress seems reluctant to embrace.This leaves enforcement efforts concentrated on one of the threemajor actors in unauthorized immigration--the smugglers who actuallyhelp migrants to evade border controls. Unless and until enforcementbecomes effective against US employers, or unauthorized migrants,unauthorized migration is likely to continue. 2. Make US farmers responsible for more of the costs associatedwith seasonal farm work. It was noted that the divorce of manyfarmers from their seasonal farm workers has reduced farm workertake-home pay. Most farmers no longer house seasonal farm workers,so that many workers pay $30 to $40 per week for housing in theback yards of rural colonias, and then pay $4 to $6 daily forrides to the fields. In addition, many workers must pay to havechecks cashed, and they face above-average prices for meals andfood in the businesses that cater to them. There are exemplary public and non-profit housing and servicefacilities in some rural towns, but there construction and operationrequires huge public subsidies, and they serve only a small fractionof the farm worker population. These housing projects, clinics,and day care centers appear to be islands of normalcy in seasof poverty. The "divorce" of farm operators and packer-shippersfrom the seasonal farm labor force means that the farm workersnot lucky enough to get into public facilities typically spend25 to 35 percent of their wages on services that were in the pastprovided by the grower. There are several ways to re-establishthe link between workers and the beneficiaries of their labor--requirefarm employers to provide or pay for housing, levy fees on commoditiesfor public housing, much as fees are levied for research and promotion,or raise wages enough so that seasonal workers can afford to obtainadequate housing with out subsidies. Each of these responses would likely raise farm labor costs, butthere is not a one-to-one relationship between rising farm wagesand consumer prices. The US Consumer Expenditure Survey reportsthat average consumer unit in 1993 spent $30,700, including $4400on food (14 percent), $2700 on food eaten at home (9 percent),and $270 on fresh fruits and vegetables eaten at home (less thanone percent). Farmers receive about one-third or $90 of the $270spent on fresh fruits and vegetables, and labor costs are typicallyone-third of farmers' costs, or about $30 or one-tenth of onepercent of average expenditures. If farm labor costs were to double, and if all of the increasedlabor costs were passed through to consumers, and there were noadjustments such as increased imports or consumers shifting toother commodities, then $60 in farm labor costs might raise the$270 spent on fresh fruits and vegetables to $300--$60 in farmlabor costs would be about one-tenth as much as the average consumerunit spent on maintenance and insurance on their house in 1993,or one-tenth of what they spent on telephone service, or one-tenthas much as the women and girls in the house spent on apparel. 3. It may not be easy to change a farm production and labor marketsystem that has been shaped by immigration over the past century.If unauthorized border crossings continue, and newly-arrived ruralMexicans continue to find jobs in seasonal US agriculture, thenpossible solutions to the "new" rural poverty associatedwith the transfer of rural Mexicans to rural America may be foundin either in rural or urban America, or rural or urban Mexico. In rural America, a farm worker service economy has developedin many areas-- the "best jobs" involve providing publicand private services to newcomers who need them. In a farm workertown of 20,000, growing by 5 percent or 1000 per year, there maybe 5000 K-12 students to be taught, making the education systemthe largest employer in many places, and generating "goodjobs." Federal, state, and local jobs are also prized, asour clinic and similar jobs. The private farm worker service economy is driven by the needsof often single male farm workers for housing, meals, transportation,and other services. Those who study the farm worker service economyhave policy recommendations that can be framed by two extremes--don'tworry too much, because those being "exploited" by highprices etc. are volunteers who took risks to cross the borderto escape even worse conditions, versus do worry--step up enforcementof housing and other laws--because what the US and Californiahas established as minimum levels of decency are being violatedevery day. Young people wanting to escape from their parents as well as limitedopportunities in their communities have always been prone to migratetoward "bright lights." In the past, many youth raisedin rural towns migrated to cities such as Los Angeles. What awaitsthem in LA? Census data suggest that Mexicans and Central Americansare most likely to be trapped in the parts of the Los Angeleslabor market that is least likely to offer upward mobility. Thissets the stage for frustration rather than opportunity. 4. What about reducing the supply of immigrants that is changingthe face of rural California and rural America at its source,in rural Mexico. Although not the subject of a great deal of discussion,the facts offer little hope. There are 25 to 30 million peoplein rural Mexico, and most are farm families that earn less thanone-third of Mexico's average income of $3000 per person per year. Most projections are that the farm population will be reducedby about one million per year, the same rate of out migrationfrom agriculture that the US experienced in the 1950s. This shiftout of Mexican agriculture could be accommodated in Mexico, eitherin rural areas with job creation, or in urban areas. However, there is little prospect of rural job creation on thescale necessary to make migration from rural towns unnecessary.And once migration is necessary, then it is clear that establishednetworks are as likely to move rural Mexicans to rural Americaas they are within Mexico, since they often have more relativesand better job contacts in the US than elsewhere in Mexico. Next Steps The "Changing Face" title of this project is meant tosuggest that the demographics of rural America are changing rapidly,as e Mexican, Central American, and Asian immigrants take jobsin agriculture and agriculture related industries. The federalgovernment spends over $600 million annually on farm worker services,and additional funds on rural development, but many of these programsremain rooted in the 1960s philosophy that the solution for ruralpoverty is rural-urban migration. This project will be extended in two directions. First, we willexamine the policy recommendations outlined above in more depthwith federal policy makers. How much awareness is there of thespeed with which the demographics of rural America are changing?To what extent have they thought about the need to revamp programsbegun in the 1960s to help persons trapped in agriculture to dealwith the integration of immigrants in the US? Second, we intend to hold conferences in other areas of the US,in which it appears that the composition of the farm and "nearfarm" labor forces began to change very rapidly in the 1980s,toward Hispanics and Asians in the midwest, and toward Hispanicsand Caribbean immigrants in the southeast and northeast. To whatextent are the patterns observed in CA also observed in theseother areas? Conference Questions and Guidelines This is a working conference; we expect the 45 participants toparticipate actively with researchers and local government officialsto discuss developments in these communities and what might bedone. A conference to discuss the policy implications of the ruralcommunity studies presented at this conference is planned for1997 in Washington DC. Community Studies Discussion Questions 1. What are the major issues--pluses and minuses--associated withhigh rates of immigration--adding one percent or more to the populationevery year via immigration, or doubling the population of thecommunity when seasonal workers arrive? How would these issuesbe affected if the inflow of new immigrants were stopped or significantlyreduced into your community, the aim of current border controlefforts and immigration reform legislation? 2. There is no generally accepted definition of immigrant integration.However, when two or more distinct groups share a geographic area,two extremes delineate their possible interaction--integrationor assimilation means eliminating boundaries between groups,encouraging convergence in language, values, earnings etc. Pluralismor multiculturalism, on the other hand, means encouragingthe maintenance of cultural diversity, and tolerating or welcomingethnic enclaves. These are sometimes referred to as the meltingpot versus the salad bowl approaches to accommodating immigrants. Which type of integration is occurring in your community/region?Why? What are the major factors affecting integration in thiscommunity/region, e.g., jobs, housing, schooling, governance?What public policies are most important in regulating the speedand extent of integration in your community/region, e.g., housingfor families, jobs for adults, or education for children? 3. Many newly-arrived immigrants find jobs with the help of ethnicnetworks. Do immigrant networks in rural communities confine immigrantsto low-wage jobs, or give them a hand up the job ladder? Somehave speculated that rural communities are distinguished fromimmigrant cities such as Los Angeles--where immigrants are concentratedat the top and the bottom of the skill and earnings distribution--because,in rural areas, the top or the role models are missing--thereis a pyramid-shaped distribution of skills and earnings, i.e.,a wide base of low-skill people and jobs that tapers off abruptly.Is this true in your community/region? 4. Federal and state governments are considering decentralizationand block grants--giving less assistance to communities, but allowinglocal leaders to decide how to spend assistance funds. How woulddecentralization and block grants--plus new restrictions on theeligibility of legal and unauthorized immigrants for public benefits--affectimmigration patterns in your community/region? Policy Implications Discussion Questions 1. Are there any particular communities/regions or public or privatepolicies that stand out in promoting successful integration, orin impeding immigrant integration? What are the communities thatcurrently have a majority of foreign-born residents, and continueto grow by one to five percent per year via immigration, likelyto look like in 10 years if current trends continue, i.e., arecurrent immigration patterns sustainable? 2. What seems to be the most variable affecting the success ofintegration--number of immigrants, characteristics of migrants,situation and attitudes of the community in which they settle,or some combination of these? What does this variable suggestabout prioritizing government efforts to accelerate integrationin immigrant communities in agricultural areas--should housing,jobs, education, crime etc.-- be tackled first, and why? Federal and state governments are considering decentralizationand block grants--giving less assistance to communities, but allowinglocal leaders to decide how to spend assistance funds. How woulddecentralization and block grants--plus new restrictions on theeligibility of legal and unauthorized immigrants for public benefits--affectimmigration patterns in your community/region? HomeWT02-B13-47IA088-000636-B048-213http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/rmn/asi.htm 128.120.36.171 19970122193814 text/html 41533HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:39:03 GMTLast-Modified: Tuesday, 21-Jan-97 21:07:10 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 41276 Fresno is a county with about 800,000 residents, half of whom live in the city of Fresno-Clovis, one-quarter in 14 incorporated cities, and one-quarter in the rest of the county. Fresno-Clovis is a predominantly non-Hispanic white city, while the percenta Immigration and the Changing Face of RuralCalifornia June 12-14, 1995 Asilomar Conference Center 800 Asilomar Blvd. PO Box 537 Pacific Grove, CA 93950 Tel (408) 372-8016 Fax (408) 372-7227 The purpose of this conference is to explore the evidence to supportor disprove the hypothesis that: "The United States risks re-creating rural poverty throughimmigration. This rural poverty may be even more difficult toextirpate; since it requires overcoming language and educationbarriers in an economy that penalizes with low earnings workerswithout education and skills." This is a working conference; we expect the 45 participants toparticipate actively with researchers and local government officialsto discuss developments in these communities and what might bedone. Another conference is planned for Summer 1996. ____________________ Monday June 12, 1995 7:45-11:30am Field Trip in the Salinas area The field trip will leave from the Laurel Inn, 801 W. Laurel St,just off Highway 101 in north Salinas promptly at 7:45 am. Wewill meet tour guide John Inman at the Golden West coffee shop(tel408-449-1545) adjacent to Laurel Inn; John will be in the coffeeshop at 7:30am, and is known to the staff there. If you wish to stay at Asilomar on Sunday or Wednesday nightsat your own expense, please call Asilomar at 408-372-8016 andreserve a room. 12:00pm Lunch at Asilomar 1:30 pm Immigration Patterns and Immigrant Policies Conference purposes: Philip Martin, UC-Davis and Michael Fix,Urban Institute Introductions Immigration Patterns in the US, California, and Rural California How is immigration is changing the population of the United States,California, and rural California? What is US immigrant or integrationpolicy, what should it be, and should allocation formulae, eligibility,and delivery systems be different in the agricultural areas ofCalifornia? (20 minute presentations, 10 minutes for discussants,general discussion) JV Palerm, Chair US and California Immigration Patterns Jeff Passel, Urban Institute Immigration into Rural California Ed Taylor, University of California, Davis The Implications of Binational Communities for the EconomicMobility of Newcomers in Rural California Carol Zabin, UCLA, and David Runsten Discussant: Nancy Bolton, Business Forecasting Project, UCLA 3:45 pm Break 4:00-5:30pm Immigrant or Integration Policies Federal Immigrant Policy Michael Fix, Urban Institute Implications for Rural California Philip Martin, University of California, Davis Discussant: Kirke Wilson, Rosenberg Foundation 5:30 PM Adjourn 6:00 -6:30PM Reception 6:30PM Dinner ____________________ Tuesday June 13, 1995 7:30-8:30 AM Breakfast 8:30am Central Valley Labor Camps and Cities, Philip Martin,Chair The Changing Demographics of Towns in Rural CaliforniaRefugio Rochin, Michigan State Parlier, Ed Kissam and David Runsten Madera, Rafael Alarcon, University of California, Berkeley McFarland, Fred Krissman, University of California,San Diego Fresno, Andy Alvarado and Bert Mason, California StateUniversity, Fresno Discussants: Juan Arambula, City of Fresno, Al Solis, City ofFresno, Ed Taylor, UC-Davis 10:30-10:45 Break 10:45-12 PM Discussion 12:00-1 PM Lunch 1pm Coastal Labor Camps and Cities, Philip Martin, Chair Guadalupe, Victor Garcia, Indiana Univeristy of Pennsylvania Shandon, Brian Haley, UCSB Watsonville, David Runsten, Pat Zavella, UCSC, and JohnBorrego, UCSC Policy Implications of Community Studies, JV Palerm, Universityof California, Riverside Discussants: Mr. Ariston Julian, GuadalupeHealth Center, Oscar Rios, Mayor of Watsonville, MichaelFix, Urban Institute 3-3:15pm Break 3:15-5:00PM Public and Private Aspects of Integration,Ed Taylor, UCD, Chair Privatizing the Costs of Seasonal Farm Employment in California Don Villarejo, California Institute for Rural Studies Education and Integration in Rural California Elias Lopez, University of California, Davis Discussants: Jeff Passel, Urban Insitute 5:00 PM Adjourn 6:00 -6:30PM Reception 6:30PM Dinner ____________________ Wednesday June 14, 1995 7:30-900 AM Breakfast 9:00 am Immigration and Integration in Perspective Chair, Kirke Wilson, Rosenberg Foundation Speaker: Cruz Reynoso, UCLA and US Civil Rights Commission 10:00-10:30 Break and and checkout 10:30 am Panel Discussion-Michael Fix, Philip Martin, JeffPassel, Ed Taylor, Refugio Rochin, Juan Palerm 12 noon Adjourn and Lunch 1:30-5pm Field Trip to Watsonville, California Watsonville is a city of 31,000 residents that was devasted byan earthquake 1989, and flooding in 1995. In order to better understand the problems and opportunitiesin a cities such as Watsonville and Pajaro, we will visit a Clinicthat is attuned to migration patterns and health conerns, Saludpara la Gente(2pm Jean Sears), a model housing project, PajaroValley Affordable Housing (3pm Bill Segal) and Murphy's LaborCamp, and then return to the Watsonville Plaza to discuss economicdevelopment with Oscar Rios(4pm). The field trip will end at 5pm Immigration and the Changing Face of Rural California Summary Report of the Conference held at Asilomar June 12-14, 1995 Philip Martin and Ed Taylor June 27, 1995 Themes 1 Introduction 2 Three Themes 3 Immigration Patterns and Immigrant Policies 4 Migration Networks 5 Colonias in The Central Valley 5 Parlier 6 Madera 6 Famersville and McFarland 7 Fresno: the Rural-Urban Connection 7 Coastal Colonias: Guadalupe and Shandon 9 Policy Alternatives 9 Themes A conference on Immigration and the Changing Face of Rural Californiawas held June 12-14 1995 in Asilomar, California, to explore whetherthe United States is recreating rural poverty through immigrationin the 1990s. Asilomar was the first of what we hope will be aseries of conferences on immigration and integration issues andprospects in rural California and rural America. An agenda and the questions that guided the discussion are attached. The Asilomar conference brought together academic and policy researchers,community leaders, and activists to consider how immigration isaffecting demographics, economies, and politics in communitiesin two California regions: the San Joaquin Valley and the CentralCoast. Studies of rural communities constituted the core of theconference program. Key findings and conclusions from this conferenceshould be useful in shaping policy and research agendas on impactsof immigration in rural areas. The key findings of the June 12-14 1995 conference in Asilomar,California include: 1. The towns and cities in major agricultural regions of the stateare growing as a result of immigration and children born to immigrants.This is evident in towns such as Parlier--two thirds of whoseresidents were born abroad; and half of these immigrants arrivedin California after 1980. 2. These residents are often poor--from 25 to 50 percent of thefamilies in these towns have incomes below federal poverty levels,and 7 of California's 10 poorest cities are "overgrown laborcamps" or farm worker towns [California has 450 cities]. 3. Poor immigrants do not affect the towns in which they settleuniformly. For example, there is closer to a one-to-one relationshipbetween new residents and housing, and high ratios of new residentshave children in schools. But the correlation between immigrationand public assistance and welfare is lower-- although the rateat which residents are requesting public assistance in these poorrural communities is rising sharply. 4. Many of the effects of immigrant farm workers on local communitiesoccur with uncertain lags. Migration is a network phenomenon,often begun by U.S. recruitment, sustained by poverty in ruralMexico and jobs in rural California, and then "managed"by family and village networks that effectively "capture"desirable items in rural California--particular jobs, labor camps,or schools--for immigrants from specific communities in Mexico. 5. The economies and labor markets of rural communities are increasinglylayered or segmented in a manner that pushes many of the costsof seasonal farm work onto the most flexible or absorptive peoplepresent, recently-arrived immigrants. These immigrants, in turn,are a market for settled local residents, including FLCs who organizethem into crews, those who provide newcomers with housing, meals,rides to work, and check-cashing services, and those who providepublicly-supported services to newcomers. Local residents areusually paid for the services they received in cash, giving themtax-free income. 6. The rural poverty being created through immigration is fundamentallydifferent from the rural poverty of the postwar south and midwest.Today's rural poverty is being created via the immigration ofpersons with low earnings and little education into an expandingfruit and vegetable agriculture that increasingly exports thecommodities produced by immigrant farm workers. During the 1950s, and 1960s, by contrast, there were a decliningnumber of jobs for U.S. citizen farmers and sharecroppers in aconsolidating and mechanizing agriculture. The solution in the1950s and 1960s was a Great rural-urban Migration involving 1million persons annually; it is not yet clear what the solutionfor 1990s rural poverty will be. 7. Rural poverty affects California cities as local residents,particularly the children of immigrants, seek a livelihood outsideof agriculture. The transfer of rural poverty to urban povertyhighlights the importance of education and training to improvethe prospects for California's rural-to-urban migrants in theurban economy. Introduction The idea for this conference emerged from two separate developments.The first was a national shift in interest in the early 1990sfrom immigration policy--how many, from where, and in what statusforeigners arrive--to immigrant or integration policy--what shouldbe done for immigrants after their arrival to ensure that theyand their children integrate successfully? The second was a long-standing interest in farm labor market trends,especially the role of seasonal harvest labor markets as a portof entry for especially rural Mexican immigrants into the US. Three concerns provided the backdrop for the conference. First, the public resources available to integrate newcomersare declining even though the number of immigrants is increasing. Second, seasonal farm work is done primarily by foreignerswho have recently arrived in the U.S. and who have few other U.S.job options. Third, despite farm labor surpluses and a variety of factorsthat combine to prevent immigrant farm workers from finding nonfarmjobs, rural Mexicans continue to arrive in rural California, fuelingpopulation growth and poverty. In the past, immigration policy was integration policy in ruralAmerica. Everyone "knew" that workers with other U.S.job options would abandon seasonal farm work, so the U.S. governmentpermitted or tolerated the entry of new immigrants into the seasonalfarm labor market. Conference participants are familiar with towns and cities inthe agricultural areas of California. They were asked to considera simple question with far-reaching socioeconomic ramifications:Are we re-creating rural poverty through immigration? If ruralpoverty is increasing, what is likely to happen to especiallypoor rural residents and their children? Will they stay in ruralareas and accept the jobs available, will they receive educationand training and attract industries that transform rural economies,will they rely on public assistance, or will they move? Three Themes Three themes run through the conference papers. First, there is no end in sight to the current wave of immigrants.This gives rise to a potential contradiction between immigrationand integration policies. There is widespread agreement that thechildren of farm workers raised and educated in the U.S. avoidseasonal farm work, so that, under current conditions, seasonalfarm workers do not reproduce themselves in the U.S. This makes integration a Sisyphean task, a never-ending questto undo the poverty that often results from seasonal farm work.Farmers will continue to ensure that newly-arrived seasonal farmworkers are available, and communities and assistance programswill continue to strive to provide them and their children withthe education needed for nonfarm jobs. In theory, this shouldcause tension between farm employers who rely on immigrant workersand efforts to integrate these workers into better-paying jobs.However, it does not, largely because successful integration effortsthat encourage and permit farm worker children to find nonfarmjobs reinforce growers' assertions that U.S. workers won't dofarm work, so the only option is to import new workers from abroad,setting in motion another cycle of escape from the farm labormarket. Second, it is clear the number of needy people in the towns andcities surrounding the state's farms has increased faster thanthe number of people on public assistance. Unlike the 1 to 1 relationshipbetween child population growth and school enrollment, the rateat which poor people apply for and receive public assistance inrural areas is slower than the rate at which their numbers areincreasing. This raises the question of whether the gap between need and publicassistance simply is a reflection of knowledge and legal obstacles,or whether it represents a behavioral difference; i.e., are privatenetworks filling assistance needs in rural areas privately, sothat only education needs are publicly visible. A question ofsignificant public policy import is whether the gap between needand public assistance in rural America is a short-term or long-termphenomenon. Third, the binational labor market is so well established betweenrural Mexico and rural California that the U.S. must take an interestin rural Mexico. Failure to promote rural development in Mexicowill inevitably lead to the need to launch rural development effortsin the U.S to integrate the rural Mexicans who move here. Immigration Patternsand Immigrant Policies There are many models of immigrant effects on local populationsand economies. Two models mark the extremes. One argues that thereare economies of scale and multiplier effects of immigrant workers,so that the arrival of immigrants increases local economic activityand creates or preserves good jobs for local residents. The other extreme argues that immigrants take over local jobsand freeze low wages into place, so that the continued arrivalof unskilled immigrants transforms the economy into somethingresembling the migrants' place of origin, and local workers whowould have to compete with immigrants tend to migrate away. Thisgives rise to the so-called import-third-world-immigrants-and-get-third-world-conditionssyndrome. An analysis of census-tract data from 12 agricultural countiesin central California suggest that immigrants represent a two-edgedsword for rural California. One the one hand, their labor is criticalto an expanding labor-intensive agricultural sector. On the otherhand, immigration into rural communities is associated with risingpoverty, public assistance, and underemployment rates. Influxes of low-skilled immigrant workers may release human-resourceconstraints and create income linkages promoting local incomegrowth, as suggested by the optimistic model. However, the benefitsof this income growth are unevenly distributed. Low wages andhigh unemployment rates are endemic at the bottom end of the jobladder, where most immigrants to rural California are concentrated,as suggested by the pessimistic view. The combination of growth-promoting immigration and a broad baseof jobs with limited earnings prospects leads to the seeminglyparadoxical outcome of a positive association between immigrationand income growth, but also a correlation between immigrationand poverty growth. Migration Networks Migration networks have evolved to assure U.S. farms a reliablesupply of low-skill immigrant labor. Mexican immigrants have traditionallycome from 6 western Mexican states centered around Guadalajara.These states include almost 20 percent of Mexico's population. Increasingly, networks of family contacts take migrants from thesestates to urban rather than agricultural U.S. jobs. The "new-new"migrants in California agriculture are primarily from the 3 southwesternstates in Mexico, which include about 10 percent of Mexico's populationbut large concentrations of Mexico's poor people. Unlike migrants from western Mexico, who were recruited underthe Bracero program to work in U.S. agriculture, Mixtecs fromOaxaca became U.S. migrants in a stage process that began withgrowers in Sinaloa and Baja California who recruited them to travelto northern Mexico, and then U.S. recruiters encouraged them tomigrate across the border. As the newest arrivals, Mixtecs are at the bottom of the agriculturaljob ladder. However, unlike migrants from western Mexico who waiteduntil they had found more-or-less permanent tractor driver orirrigator jobs to unify their families in the U.S., some Mixtecsbelieve a series of seasonal jobs provides sufficient stabilityto justify family unification in the U.S. Colonias in The CentralValley California has about 450 cities, and an analysis of 120 of themfound that colonias--mostly Hispanic towns and cities--are replacingbarrios, cities with a section in which Hispanics are concentrated.Across these colonias, indicators of low earnings and povertyincreased between 1980 and 1990--the percent of the populationwith below poverty level earnings increased from 15 to 20 percent,while the percent of adults without a high school diploma rosefrom 50 to 54 percent. Studies of colonias reveal a challenging problem in evaluatingthe costs and benefits of immigration in rural California: themajor beneficiaries of immigration tend to live outside the communitiesthat bear the costs of servicing the needs of large numbers oflow-skilled immigrant farm workers with poor earnings and unstableemployment. This means that studies of individual colonias canlead to a pessimistic view of immigration's impacts. Labor-intensive agriculture, by drawing large numbers of workersfrom abroad and offering many of them only poverty-level earningsand employment, creates a negative externality for these ruralcommunities, i.e., the cost of meeting the public service needsof farm workers whose paychecks cannot support them. The demographic and economic trends identified by the "macro"studies typically are magnified in individual "micro"community case studies. Seven studies presented at the conferenceprovide a starting point for piecing together a picture of howimmigration is reshaping rural California communities. Parlier Parlier is a city of 10,000 about 20 miles southeast of Fresno.It is over 97 percent Hispanic. Its history illustrates the demographictransition occurring in rural California. It was 95 percent non-Hispanicwhite in 1921 and 70 percent Hispanic in 1970. In 1972, afterschooling and police disputes, Hispanics replaced Whites on thecity council. Grapes and tree fruits dominate the agriculture around Parlier,and the nature of seasonal labor needs in these commodities hasled in most cases to a three-tiered labor force-- a few year-roundworkers (1/7), more long-season local workers (1/5), and mostlypeak season migrants (2/3). This means that the job pyramid inlocal agriculture is narrow at the top. Parlier's economy has long been based on serving farm workers,including those employed in nonfarm but ag-related industriessuch as packing and processing. Like many other cities in ruralCalifornia, Parlier grew rapidly during the 1970s and 1980s asfarmers eliminated on-farm housing for workers. The city constructedlow-income housing to help fill the housing gap. However, Parlieris now on a housing treadmill. As new migrants continue to arrive,established residents rent out their garages and backyards, anda constant or higher percentage of the city's residents wind upin poor housing. Provision of services like housing, job contracting, transportationand food to a large seasonal influx of farm workers creates someincome and employment for established residents, in a manner analogousto a tourist town. However, the poverty-level earnings of mostfarm workers severely limits incomes in these immigrant serviceactivities. The best local jobs are held by those who use publicfunds to provide education, health, and other public servicesto farm workers. A high percentage of Parlier residents is poor, but relativelyfew receive public assistance. Public assistance in Parlier seemsto go to poor people who have an attachment to the labor force,in contrast to the nearby city of Fresno where a higher percentageof recipients seem to receive aid for long periods. Legal obstaclesto immigrants obtaining public assistance, together with strongnetwork support among immigrants, probably help explain thesedifferences. The state-run migrant camp--reportedly isolated fromthe city despite being inside city limits--houses workers whospend 6 months each year in south Texas or Mexico. The childrenof camp workers sometimes follow their parents to the fields. Madera Madera county has about 100,000 residents, about one-third ofwhom are Hispanic. Raisin grapes and other commodities in thecounty have long relied on seasonal Mestizo workers from the westernMexican state of Michoacan but, since the mid-1980s, Mixtec Indiansfrom Oaxaca have become the major entry-level workers. This ethnic succession raises interesting questions, includingwhether or not the Mixtecs arriving in Madera in the 1990s canexpect to achieve the same upward mobility achieved by previousfarm workers from Michoacan, who replaced white farm workers inan expanding labor intensive agriculture. Immigrants currentlyare experiencing falling earnings relative to whites, and thereis evidence of rising competition between established Mestizoand burgeoning Mixtec migration networks for more desirable, year-roundjobs. Madera illustrates the dilemma inherent in managing seasonal laborin rural California. Most residents pay at least lip service tothe notion that education should be improved so that farm workerchildren are not "trapped" in poverty. But the sameeducational opportunities that prepare farm worker children fornonfarm jobs ensure that they will not be seasonal farm workersthemselves, putting the county on an immigrant farm worker treadmillin which new groups of immigrants are encouraged to fill seasonaljob vacancies, and the community struggles to ensure that theirchildren can achieve the better life to which they aspire. Famersville and McFarland Famersville and McFarland are towns of about 7000 residents eachin which half of the labor force are farm or food processing workers,prompting them to be labeled by some as "incorporated laborcamps." In both cities, there are relatively few businesses,and they have low sales, so that there are low sales tax and publicrevenues. These communities represent a striking juxtaposition of concentratedrural poverty amidst a prosperous agriculture. Rising povertyin the two towns is associated with an oversupply of immigrantworkers and displacement of local workers (mostly older immigrants)by new immigrant groups from southern Mexico. Here, as in Parlier,settled residents provide low-cost services to farm workers. Higherincome groups have moved outside the communities. The farm workers in Farmersville and McFarland appear to be unifyingtheir families in California. A combination of factors--legalstatus, U.S. wages and benefits including unemployment benefits,and the sense that there is little economic future in rural Mexico--helpto explain why rural Mexican migrants increasingly are becomingresidents of cities in the agricultural areas of California. Fresno: the Rural-UrbanConnection Two things flow out of small rural towns into the rapidly expandingcities of California's central valley: second-generation immigrants,and large business. Cities are a magnet for sons and daughtersof immigrant farm workers who do not see a future for themselvesdoing farm work. Conference participants also provided numerous examples of "MainStreets" of rural communities shutting down, as local residentsturn to regional shopping centers to be their primary suppliersof goods. Only businesses providing goods and services not easilytraded across the distances separating rural residents from theclosest urban area remain, leaving a string of empty store frontsin the downtowns of rural communities. Fresno county dominates the demographic and economic landscapeof the Central Valley. Fresno county has annual agricultural commoditysales of $3 billion, about one-sixth of the CA total, and morethan the farm sales of states such as New York and South Dakota.The county had about 670,000 residents in 1990, about 60 percentof whom lived in the Fresno-Clovis metropolitan area. By 1995, the county's population is estimated to be almost 800,000,with half in the city of Fresno, one-quarter in 14 incorporatedcities, and one-quarter in the rest of the county. Fresno-Clovisis a predominantly non-Hispanic white city, while the percentageof Hispanics in cities such as Mendota, Huron, and Parlier tops90 percent. Non-Hispanic whites are the oldest residents, so that, e.g., theHispanic and Asian percentage of the cityís school enrollmentis greater than their percentage of the cityís population.One third of the countyís population is younger than 18. There are about 300,000 employed persons in the county, including20 percent in agriculture and 10 percent in manufacturing. Countywide, 90 percent of total employment is in 5 sectors--trade, services,and government each have 20 percent. The average annual unemploymentrate was 14 percent in 1992-93. Fresno county has a relatively low-wage economy, largely becauseof the importance of low-wage agriculture in the economy and thefact that about 2/3 of the manufacturing jobs are in non-durables.The percentage of Fresno countyís population with less-than-povertylevel incomes jumped between 1980 and 1990. About 30 percent ofthe countyís residents received public assistance nearthe end of 1993. Rates of public assistance varied by race/ethnicity--about10 percent for non-Hispanic whites, versus almost 40 percent forHispanics, and over 60 percent of Blacks. Surveys of farm workers, many of whom are SAWs, suggest that mostwant nonfarm jobs, but lack of English and skills keep them inthe farm work force. Most do not learn English, or live in areasand work in situations in which they need to learn English. Farmworkers with children often rely on them to translate for them. It appears that most first generation immigrant farm worker donot have an opportunity to learn English. Their children do, andthey develop both aspirations for nonfarm jobs and rights to publicassistance. The race in Fresno county is to determine whetherthe nonfarm jobs in the area, public assistance, or migrationaway from Fresno will prove more attractive to the immigrant childrenof farm workers. Coastal Colonias:Guadalupe and Shandon Guadalupe is a city of 6000 in Santa Barbara county that thathas long relied on Mexican immigrant workers. The argument madeabout Guadalupe is that the nature of agricultural productionproduces poverty, not continuing immigration. However, labor-intensiveagriculture may not have expanded in the area without the availabilityof flexible immigrant workers. Shandon is another farm worker town of 700 that switched fromcattle and grains to producing more labor-intensive crops, especiallygrapes. As the number of seasonal farm workers increased, so didthe number of newly-arrived immigrant Hispanics, who were visiblein the small town--Hispanics are about one-third of the town'spopulation. Crowding in substandard housing led to visibilityand conflict with local residents, especially those who were notdependent on seasonal Mexican immigrant workers. Eventually, farmworkers were dispersed to less visible locations outside the town. It is important to emphasize that California, which has a proportionatelysmall rural or nonmetro population, is experiencing rapid populationgrowth in the towns and cities in major farming areas, so thatfarm evolution is not associated with population decline in surroundingcommunities in California, as it is in the midwest. Second, in the race between mechanization and the expansion ofagricultural production, the net number of seasonal farm jobsseems to be stable, at least at the state level, which means thatthere are more jobs for seasonal workers in some parts of thestate. Third, an apparently vibrant and expanding agriculturalindustry is associated with more visible poverty among farm workers. Policy Alternatives U.S. history is in part the story of how agriculture dealt withthe need for seasonal farm workers in a nation that offered enoughnonfarm opportunities that it was very hard to maintain a workforce willing to accommodate itself to the needs of seasonal agriculture.Over the last 150 years, the seasonal work force evolved froma mix of slaves, families of farm workers, and seasonal hiredhands to mostly hired workers. The seasonal hired farm labor market,in turn, has developed institutions that turn many of the costsassociated with low seasonal earnings over to workers themselves--andto the communities that house them. For example, lower-than-average farm wages, it was once argued,were offset in part by employer-provided housing and other in-kindbenefits. But across the United States, the story of the 1980sand 1990s is that employer-provided benefits are shrinking andwages are not rising in compensation, so effective real farm workerearnings are shrinking. This makes seasonal farm jobs less attractiveto workers with other options, and ensures that only the newestand most desperate immigrants are eager for seasonal jobs. Increasing socio-economic distance between farmers and workersonly compounds the isolation of the farm labor market. With farmersdealing more and more with farm labor contractor (FLC) middlemenwho compete for their farm work on the basis of cost, farmersknow less and less about "their workers," and take lessresponsibility for them. Laws that seek to force growers to takemore responsibility for seasonal workers generally include loopholesand, in any event, are not uniformly enforced. One advantage tofarmers of employing labor through FLCs is that the FLCs seemto be able to avoid effective labor and tax law enforcement. Changes in the farm labor market make it unlikely that immigrantfarm workers and their children will achieve upward mobility there.Several conference participants proposed a combination of effortsto slow immigration, training second-generation immigrants tocompete in urban labor markets, and developing nonagriculturalemployment in rural and urban areas to provide workers with alternativesto low-paying seasonal farm work. However, solutions like these lead to the policy dilemma of howto encourage mobility of immigrant farm workers and their childrenwhile at the same time guaranteeing a supply of labor to fillseasonal farm jobs. California's prosperous agriculture is a revolving-dooremployer of new immigrants, and attempts to integrate new immigrantsinto the U.S. economy speed up the revolving door. In the process,poverty continues to be transferred from rural Mexico to ruralCalifornia through immigration, and then into urban California,through the migration of farm workers and their children out ofagriculture. There are no easy alternatives to revolving door farm worker poverty.One option would be to push up farm wages, either by reducingimmigration, by raising minimum wages and enforcing labor laws,or through collective bargaining. The supply of US workers shouldincrease as a result--perhaps as workers revolve through the farmlabor market slower--and the demand should drop significantly,as farmers use labor more efficiently, mechanize, and change crops. A second alternative is to argue that the farm labor market shouldbe maintained as it is, but that seasonal farm workers shouldbe guest workers who do not earn the right to stay in the US.In this manner, the revolving door would operate to and from ruralMexico, rather than from rural Mexico to rural California andrural America. Conference Questions and Guidelines This is a working conference; we expect the 45 participants toparticipate actively with researchers and local government officialsto discuss developments in these communities and what might bedone. A conference to discuss the policy implications of the ruralcommunity studies presented at this conference is planned for1997 in Washington DC. Community Studies Discussion Questions 1. What are the major issues--pluses and minuses--associated withhigh rates of immigration--adding one percent or more to the populationevery year via immigration, or doubling the population of thecommunity when seasonal workers arrive? How would these issuesbe affected if the inflow of new immigrants were stopped or significantlyreduced into your community, the aim of current border controlefforts and immigration reform legislation? 2. There is no generally accepted definition of immigrant integration.However, when two or more distinct groups share a geographic area,two extremes delineate their possible interaction--integrationor assimilation means eliminating boundaries between groups,encouraging convergence in language, values, earnings etc. Pluralismor multiculturalism, on the other hand, means encouragingthe maintenance of cultural diversity, and tolerating or welcomingethnic enclaves. These are sometimes referred to as the meltingpot versus the salad bowl approaches to accommodating immigrants. Which type of integration is occurring in your community/region?Why? What are the major factors affecting integration in thiscommunity/region, e.g., jobs, housing, schooling, governance?What public policies are most important in regulating the speedand extent of integration in your community/region, e.g., housingfor families, jobs for adults, or education for children? 3. Many newly-arrived immigrants find jobs with the help of ethnicnetworks. Do immigrant networks in rural communities confine immigrantsto low-wage jobs, or give them a hand up the job ladder? Somehave speculated that rural communities are distinguished fromimmigrant cities such as Los Angeles--where immigrants are concentratedat the top and the bottom of the skill and earnings distribution--because,in rural areas, the top or the role models are missing--thereis a pyramid-shaped distribution of skills and earnings, i.e.,a wide base of low-skill people and jobs that tapers off abruptly.Is this true in your community/region? 4. Federal and state governments are considering decentralizationand block grants--giving less assistance to communities, but allowinglocal leaders to decide how to spend assistance funds. How woulddecentralization and block grants--plus new restrictions on theeligibility of legal and unauthorized immigrants for public benefits--affectimmigration patterns in your community/region? Policy Implications Discussion Questions 1. Are there any particular communities/regions or public or privatepolicies that stand out in promoting successful integration, orin impeding immigrant integration? What are the communities thatcurrently have a majority of foreign-born residents, and continueto grow by one to five percent per year via immigration, likelyto look like in 10 years if current trends continue, i.e., arecurrent immigration patterns sustainable? 2. What seems to be the most variable affecting the success ofintegration--number of immigrants, characteristics of migrants,situation and attitudes of the community in which they settle,or some combination of these? What does this variable suggestabout prioritizing government efforts to accelerate integrationin immigrant communities in agricultural areas--should housing,jobs, education, crime etc.-- be tackled first, and why? Federal and state governments are considering decentralizationand block grants--giving less assistance to communities, but allowinglocal leaders to decide how to spend assistance funds. How woulddecentralization and block grants--plus new restrictions on theeligibility of legal and unauthorized immigrants for public benefits--affectimmigration patterns in your community/region? HomeWT02-B13-48IA088-000636-B048-262http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/carucom/rankings/popch.html 128.120.36.171 19970122193849 text/html 7880HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:39:45 GMTLast-Modified: Friday, 09-Aug-96 01:22:16 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 7625 % Change in Population Population Growth CARUCOM Communities ranked by Percentage Change in Populationfrom 1980 to 1990 County % Change in Population 1990-1980 Brawley 634% Piru 253% Kettleman City 233% Patterson 129% Imperial 110% Avenal 108% Cutler 94% McFarland 82% Pixley 79% Las Lomas 78% Richgrove 77% Poplar-Cotton 58% Greenfield 50% Ivanhoe 46% Huron 44% Lockeford 43% Laton 39% Wasco 39% Coalinga 37% Arvin 33% Lindsay 33% Orange Cove 30% Kerman 28% London 27% Exeter 27% Farmersville 26% Parlier 25% El Rio 23% Planada 21% Strathmore 21% Calexico 20% Lamont-Weedpatch 20% Castroville 20% Shafter City 18% Armona 17% Firebaugh 17% Dos Palos 16% Calistoga 15% San Joaquin 15% Holtville 15% Del Rey 11% Buttonwillow 11% Hughson 10% Sanger 9% Carruthers 7% Easton 5% Corcoran 0% St. Helena -1% Woodlake -4% Selma -7% Terra Bella -11% Delhi -16% Orosi -17% Livingston -18% Soledad -22% Westmorland -27% King City -28% Calipatria-Niland -34% Earlimart -35% Mendota -35% Gonzales -40% East Porterville -43% Seeley -51% Fillmore -54% Tipton-Woodville -64% Last Update: 8/7/96WT02-B13-49IA088-000636-B048-281http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/carucom/rankings/hpop.html 128.120.36.171 19970122193922 text/html 8797HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:40:03 GMTLast-Modified: Thursday, 08-Aug-96 02:44:36 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 8540 Percent HIspanic Percent Hispanic CARUCOM Communities ranked by the Percent of Hispanic Population County % Hispanic Calexico 359% Sanger 208% Corcoran 193% Selma 132% Lindsay 117% Huron 95% Mendota 93% Parlier 86% Earlimart 84% Firebaugh 80% Orange Cove 79% Castroville 79% Soledad 79% Gonzales 78% Lamont-Weedpatch 78% McFarland 76% Dinuba 74% Orosi 74% San Joaquin 73% Arvin 73% Greenfield 72% Planada 71% Del Rey 71% Farmersville 70% Brawley 69% El Rio 67% King City 66% Richgrove 65% Wasco 63% London 63% Cutler 63% Imperial 62% Holtville 60% Fillmore 59% Piru 59% Livingston 59% Tipton-Woodville 58% Shafter City 51% Kettleman City 51% Pixley 51% Woodlake 51% Kerman 51% Avenal 50% Patterson 49% Ivanhoe 48% Las Lomas 46% Calipatria-Niland 46% Poplar-Cotton 46% Dos Palos 44% Buttonwillow 44% Seeley 43% Easton 43% Carruthers 43% Strathmore 37% Laton 36% East Porterville 36% Hughson 35% Westmorland 34% Terra Bella 33% Armona 29% Coalinga 28% Delhi 27% Exeter 26% Calistoga 24% Lockeford 16% St. Helena 14% US Census defintion is: Total Hispanic Population Within Census Tract/Total Population within Census Tract for Race/Etnicity Last Update: 8/7/96WT02-B13-50IA088-000636-B048-304http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/carucom/rankings/forbo.html 128.120.36.171 19970122193936 text/html 8831HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:40:31 GMTLast-Modified: Thursday, 08-Aug-96 02:37:04 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 8574 Percent Foreign Born Percent Foreign Born CARUCOM Communities ranked by the percentage of Foreign Born in the Total Population County Share Foreign Born Calexico 179% Sanger 67% Huron 57% Corcoran 54% Earlimart 48% Lindsay 47% Mendota 47% Selma 47% Livingston 45% Gonzales 43% Arvin 42% San Joaquin 42% Orange Cove 40% Soledad 40% Orosi 39% Castroville 38% Greenfield 37% Lamont-Weedpatch 37% Parlier 37% Firebaugh 35% Richgrove 35% Del Rey 34% King City 34% McFarland 33% Farmersville 33% Dinuba 32% London 32% Cutler 31% Tipton-Woodville 31% Planada 31% Wasco 31% Imperial 29% El Rio 28% Las Lomas 27% Pixley 26% Holtville 26% Fillmore 26% Piru 26% Brawley 25% Calipatria-Niland 25% Avenal 23% Poplar-Cotton 23% Kettleman City 23% Ivanhoe 23% Shafter City 22% Woodlake 22% Carruthers 22% Calistoga 21% Delhi 21% Laton 20% Buttonwillow 19% Terra Bella 19% Dos Palos 19% Strathmore 19% Patterson 18% Hughson 18% East Porterville 18% Seeley 17% Kerman 17% Easton 17% Westmorland 15% St. Helena 14% Lockeford 13% Armona 12% Coalinga 10% Exeter 8% US Census defintion is:Total Foreign Born Population Within Census Tract/Total Population within Census Tract for Race/Etnicity Last Update: 8/7/96WT02-B13-51IA088-000636-B048-321http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/carucom/rankings/hispo.html 128.120.36.171 19970122193958 text/html 8877HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:40:46 GMTLast-Modified: Thursday, 08-Aug-96 02:31:48 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 8620 Percent Hispanics in Poverty Percent Hispanics in Poverty Carucom Communites Ranked by the Percent of Hispanics in Poverty County % Hispanics in Poverty Calexico 130% Corcoran 92% Farmersville 73% Sanger 72% Selma 66% Lindsay 59% Exeter 51% Orange Cove 50% Earlimart 44% Richgrove 42% London 42% Huron 41% Tipton-Woodville 41% Kettleman City 41% Poplar-Cotton 41% Pixley 40% Parlier 39% Orosi 39% Avenal 38% Kerman 38% Del Rey 37% Cutler 36% Armona 36% Arvin 35% San Joaquin 35% Mendota 35% Easton 35% Laton 35% Lockeford 35% Carruthers 34% Shafter City 34% East Porterville 34% Lamont-Weedpatch 34% Ivanhoe 34% Planada 33% Delhi 33% McFarland 33% Firebaugh 33% Wasco 32% Dinuba 32% Terra Bella 31% Strathmore 31% Gonzales 31% Woodlake 31% Coalinga 30% Brawley 29% Holtville 28% Dos Palos 28% Imperial 27% Livingston 26% Calipatria-Niland 26% Patterson 25% Hughson 24% Seeley 24% Castroville 23% Westmorland 19% King City 18% Greenfield 17% Fillmore 17% Piru 17% El Rio 16% Soledad 16% Buttonwillow 14% Las Lomas 13% Calistoga 13% St. Helena 12% US Census defintion is: Total Number of Hispanic Persons below the Poverty Level in 1989/ Total Hispanic Population within Census Tract for whom Poverty Level is Determined Last Update: 8/7/96WT02-B13-52IA088-000636-B048-344http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/carucom/rankings/hsdro.html 128.120.36.171 19970122194032 text/html 8825HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:41:25 GMTLast-Modified: Thursday, 08-Aug-96 02:31:48 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 8568 H.S. Dropout Rate High School Dropout Rate CARUCOM Communities ranked by the High School Dropout Rate County % H.S. Dropouts Sanger 58% Corcoran 55% Farmersville 43% Huron 42% Calexico 40% Lindsay 39% Selma 38% El Rio 36% Carruthers 34% Gonzales 34% Soledad 33% King City 32% Lamont-Weedpatch 32% Parlier 31% Mendota 31% Poplar-Cotton 30% Orange Cove 30% Greenfield 30% London 30% Dinuba 29% Kerman 29% Orosi 27% Earlimart 27% Buttonwillow 26% Arvin 25% Avenal 25% Del Rey 24% Cutler 24% Westmorland 24% Kettleman City 24% Livingston 24% Tipton-Woodville 24% East Porterville 23% Ivanhoe 21% Shafter City 21% San Joaquin 20% Richgrove 19% Calistoga 19% Las Lomas 18% Delhi 17% Castroville 17% Pixley 17% Woodlake 17% Planada 16% Terra Bella 16% Brawley 15% Fillmore 15% Piru 15% Lockeford 15% Easton 15% McFarland 15% Hughson 14% Patterson 14% Coalinga 14% Imperial 13% Calipatria-Niland 13% Armona 13% Holtville 13% Exeter 11% Dos Palos 11% Strathmore 11% Wasco 11% Firebaugh 6% Laton 3% Seeley 2% St. Helena 2% US Census Definition: Total Number of Persons16-19 Years Old Neither Enrolled in nor Graduated From High School/Total Number of Persons 16-19 in MSA/MCSA Last Update: 8/7/96WT02-B13-53IA088-000636-B048-365http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/carucom/caruth.HTML 128.120.36.171 19970122194047 text/html 12469HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:41:38 GMTLast-Modified: Tuesday, 21-Nov-95 13:05:19 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 12212 Carruthers Carruthers Carruthers Carruthers Change 1980 1990 1980-1990 Tract Population 3986 4265 7% %White 84% 69% -16% %Black 2% 1% -1% %Hispanic 30% 43% 13% %Under 18 35% 31% -4% %Over 65 10% 11% 1% %Under 6 10% 10% 1% %Foreign Born 13% 22% 9% Area Population 514,555 667,490 30% Area Foreign Born 54,675 119,109 118% %Area Foreign Born 11% 18% 7% Education (%pop over 25) % 0-8 years 40% 33% -6% % 9-11 years 21% 23% 2% %Completed H.S. 22% 20% -1% %Some College 12% 15% 3% %Bachelors or Graduate Degree 5% 6% 1% Persons over 25 2132 2488 17% H.S. Dropout Rate 12% 34% 22% Labor Market Structure Employed Persons 1419 1702 20% %Operators, Nonfarm Laborers and Service 30% 26% -4% %Professional & Technical 4% 8% 4% %Managers & Administrators 4% 5% 2% %Sales Workers 3% 9% 5% %Clerical 10% 12% 2% %Craft Workers 19% 11% -7% %Operators 9% 15% 6% %Nonfarm Laborers 9% 5% -4% %Service Workers 12% 6% -6% %Farm Workers 29% 28% -1% %Males Working less than 26 weeks 38% 37% -1% Males over 16 1404 1580 13% Poverty And Welfare %Persons in Impoverished Families 18% 22% 4% %Whites in Poverty 16% 15% -1% %Blacks in Poverty 47% 65% %Hispanics in Poverty 35% 34% -1% % Families Receiving Welfare or PA 18% 17% -1% Income Aggregate Income $ 23,048,617 $ 30,043,947 30% Number of Families 17,957 33,851 89% Average Family Income $ 22,775 $ 27,974 23% Aggregate Wage and Salary Income $ 14,402,257 $ 20,770,842 44% Wage & Salary Households 818 1,036 27% Average Wage & Salary Income $ 17,607 $ 20,049 14% Aggregate Self-Employed Income $ 6,191,274 $ 7,511,910 21% Self-Employed Households 300 287 -4% Average Self-Employed Income $ 20,638 $ 26,174 27% Aggregate Earned Income $ 20,593,532 $ 28,282,751 37% Earned Income Households 945 1,092 16% Average Earned Income $ 21,792 $ 25,900 19% Average Welfare Income per Household $ 3,270 $ 3,142 -4% Households Grouped by Income Level Income Under $5,000 90 74 -18% Income of $5,000-9,999 104 68 -35% Income of $10,000-14,999 199 116 -42% Income of $15,000-24,999 259 255 -2% Income of $25,000-49,999 224 313 40% Income over $50,000 28 248 786% Last Update: 5/26/96WT02-B13-54IA088-000636-B049-16http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/carucom/coali.HTML 128.120.36.171 19970122194102 text/html 12611HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:41:54 GMTLast-Modified: Friday, 24-Nov-95 02:16:51 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 12355 Coalinga Coalinga Coalinga Coalinga Change 1980 1990 1980-1990 Tract Population 4039 5547 37% %White 86% 88% 2% %Black 1% 0% -1% %Hispanic 16% 28% 13% %Under 18 29% 31% 2% %Over 65 11% 12% 1% %Under 6 9% 13% 4% %Foreign Born 6% 10% 4% Area Population 514,555 667,490 30% Area Foreign Born 54,675 119,109 118% %Area Foreign Born 11% 18% 7% Education (%pop over 25) % 0-8 years 17% 15% -2% % 9-11 years 12% 15% 3% %Completed H.S. 30% 25% -5% %Some College 24% 21% -3% %Bachelors or Graduate Degree 16% 12% -4% Persons over 25 2242 3218 44% H.S. Dropout Rate 5% 14% 9% Labor Market Structure Employed Persons 1674 2319.33 39% %Operators, Nonfarm Laborers and Service 36% 32% -4% %Professional & Technical 14% 11% -3% %Managers & Administrators 7% 10% 2% %Sales Workers 8% 7% 0% %Clerical 15% 14% -1% %Craft Workers 11% 19% 8% %Operators 10% 11% 1% %Nonfarm Laborers 6% 3% -3% %Service Workers 20% 19% -2% %Farm Workers 8% 6% -2% %Males Working less than 26 weeks 37% 32% -5% Males over 16 1513 1901 26% Poverty And Welfare %Persons in Impoverished Families 6% 14% 8% %Whites in Poverty 5% 12% 8% %Blacks in Poverty . 29% %Hispanics in Poverty 18% 30% 12% % Families Receiving Welfare or PA 11% 12% 0% Income Aggregate Income $ 31,013,786 $ 42,813,530 38% Number of Families 21,960 32,708 49% Average Family Income $ 29,735 $ 28,466 -4% Aggregate Wage and Salary Income $ 25,522,039 $ 35,337,080 38% Wage & Salary Households 1,049 1,510 44% Average Wage & Salary Income $ 24,330 $ 23,402 -4% Aggregate Self-Employed Income $ 3,634,005 $ 3,869,387 6% Self-Employed Households 213 333 56% Average Self-Employed Income $ 17,061 $ 11,631 -32% Aggregate Earned Income $ 29,156,044 $ 39,206,467 34% Earned Income Households 1,094 1,567 43% Average Earned Income $ 26,651 $ 25,025 -6% Average Welfare Income per Household $ 4,171 $ 4,039 -3% Households Grouped by Income Level Income Under $5,000 45 63.67 41% Income of $5,000-9,999 85 96.33 13% Income of $10,000-14,999 91 155 70% Income of $15,000-24,999 335 195 -42% Income of $25,000-49,999 385 622 62% Income over $50,000 53 372 602% Last Update: 5/28/96WT02-B13-55IA088-000636-B049-40http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/carucom/delre.html 128.120.36.171 19970122194118 text/html 12600HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:42:12 GMTLast-Modified: Friday, 24-Nov-95 02:17:39 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 12344 Del Rey Del Rey Del Rey Del Rey Change 1980 1990 1980-1990 Tract Population 2619 2910 11% %White 66% 54% -13% %Black 0% 0% 0% %Hispanic 63% 71% 8% %Under 18 33% 32% -1% %Over 65 8% 11% 3% %Under 6 8% 11% 3% %Foreign Born 24% 34% 10% Area Population 514,555 667,490 30% Area Foreign Born 54,675 119,109 118% %Area Foreign Born 11% 18% 7% Education (%pop over 25) % 0-8 years 39% 38% -1% % 9-11 years 18% 22% 4% %Completed H.S. 14% 16% 3% %Some College 17% 11% -7% %Bachelors or Graduate Degree 12% 8% -4% Persons over 25 1445 1604 11% H.S. Dropout Rate 20% 24% 5% Labor Market Structure Employed Persons 1007 1073 7% %Operators, Nonfarm Laborers and Service 30% 29% -1% %Professional & Technical 6% 6% -1% %Managers & Administrators 7% 9% 3% %Sales Workers 4% 9% 5% %Clerical 7% 12% 5% %Craft Workers 8% 4% -5% %Operators 15% 16% 1% %Nonfarm Laborers 5% 5% 0% %Service Workers 10% 8% -2% %Farm Workers 37% 32% -6% %Males Working less than 26 weeks 41% 41% 0% Males over 16 1036 1045 1% Poverty And Welfare %Persons in Impoverished Families 17% 28% 11% %Whites in Poverty 19% 26% 6% %Blacks in Poverty . . %Hispanics in Poverty 24% 37% 13% % Families Receiving Welfare or PA 16% 11% -5% Income Aggregate Income $ 14,922,257 $ 18,445,941 24% Number of Families 17,586 30,090 71% Average Family Income $ 24,912 $ 27,368 10% Aggregate Wage and Salary Income $ 10,511,050 $ 12,781,344 22% Wage & Salary Households 621 627 1% Average Wage & Salary Income $ 16,926 $ 20,385 20% Aggregate Self-Employed Income $ 3,660,413 $ 2,390,230 -35% Self-Employed Households 286 199 -30% Average Self-Employed Income $ 12,799 $ 12,011 -6% Aggregate Earned Income $ 14,171,462 $ 15,171,574 7% Earned Income Households 664 659 -1% Average Earned Income $ 21,343 $ 23,022 8% Average Welfare Income per Household $ 4,359 $ 4,519 4% Households Grouped by Income Level Income Under $5,000 33 30 -9% Income of $5,000-9,999 84 104 24% Income of $10,000-14,999 125 74 -41% Income of $15,000-24,999 153 135 -12% Income of $25,000-49,999 130 200 54% Income over $50,000 34 131 285% Last Update: 5/28/96WT02-B13-56IA088-000636-B049-65http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/carucom/easto.html 128.120.36.171 19970122194144 text/html 12601HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:42:37 GMTLast-Modified: Friday, 24-Nov-95 02:18:19 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 12345 Easton Easton Easton Easton Change 1980 1990 1980-1990 Tract Population 4019 4224 5% %White 71% 68% -3% %Black 3% 1% -2% %Hispanic 34% 43% 9% %Under 18 34% 28% -6% %Over 65 9% 12% 3% %Under 6 9% 8% -1% %Foreign Born 13% 17% 4% Area Population 514,555 667,490 30% Area Foreign Born 54,675 119,109 118% %Area Foreign Born 11% 18% 7% Education (%pop over 25) % 0-8 years 28% 23% -6% % 9-11 years 16% 20% 4% %Completed H.S. 32% 25% -7% %Some College 15% 20% 5% %Bachelors or Graduate Degree 9% 8% -1% Persons over 25 2230 2651 19% H.S. Dropout Rate 20% 15% -6% Labor Market Structure Employed Persons 1660 1705 3% %Operators, Nonfarm Laborers and Service 29% 28% -2% %Professional & Technical 5% 10% 6% %Managers & Administrators 11% 6% -6% %Sales Workers 7% 11% 3% %Clerical 14% 17% 2% %Craft Workers 15% 15% -1% %Operators 9% 13% 4% %Nonfarm Laborers 2% 5% 3% %Service Workers 18% 10% -8% %Farm Workers 18% 15% -3% %Males Working less than 26 weeks 36% 37% 1% Males over 16 1411 1574 12% Poverty And Welfare %Persons in Impoverished Families 16% 20% 4% %Whites in Poverty 10% 13% 3% %Blacks in Poverty 48% 8% %Hispanics in Poverty 28% 35% 7% % Families Receiving Welfare or PA 14% 20% 6% Income Aggregate Income $ 28,962,615 $ 27,335,075 -6% Number of Families 21,077 30,309 44% Average Family Income $ 27,531 $ 24,385 -11% Aggregate Wage and Salary Income $ 18,292,209 $ 19,706,673 8% Wage & Salary Households 872 955 10% Average Wage & Salary Income $ 20,977 $ 20,635 -2% Aggregate Self-Employed Income $ 7,747,609 $ 4,039,942 -48% Self-Employed Households 397 344 -13% Average Self-Employed Income $ 19,515 $ 11,744 -40% Aggregate Earned Income $ 26,039,818 $ 23,746,614 -9% Earned Income Households 1,018 1,024 1% Average Earned Income $ 25,579 $ 23,190 -9% Average Welfare Income per Household $ 2,757 $ 3,861 40% Households Grouped by Income Level Income Under $5,000 95 68 -28% Income of $5,000-9,999 96 83 -14% Income of $10,000-14,999 165 173 5% Income of $15,000-24,999 283 202 -29% Income of $25,000-49,999 267 406 52% Income over $50,000 69 189 174% Last Update: 5/28/96WT02-B13-57IA088-000636-B049-82http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/carucom/fireb.html 128.120.36.171 19970122194153 text/html 12609HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:42:50 GMTLast-Modified: Friday, 24-Nov-95 02:19:18 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 12353 Firebaugh Firebaugh Firebaugh Firebaugh Change 1980 1990 1980-1990 Tract Population 4705 5503 17% %White 51% 30% -21% %Black 2% 1% -1% %Hispanic 70% 80% 10% %Under 18 38% 39% 2% %Over 65 7% 6% -1% %Under 6 14% 13% -1% %Foreign Born 23% 35% 12% Area Population 514,555 667,490 30% Area Foreign Born 54,675 119,109 118% %Area Foreign Born 11% 18% 7% Education (%pop over 25) % 0-8 years 52% 45% -6% % 9-11 years 12% 17% 5% %Completed H.S. 22% 19% -3% %Some College 8% 12% 3% %Bachelors or Graduate Degree 6% 3% -3% Persons over 25 2260 2691 19% H.S. Dropout Rate 20% 6% -14% Labor Market Structure Employed Persons 1504 1957 30% %Operators, Nonfarm Laborers and Service 34% 23% -11% %Professional & Technical 5% 4% -1% %Managers & Administrators 6% 5% -1% %Sales Workers 5% 8% 3% %Clerical 9% 11% 3% %Craft Workers 6% 9% 3% %Operators 15% 9% -6% %Nonfarm Laborers 6% 6% 1% %Service Workers 13% 7% -5% %Farm Workers 35% 40% 5% %Males Working less than 26 weeks 36% 36% -1% Males over 16 1569 1896 21% Poverty And Welfare %Persons in Impoverished Families 20% 31% 10% %Whites in Poverty 19% 26% 7% %Blacks in Poverty 27% 11% %Hispanics in Poverty 24% 33% 9% % Families Receiving Welfare or PA 16% 18% 2% Income Aggregate Income $ 23,679,144 $ 25,584,751 8% Number of Families 14,723 25,525 73% Average Family Income $ 20,626 $ 20,937 2% Aggregate Wage and Salary Income $ 19,989,715 $ 21,806,516 9% Wage & Salary Households 1,182 1,156 -2% Average Wage & Salary Income $ 16,912 $ 18,864 12% Aggregate Self-Employed Income $ 1,879,800 $ 1,551,113 -17% Self-Employed Households 140 109 -22% Average Self-Employed Income $ 13,427 $ 14,230 6% Aggregate Earned Income $ 21,869,515 $ 23,357,630 7% Earned Income Households 1,224 1,196 -2% Average Earned Income $ 17,867 $ 19,530 9% Average Welfare Income per Household $ 3,710 $ 4,585 24% Households Grouped by Income Level Income Under $5,000 102 68 -33% Income of $5,000-9,999 192 156 -19% Income of $10,000-14,999 225 147 -35% Income of $15,000-24,999 245 294 20% Income of $25,000-49,999 231 433 87% Income over $50,000 33 124 276% Last Update: 5/28/96WT02-B13-58IA088-000637-B001-24http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/carucom/huron.html 128.120.36.171 19970122194235 text/html 12588HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:43:16 GMTLast-Modified: Friday, 24-Nov-95 02:20:14 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 12332 Huron Huron Huron Huron Change 1980 1990 1980-1990 Tract Population 5056 7262 44% %White 49% 13% -36% %Black 0% 1% 0% %Hispanic 89% 95% 5% %Under 18 40% 34% -6% %Over 65 2% 2% -1% %Under 6 15% 13% -2% %Foreign Born 51% 57% 7% Area Population 514,555 667,490 30% Area Foreign Born 54,675 119,109 118% %Area Foreign Born 11% 18% 7% Education (%pop over 25) % 0-8 years 73% 61% -12% % 9-11 years 10% 19% 9% %Completed H.S. 10% 9% -1% %Some College 5% 5% 0% %Bachelors or Graduate Degree 2% 2% 0% Persons over 25 2121 3657 72% H.S. Dropout Rate 44% 42% -2% Labor Market Structure Employed Persons 2120 3125 47% %Operators, Nonfarm Laborers and Service 18% 20% 2% %Professional & Technical 3% 2% -1% %Managers & Administrators 2% 1% 0% %Sales Workers 2% 3% 2% %Clerical 5% 5% 0% %Craft Workers 7% 5% -2% %Operators 4% 9% 5% %Nonfarm Laborers 3% 2% -1% %Service Workers 10% 9% -2% %Farm Workers 65% 64% -1% %Males Working less than 26 weeks 34% 33% -1% Males over 16 2003 3075 54% Poverty And Welfare %Persons in Impoverished Families 30% 40% 10% %Whites in Poverty 21% 23% 1% %Blacks in Poverty . 24% %Hispanics in Poverty 32% 41% 9% % Families Receiving Welfare or PA 10% 14% 5% Income Aggregate Income $ 16,317,536 $ 22,671,907 39% Number of Families 14,462 23,303 61% Average Family Income $ 16,927 $ 17,360 3% Aggregate Wage and Salary Income $ 16,882,379 $ 22,146,988 31% Wage & Salary Households 1,018 1,287 26% Average Wage & Salary Income $ 16,584 $ 17,208 4% Aggregate Self-Employed Income $ 1,283,089 $ 1,049,409 -18% Self-Employed Households 62 53 -15% Average Self-Employed Income $ 20,695 $ 19,800 -4% Aggregate Earned Income $ 18,165,467 $ 23,196,396 28% Earned Income Households 1,035 1,301 26% Average Earned Income $ 17,551 $ 17,830 2% Average Welfare Income per Household $ 4,124 $ 4,805 17% Households Grouped by Income Level Income Under $5,000 102 70 -31% Income of $5,000-9,999 130 220 69% Income of $10,000-14,999 288 214 -26% Income of $15,000-24,999 225 357 59% Income of $25,000-49,999 100 357 257% Income over $50,000 4 88 2100% Last Update: 5/28/96WT02-B13-59IA088-000637-B001-54http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/carucom/kerma.html 128.120.36.171 19970122194254 text/html 12597HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:43:47 GMTLast-Modified: Friday, 24-Nov-95 02:21:55 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 12341 Kerman Kerman Kerman Kerman Change 1980 1990 1980-1990 Tract Population 5230 6708 28% %White 77% 72% -5% %Black 0% 0% 0% %Hispanic 38% 51% 12% %Under 18 35% 35% 1% %Over 65 9% 9% 1% %Under 6 12% 12% 0% %Foreign Born 9% 17% 8% Area Population 514,555 667,490 30% Area Foreign Born 54,675 119,109 118% %Area Foreign Born 11% 18% 7% Education (%pop over 25) % 0-8 years 35% 31% -4% % 9-11 years 20% 19% -1% %Completed H.S. 29% 27% -2% %Some College 12% 11% -1% %Bachelors or Graduate Degree 5% 6% 2% Persons over 25 2773 3732 35% H.S. Dropout Rate 26% 29% 2% Labor Market Structure Employed Persons 1898 2342 23% %Operators, Nonfarm Laborers and Service 30% 29% -1% %Professional & Technical 6% 8% 2% %Managers & Administrators 7% 9% 2% %Sales Workers 10% 10% 0% %Clerical 16% 16% 0% %Craft Workers 11% 10% 0% %Operators 13% 12% -1% %Nonfarm Laborers 6% 5% -1% %Service Workers 12% 12% 1% %Farm Workers 20% 19% -2% %Males Working less than 26 weeks 33% 40% 7% Males over 16 1753 2157 23% Poverty And Welfare %Persons in Impoverished Families 11% 24% 13% %Whites in Poverty 11% 22% 11% %Blacks in Poverty . . %Hispanics in Poverty 16% 38% 22% % Families Receiving Welfare or PA 20% 20% -1% Income Aggregate Income $ 33,265,370 $ 40,515,947 22% Number of Families 19,850 30,648 54% Average Family Income $ 24,036 $ 24,349 1% Aggregate Wage and Salary Income $ 22,960,904 $ 29,666,013 29% Wage & Salary Households 1,182 1,501 27% Average Wage & Salary Income $ 19,425 $ 19,764 2% Aggregate Self-Employed Income $ 7,464,763 $ 7,360,020 -1% Self-Employed Households 310 421 36% Average Self-Employed Income $ 24,080 $ 17,482 -27% Aggregate Earned Income $ 30,425,667 $ 37,026,033 22% Earned Income Households 1,263 1,579 25% Average Earned Income $ 24,090 $ 23,449 -3% Average Welfare Income per Household $ 3,811 $ 4,107 8% Households Grouped by Income Level Income Under $5,000 77 100 30% Income of $5,000-9,999 159 179 13% Income of $10,000-14,999 296 222 -25% Income of $15,000-24,999 447 349 -22% Income of $25,000-49,999 210 546 160% Income over $50,000 64 268 319% Last Update: 5/28/96WT02-B13-60IA088-000637-B001-76http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/carucom/laton.html 128.120.36.171 19970122194304 text/html 12609HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:44:00 GMTLast-Modified: Tuesday, 01-Oct-96 02:13:01 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 12352 Laton Laton Laton Laton Change 1980 1990 1980-1990 Tract Population 2517 3506 39% %White 77% 76% -2% %Black 2% 3% 1% %Hispanic 33% 36% 3% %Under 18 31% 33% 1% %Over 65 9% 10% 1% %Under 6 8% 11% 3% %Foreign Born 12% 20% 7% Area Population 514,555 667,490 30% Area Foreign Born 54,675 119,109 118% %Area Foreign Born 11% 18% 7% Education (%pop over 25) % 0-8 years 30% 26% -4% % 9-11 years 17% 18% 1% %Completed H.S. 37% 30% -7% %Some College 10% 17% 7% %Bachelors or Graduate Degree 6% 5% -1% Persons over 25 1397 1976.5 41% H.S. Dropout Rate 18% 3% -15% Labor Market Structure Employed Persons 981 1271 30% %Operators, Nonfarm Laborers and Service 29% 25% -4% %Professional & Technical 5% 8% 4% %Managers & Administrators 5% 4% -1% %Sales Workers 8% 6% -2% %Clerical 9% 12% 3% %Craft Workers 8% 11% 3% %Operators 10% 11% 1% %Nonfarm Laborers 6% 3% -3% %Service Workers 13% 11% -2% %Farm Workers 36% 35% -2% %Males Working less than 26 weeks 34% 33% -1% Males over 16 957 1248 30% Poverty And Welfare %Persons in Impoverished Families 12% 25% 13% %Whites in Poverty 6% 22% 15% %Blacks in Poverty 0% 30% %Hispanics in Poverty 28% 35% 7% % Families Receiving Welfare or PA 14% 15% 1% Income Aggregate Income $ 15,692,530 $ 24,221,315 54% Number of Families 17,924 33,687 88% Average Family Income $ 23,741 $ 27,400 15% Aggregate Wage and Salary Income $ 9,662,184 $ 17,075,116 77% Wage & Salary Households 540 782 45% Average Wage & Salary Income $ 17,893 $ 21,849 22% Aggregate Self-Employed Income $ 4,237,931 $ 4,613,710 9% Self-Employed Households 234 218 -7% Average Self-Employed Income $ 18,111 $ 21,164 17% Aggregate Earned Income $ 13,900,115 $ 21,688,825 56% Earned Income Households 639 842 32% Average Earned Income $ 21,753 $ 25,774 18% Average Welfare Income per Household $ 5,829 $ 4,976 -15% Households Grouped by Income Level Income Under $5,000 29 27.5 -5% Income of $5,000-9,999 123 92 -25% Income of $10,000-14,999 126 129.5 3% Income of $15,000-24,999 196 167 -15% Income of $25,000-49,999 125 289.5 132% Income over $50,000 23 178.5 676% Last Update: 5/28/96WT02-B13-61IA088-000637-B001-102http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/carucom/mendo.html 128.120.36.171 19970122194315 text/html 12627HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:44:10 GMTLast-Modified: Tuesday, 01-Oct-96 02:13:28 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 12370 Mendota Mendota Mendota Mendota Change 1980 1990 1980-1990 Tract Population 7152 4642 -35% %White 37% 20% -17% %Black 1% 1% 0% %Hispanic 82% 93% 11% %Under 18 42% 37% -4% %Over 65 4% 4% 0% %Under 6 16% 12% -4% %Foreign Born 33% 47% 14% Area Population 514,555 667,490 30% Area Foreign Born 54,675 119,109 118% %Area Foreign Born 11% 18% 7% Education (%pop over 25) % 0-8 years 58% 62% 4% % 9-11 years 13% 15% 2% %Completed H.S. 19% 14% -5% %Some College 9% 7% -2% %Bachelors or Graduate Degree 2% 2% 0% Persons over 25 3017 2318.5 -23% H.S. Dropout Rate 40% 31% -9% Labor Market Structure Employed Persons 2205 1602 -27% %Operators, Nonfarm Laborers and Service 23% 21% -3% %Professional & Technical 4% 2% -2% %Managers & Administrators 1% 1% -1% %Sales Workers 5% 3% -2% %Clerical 6% 7% 1% %Craft Workers 9% 5% -4% %Operators 8% 10% 2% %Nonfarm Laborers 3% 4% 1% %Service Workers 12% 7% -5% %Farm Workers 51% 62% 10% %Males Working less than 26 weeks 45% 41% -5% Males over 16 2488 1794 -28% Poverty And Welfare %Persons in Impoverished Families 22% 34% 12% %Whites in Poverty 17% 17% 0% %Blacks in Poverty 20% 100% %Hispanics in Poverty 25% 35% 11% % Families Receiving Welfare or PA 17% 22% 4% Income Aggregate Income $ 27,040,103 $ 14,464,888 -47% Number of Families 13,272 21,059 59% Average Family Income $ 17,445 $ 15,869 -9% Aggregate Wage and Salary Income $ 23,814,199 $ 13,931,697 -41% Wage & Salary Households 1,553 890 -43% Average Wage & Salary Income $ 15,334 $ 15,654 2% Aggregate Self-Employed Income $ 1,779,248 $ 1,012,383 -43% Self-Employed Households 93 95 2% Average Self-Employed Income $ 19,132 $ 10,713 -44% Aggregate Earned Income $ 25,593,447 $ 14,944,080 -42% Earned Income Households 1,589 928 -42% Average Earned Income $ 16,107 $ 16,112 0% Average Welfare Income per Household $ 3,383 $ 4,188 24% Households Grouped by Income Level Income Under $5,000 173 51.5 -70% Income of $5,000-9,999 211 162.5 -23% Income of $10,000-14,999 399 137.5 -66% Income of $15,000-24,999 421 274 -35% Income of $25,000-49,999 148 246 66% Income over $50,000 20 40 100% Last Update: 5/28/96WT02-B13-62IA088-000637-B001-126http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/carucom/orang.html 128.120.36.171 19970122194333 text/html 12623HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:44:21 GMTLast-Modified: Friday, 24-Nov-95 02:24:48 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 12367 Orange Cove Orange Cove Orange Cove Orange Cove Change 1980 1990 1980-1990 Tract Population 5052 6543 30% %White 53% 36% -17% %Black 0% 0% 0% %Hispanic 64% 79% 15% %Under 18 38% 39% 1% %Over 65 8% 7% -1% %Under 6 12% 13% 0% %Foreign Born 23% 40% 17% Area Population 514,555 667,490 30% Area Foreign Born 54,675 119,109 118% %Area Foreign Born 11% 18% 7% Education (%pop over 25) % 0-8 years 49% 54% 5% % 9-11 years 18% 15% -3% %Completed H.S. 19% 15% -4% %Some College 8% 9% 1% %Bachelors or Graduate Degree 6% 3% -3% Persons over 25 2438 3228 32% H.S. Dropout Rate 32% 30% -2% Labor Market Structure Employed Persons 1623 2179 34% %Operators, Nonfarm Laborers and Service 37% 27% -10% %Professional & Technical 6% 4% -2% %Managers & Administrators 4% 2% -3% %Sales Workers 4% 6% 1% %Clerical 8% 8% 0% %Craft Workers 11% 8% -3% %Operators 22% 12% -10% %Nonfarm Laborers 4% 6% 2% %Service Workers 11% 9% -2% %Farm Workers 30% 46% 15% %Males Working less than 26 weeks 40% 47% 6% Males over 16 1730 2340 35% Poverty And Welfare %Persons in Impoverished Families 18% 43% 25% %Whites in Poverty 16% 35% 19% %Blacks in Poverty . 0% %Hispanics in Poverty 24% 50% 27% % Families Receiving Welfare or PA 27% 24% -4% Income Aggregate Income $ 23,796,505 $ 23,595,562 -1% Number of Families 15,293 21,121 38% Average Family Income $ 19,748 $ 16,593 -16% Aggregate Wage and Salary Income $ 18,757,494 $ 18,902,972 1% Wage & Salary Households 1,116 1,252 12% Average Wage & Salary Income $ 16,808 $ 15,098 -10% Aggregate Self-Employed Income $ 2,271,007 $ 1,781,748 -22% Self-Employed Households 145 135 -7% Average Self-Employed Income $ 15,662 $ 13,198 -16% Aggregate Earned Income $ 21,028,501 $ 20,684,720 -2% Earned Income Households 1,133 1,280 13% Average Earned Income $ 18,560 $ 16,160 -13% Average Welfare Income per Household $ 4,466 $ 4,257 -5% Households Grouped by Income Level Income Under $5,000 104 124 19% Income of $5,000-9,999 208 194 -7% Income of $10,000-14,999 291 268 -8% Income of $15,000-24,999 323 391 21% Income of $25,000-49,999 161 365 127% Income over $50,000 34 80 135% Last Update: 5/28/96WT02-B13-63IA088-000637-B001-159http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/carucom/parli.html 128.120.36.171 19970122194405 text/html 12595HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:44:59 GMTLast-Modified: Friday, 24-Nov-95 02:25:38 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 12339 Parlier Parlier Parlier Parlier Change 1980 1990 1980-1990 Tract Population 8239 10327 25% %White 58% 56% -3% %Black 0% 0% 0% %Hispanic 78% 86% 8% %Under 18 37% 37% -1% %Over 65 8% 7% -1% %Under 6 11% 13% 2% %Foreign Born 32% 37% 5% Area Population 514,555 667,490 30% Area Foreign Born 54,675 119,109 118% %Area Foreign Born 11% 18% 7% Education (%pop over 25) % 0-8 years 60% 50% -10% % 9-11 years 11% 15% 4% %Completed H.S. 15% 18% 2% %Some College 9% 11% 1% %Bachelors or Graduate Degree 5% 4% -2% Persons over 25 4029 5065 26% H.S. Dropout Rate 27% 31% 4% Labor Market Structure Employed Persons 2270 3701 63% %Operators, Nonfarm Laborers and Service 32% 27% -5% %Professional & Technical 8% 4% -4% %Managers & Administrators 3% 5% 2% %Sales Workers 5% 7% 2% %Clerical 9% 9% 0% %Craft Workers 6% 5% -1% %Operators 11% 12% 0% %Nonfarm Laborers 10% 8% -2% %Service Workers 11% 8% -3% %Farm Workers 37% 43% 6% %Males Working less than 26 weeks 46% 45% -1% Males over 16 2844 3742 32% Poverty And Welfare %Persons in Impoverished Families 29% 35% 6% %Whites in Poverty 31% 33% 3% %Blacks in Poverty . 0% %Hispanics in Poverty 36% 39% 3% % Families Receiving Welfare or PA 15% 20% 5% Income Aggregate Income $ 38,337,664 $ 40,101,732 5% Number of Families 14,408 21,427 49% Average Family Income $ 20,813 $ 18,678 -10% Aggregate Wage and Salary Income $ 26,383,598 $ 31,157,285 18% Wage & Salary Households 1,775 2,049 15% Average Wage & Salary Income $ 14,864 $ 15,206 2% Aggregate Self-Employed Income $ 6,489,970 $ 3,794,044 -42% Self-Employed Households 306 313 2% Average Self-Employed Income $ 21,209 $ 12,122 -43% Aggregate Earned Income $ 32,873,568 $ 34,951,329 6% Earned Income Households 1,880 2,132 13% Average Earned Income $ 17,486 $ 16,394 -6% Average Welfare Income per Household $ 3,578 $ 4,211 18% Households Grouped by Income Level Income Under $5,000 179 192 7% Income of $5,000-9,999 234 220 -6% Income of $10,000-14,999 428 387 -10% Income of $15,000-24,999 429 561 31% Income of $25,000-49,999 253 551 118% Income over $50,000 70 236 237% Last Update: 5/28/96WT02-B13-64IA088-000637-B001-184http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/carucom/sanjo.html 128.120.36.171 19970122194430 text/html 12605HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:45:24 GMTLast-Modified: Friday, 24-Nov-95 02:26:42 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 12349 San Joaquin San Joaquin San Joaquin San Joaquin Change 1980 1990 1980-1990 Tract Population 5126 5889 15% %White 61% 37% -24% %Black 0% 1% 0% %Hispanic 59% 73% 14% %Under 18 38% 39% 1% %Over 65 5% 5% 0% %Under 6 13% 12% -1% %Foreign Born 27% 42% 16% Area Population 514,555 667,490 30% Area Foreign Born 54,675 119,109 118% %Area Foreign Born 11% 18% 7% Education (%pop over 25) % 0-8 years 50% 53% 3% % 9-11 years 17% 15% -2% %Completed H.S. 22% 18% -4% %Some College 7% 7% 0% %Bachelors or Graduate Degree 4% 5% 1% Persons over 25 2551 2888 13% H.S. Dropout Rate 38% 20% -18% Labor Market Structure Employed Persons 1902 1968 3% %Operators, Nonfarm Laborers and Service 20% 21% 1% %Professional & Technical 3% 3% 0% %Managers & Administrators 3% 3% 0% %Sales Workers 7% 7% 0% %Clerical 8% 9% 1% %Craft Workers 6% 4% -1% %Operators 8% 13% 5% %Nonfarm Laborers 7% 3% -4% %Service Workers 5% 5% 0% %Farm Workers 53% 52% -1% %Males Working less than 26 weeks 31% 38% 7% Males over 16 1924 2124 10% Poverty And Welfare %Persons in Impoverished Families 22% 29% 7% %Whites in Poverty 22% 21% -1% %Blacks in Poverty . 0% %Hispanics in Poverty 27% 35% 8% % Families Receiving Welfare or PA 13% 12% -1% Income Aggregate Income $ 30,007,263 $ 26,554,230 -12% Number of Families 18,866 29,779 58% Average Family Income $ 25,582 $ 21,928 -14% Aggregate Wage and Salary Income $ 19,742,403 $ 25,168,493 27% Wage & Salary Households 1,147 1,222 7% Average Wage & Salary Income $ 17,212 $ 20,596 20% Aggregate Self-Employed Income $ 8,533,107 $ 3,494,249 -59% Self-Employed Households 222 178 -20% Average Self-Employed Income $ 38,437 $ 19,631 -49% Aggregate Earned Income $ 28,275,510 $ 28,662,742 1% Earned Income Households 1,235 1,258 2% Average Earned Income $ 22,895 $ 22,784 0% Average Welfare Income per Household $ 3,480 $ 3,580 3% Households Grouped by Income Level Income Under $5,000 92 96 4% Income of $5,000-9,999 107 89 -17% Income of $10,000-14,999 308 146 -53% Income of $15,000-24,999 300 367 22% Income of $25,000-49,999 164 384 134% Income over $50,000 81 129 59% Last Update: 5/28/96WT02-B13-65IA088-000637-B001-210http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/carucom/sange.html 128.120.36.171 19970122194446 text/html 13526HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:45:38 GMTLast-Modified: Thursday, 16-Jan-97 22:28:21 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 13268 sanger SANGER Sanger Change 1980 1990 1980-1990 Tract Population 14,469 15,747 9% %White 70.9% 48.2% -23% %Black 0.0% 0.1% 0% %Hispanic 63.8% 71.5% 8% %Under 18 32.7% 33.4% 1% %Over 65 10.6% 9.7% -1% %Under 6 10.3% 11.5% 1% %Foreign Born 17.9% 23.6% 6% Area Population 514,555 667,490 30% Area Foreign Born 54,675 119,109 118% %Area Foreign Born 11% 0% -11% Residing in County in 1985 90% 90% 0% Education (%pop over 25) % 0-8 years 40% 34% -7% % 9-11 years 14% 17% 4% %Completed H.S. 25% 21% -4% %Some College 13% 15% 2% %Bachelors or Graduate Degree 8% 7% -1% Persons over 25 7,876 8,717 11% H.S. Dropout Rate 22% 21% -2% Labor Market Structure Employed Persons 5,456 6,019 10% %Operators, Nonfarm Laborers and Service 36.4% 37.5% 1% %Professional & Technical 8.7% 9.0% 0% %Managers & Administrators 7.8% 7.0% -1% %Sales Workers 7.2% 8.6% 1% %Clerical 14.7% 13.9% -1% %Craft Workers 11.1% 10.1% -1% %Operators 19.3% 16.3% -3% %Nonfarm Laborers 5.4% 9.0% 4% %Service Workers 11.7% 12.1% 0% %Farm Workers 14.2% 13.9% 0% %Males Working less than 26 weeks 33.5% 38.9% 5% Males over 16 5,017 5,370 7% Poverty And Welfare %Persons in Impoverished Families 16.7% 22.0% 5% %Whites in Poverty 15.8% 13.5% -2% %Blacks in Poverty . 0.0% %Hispanics in Poverty 20.9% 27.7% 7% % Families Receiving Welfare or PA 16.3% 18.4% 2% Income Aggregate Income 71,504,410 119,384,369 91% Number of Families 3,712 3,847 78% Average Family Income 19,263 31,037 10% Aggregate Wage and Salary Income 58,203,805 96,156,847 87% Wage & Salary Households 3,530 3,458 76% Average Wage & Salary Income 16,488 27,811 6% Aggregate Self-Employed Income 6,491,140 9,959,411 314% Self-Employed Households 568 547 151% Average Self-Employed Income 11,428 18,224 65% Aggregate Earned Income 64,694,945 106,116,257 102% Earned Income Households 3,649 3,605 79% Average Earned Income 17,730 29,440 12% Average Welfare Income per Household 8,517 15,943 18% Households Grouped by Income Level Income Under $5,000 266 218 -18% Income of $5,000-9,999 677 311 -54% Income of $10,000-14,999 696 502 -28% Income of $15,000-24,999 1,177 825 -30% Income of $25,000-49,999 780 1,348 73% Income over $50,000 116 644 455% Last Update: 12/18/96WT02-B13-66IA088-000637-B001-237http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/carucom/selma.html 128.120.36.171 19970122194508 text/html 14534HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:46:02 GMTLast-Modified: Thursday, 16-Jan-97 22:28:24 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 14276 Selma Selma Selma Change 1980 1990 1980-1990 Tract Population 14,634 13,564 -7% %White 61.3% 62.8% 2% %Black 1.1% 1.5% 0% %Hispanic 51.6% 63.6% 12% %Under 18 33.5% 33.2% 0% %Over 65 11.4% 11.9% 1% %Under 6 11.2% 12.0% 1% %Foreign Born 14.7% 21.7% 7% Area Population 514,555 667,490 30% Area Foreign Born 54,675 119,109 118% %Area Foreign Born 11% 0% -11% Residing in County in 1985 90% 86% -3% Education (%pop over 25) % 0-8 years 37% 32% -5% % 9-11 years 18% 18% 0% %Completed H.S. 23% 23% 0% %Some College 14% 13% -1% %Bachelors or Graduate Degree 7% 7% 0% Persons over 25 7,819 7,681 -2% H.S. Dropout Rate 12% 17% 6% Labor Market Structure Employed Persons 5,133 4,582 -11% %Operators, Nonfarm Laborers and Service 38.3% 37.6% -1% %Professional & Technical 7.8% 10.2% 2% %Managers & Administrators 6.6% 5.4% -1% %Sales Workers 9.6% 11.3% 2% %Clerical 14.1% 11.7% -2% %Craft Workers 11.7% 10.4% -1% %Operators 16.7% 15.6% -1% %Nonfarm Laborers 7.0% 8.6% 2% %Service Workers 14.6% 13.4% -1% %Farm Workers 11.8% 13.4% 2% %Males Working less than 26 weeks 35.9% 42.7% 7% Males over 16 4,920 4,636 -6% Poverty And Welfare %Persons in Impoverished Families 17.1% 25.2% 8% %Whites in Poverty 15.0% 22.0% 7% %Blacks in Poverty 3.3% 27.0% %Hispanics in Poverty 22.7% 33.1% 10% % Families Receiving Welfare or PA 21.1% 21.6% 0% Income Aggregate Income $ 75,572,660 $ 88,259,248 91% Number of Families 3,795 3,278 78% Average Family Income $ 19,914 $ 26,929 10% Aggregate Wage and Salary Income $ 55,246,025 $ 71,537,970 87% Wage & Salary Households 3,439 3,015 76% Average Wage & Salary Income $ 16,065 $ 23,727 6% Aggregate Self-Employed Income $ 9,268,505 $ 6,990,248 314% Self-Employed Households 666 485 151% Average Self-Employed Income $ 13,917 $ 14,413 65% Aggregate Earned Income $ 64,514,530 $ 78,528,218 102% Earned Income Households 3,600 3,129 79% Average Earned Income $ 17,921 $ 25,101 12% Average Welfare Income per Household $ 6,913 $ 10,332 18% Households Grouped by Income Level Income Under $5,000 279 174 -38% Income of $5,000-9,999 740 382 -48% Income of $10,000-14,999 638 528 -17% Income of $15,000-24,999 1,203 778 -35% Income of $25,000-49,999 769 1,055 37% Income over $50,000 166 362 118% Last Update: 12/18/96WT02-B13-67IA088-000637-B001-261http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/carucom/brawl.html 128.120.36.171 19970122194516 text/html 12611HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:46:12 GMTLast-Modified: Tuesday, 01-Oct-96 02:13:55 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 12354 Brawley Brawley Brawley Brawley Change 1980 1990 1980-1990 Tract Population 1209 8872 634% %White 57% 72% 16% %Black 0% 3% 2% %Hispanic 49% 69% 20% %Under 18 37% 36% -1% %Over 65 6% 9% 3% %Under 6 8% 12% 3% %Foreign Born 28% 25% -2% Area Population na na na Area Foreign Born na na na %Area Foreign Born na na na Education (%pop over 25) % 0-8 years 36% 32% -4% % 9-11 years 12% 17% 5% %Completed H.S. 29% 20% -9% %Some College 8% 16% 8% %Bachelors or Graduate Degree 15% 9% -6% Persons over 25 605 4857.83 703% H.S. Dropout Rate 2% 15% 13% Labor Market Structure Employed Persons 403 3043.5 655% %Operators, Nonfarm Laborers and Service 10% 28% 19% %Professional & Technical 15% 12% -3% %Managers & Administrators 4% 9% 5% %Sales Workers 9% 9% 0% %Clerical 16% 13% -3% %Craft Workers 4% 12% 8% %Operators 3% 11% 8% %Nonfarm Laborers 0% 5% 5% %Service Workers 7% 13% 6% %Farm Workers 42% 17% -25% %Males Working less than 26 weeks 31% 40% 8% Males over 16 413 2930 609% Poverty And Welfare %Persons in Impoverished Families 4% 24% 20% %Whites in Poverty 0% 24% 24% %Blacks in Poverty . 14% %Hispanics in Poverty 8% 29% 22% % Families Receiving Welfare or PA 4% 19% 15% Income Aggregate Income $ 10,177,894 $ 57,286,122 463% Number of Families 22,379 32,253 44% Average Family Income $ 35,340 $ 26,678 -25% Aggregate Wage and Salary Income $ 5,652,955 $ 44,499,871 687% Wage & Salary Households 261 2,067 692% Average Wage & Salary Income $ 21,659 $ 21,534 -1% Aggregate Self-Employed Income $ 2,711,863 $ 9,299,770 243% Self-Employed Households 106 402 279% Average Self-Employed Income $ 25,584 $ 23,153 -10% Aggregate Earned Income $ 8,364,818 $ 53,799,641 543% Earned Income Households 308 2,180 608% Average Earned Income $ 27,158 $ 24,677 -9% Average Welfare Income per Household $ 5,688 $ 4,519 -21% Households Grouped by Income Level Income Under $5,000 0 46.33 #DIV/0! Income of $5,000-9,999 16 275.5 1622% Income of $10,000-14,999 59 303.83 415% Income of $15,000-24,999 98 440 349% Income of $25,000-49,999 87 653 651% Income over $50,000 28 428.67 1431% Last Update: 5/28/96WT02-B13-68IA088-000637-B001-290http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/carucom/calex.html 128.120.36.171 19970122194526 text/html 12636HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:46:22 GMTLast-Modified: Tuesday, 01-Oct-96 02:14:42 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 12379 Calexico Calexico Calexico Calexico Change 1980 1990 1980-1990 Tract Population 15928 19160 20% %White 152% 282% 129% %Black 1% 0% -1% %Hispanic 370% 359% -11% %Under 18 164% 146% -17% %Over 65 22% 40% 17% %Under 6 43% 42% -1% %Foreign Born 216% 179% -37% Area Population na na na Area Foreign Born na na na %Area Foreign Born na na na Education (%pop over 25) % 0-8 years 222% 185% -38% % 9-11 years 42% 60% 18% %Completed H.S. 72% 62% -10% %Some College 41% 42% 1% %Bachelors or Graduate Degree 23% 27% 5% Persons over 25 7443 9990.5 34% H.S. Dropout Rate 42% 40% -2% Labor Market Structure Employed Persons 5040 5437 8% %Operators, Nonfarm Laborers and Service 125% 112% -13% %Professional & Technical 29% 34% 5% %Managers & Administrators 30% 32% 2% %Sales Workers 62% 65% 3% %Clerical 55% 57% 2% %Craft Workers 29% 30% 1% %Operators 33% 39% 6% %Nonfarm Laborers 32% 26% -6% %Service Workers 60% 48% -12% %Farm Workers 71% 71% 0% %Males Working less than 26 weeks 180% 212% 32% Males over 16 4881 5928 21% Poverty And Welfare %Persons in Impoverished Families 93% 123% 31% %Whites in Poverty 59% 134% 75% %Blacks in Poverty . 0% %Hispanics in Poverty 97% 130% 33% % Families Receiving Welfare or PA 73% 92% 19% Income Aggregate Income $ 69,177,979 $ 88,752,869 28% Number of Families 64,182 99,051 54% Average Family Income $ 83,714 $ 81,193 -3% Aggregate Wage and Salary Income $ 56,425,267 $ 68,448,609 21% Wage & Salary Households 3,249 3,758 16% Average Wage & Salary Income $ 72,430 $ 70,929 -2% Aggregate Self-Employed Income $ 5,753,277 $ 8,104,446 41% Self-Employed Households 347 577 66% Average Self-Employed Income $ 68,011 $ 58,296 -14% Aggregate Earned Income $ 62,178,544 $ 76,511,094 23% Earned Income Households 3,356 3,943 17% Average Earned Income $ 77,890 $ 75,785 -3% Average Welfare Income per Household $ 16,590 $ 19,220 16% Households Grouped by Income Level Income Under $5,000 334 284.5 -15% Income of $5,000-9,999 458 595 30% Income of $10,000-14,999 830 807.5 -3% Income of $15,000-24,999 908 1027 13% Income of $25,000-49,999 503 1188.5 136% Income over $50,000 73 460.5 531% Last Update: 5/28/96WT02-B13-69IA088-000637-B002-22http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/carucom/calip.html 128.120.36.171 19970122194539 text/html 12637HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:46:31 GMTLast-Modified: Tuesday, 01-Oct-96 02:15:12 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 12380 Calipatria-Niland Calipatria-Niland Calipatria-Niland Calipatria-Niland Change 1980 1990 1980-1990 Tract Population 4823 3198 -34% %White 57% 76% 19% %Black 4% 4% 0% %Hispanic 53% 46% -6% %Under 18 35% 29% -7% %Over 65 14% 21% 7% %Under 6 10% 9% 0% %Foreign Born 27% 25% -2% Area Population na na na Area Foreign Born na na na %Area Foreign Born na na na Education (%pop over 25) % 0-8 years 42% 26% -16% % 9-11 years 15% 24% 9% %Completed H.S. 25% 25% 0% %Some College 10% 14% 5% %Bachelors or Graduate Degree 8% 8% 0% Persons over 25 2632 2045 -22% H.S. Dropout Rate 19% 13% -6% Labor Market Structure Employed Persons 1487 874.5 -41% %Operators, Nonfarm Laborers and Service 23% 33% 10% %Professional & Technical 12% 6% -6% %Managers & Administrators 5% 10% 5% %Sales Workers 8% 9% 1% %Clerical 13% 5% -8% %Craft Workers 8% 10% 2% %Operators 10% 11% 1% %Nonfarm Laborers 4% 8% 5% %Service Workers 9% 13% 5% %Farm Workers 32% 27% -4% %Males Working less than 26 weeks 47% 58% 11% Males over 16 1702 1145 -33% Poverty And Welfare %Persons in Impoverished Families 17% 26% 8% %Whites in Poverty 17% 26% 9% %Blacks in Poverty 15% 59% %Hispanics in Poverty 23% 26% 3% % Families Receiving Welfare or PA 19% 18% -1% Income Aggregate Income $ 23,572,864 $ 14,531,982 -38% Number of Families 14,349 24,005 67% Average Family Income $ 19,498 $ 19,532 0% Aggregate Wage and Salary Income $ 17,806,244 $ 10,736,412 -40% Wage & Salary Households 1,047 634 -39% Average Wage & Salary Income $ 17,007 $ 16,934 0% Aggregate Self-Employed Income $ 1,156,978 $ 1,532,513 32% Self-Employed Households 164 111 -33% Average Self-Employed Income $ 7,055 $ 13,869 97% Aggregate Earned Income $ 18,963,222 $ 12,268,925 -35% Earned Income Households 1,089 668 -39% Average Earned Income $ 17,413 $ 18,367 5% Average Welfare Income per Household $ 3,019 $ 3,874 28% Households Grouped by Income Level Income Under $5,000 83 55 -34% Income of $5,000-9,999 159 84 -47% Income of $10,000-14,999 323 101.5 -69% Income of $15,000-24,999 335 186 -44% Income of $25,000-49,999 167 241.5 45% Income over $50,000 9 76 744% Last Update: 5/28/96WT02-B13-70IA088-000637-B002-45http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/carucom/holtv.html 128.120.36.171 19970122194553 text/html 12595HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:46:48 GMTLast-Modified: Tuesday, 01-Oct-96 02:15:36 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 12338 Holtville Holtville Holtville Holtville Change 1980 1990 1980-1990 Tract Population 5321 6097 15% %White 66% 54% -12% %Black 0% 0% 0% %Hispanic 47% 60% 13% %Under 18 35% 36% 1% %Over 65 9% 10% 1% %Under 6 12% 12% 0% %Foreign Born 21% 26% 5% Area Population na na na Area Foreign Born na na na %Area Foreign Born na na na Education (%pop over 25) % 0-8 years 32% 32% -1% % 9-11 years 14% 17% 3% %Completed H.S. 28% 20% -9% %Some College 16% 17% 2% %Bachelors or Graduate Degree 10% 8% -1% Persons over 25 2783 3295.33 18% H.S. Dropout Rate 7% 13% 6% Labor Market Structure Employed Persons 2172 2129 -2% %Operators, Nonfarm Laborers and Service 28% 31% 3% %Professional & Technical 10% 11% 0% %Managers & Administrators 6% 8% 2% %Sales Workers 6% 7% 1% %Clerical 21% 17% -3% %Craft Workers 9% 8% -1% %Operators 10% 13% 3% %Nonfarm Laborers 4% 5% 1% %Service Workers 13% 13% 0% %Farm Workers 19% 17% -3% %Males Working less than 26 weeks 27% 44% 16% Males over 16 1726 1963 14% Poverty And Welfare %Persons in Impoverished Families 5% 20% 14% %Whites in Poverty 5% 13% 9% %Blacks in Poverty . 100% %Hispanics in Poverty 6% 28% 23% % Families Receiving Welfare or PA 10% 16% 6% Income Aggregate Income $ 36,564,927 $ 43,000,843 18% Number of Families 21,011 33,054 57% Average Family Income $ 27,764 $ 28,427 2% Aggregate Wage and Salary Income $ 30,979,150 $ 30,490,652 -2% Wage & Salary Households 1,349 1,410 5% Average Wage & Salary Income $ 22,965 $ 21,619 -6% Aggregate Self-Employed Income $ 3,571,013 $ 6,273,041 76% Self-Employed Households 182 208 14% Average Self-Employed Income $ 19,621 $ 30,111 53% Aggregate Earned Income $ 34,550,164 $ 36,763,692 6% Earned Income Households 1,355 1,454 7% Average Earned Income $ 25,498 $ 25,290 -1% Average Welfare Income per Household $ 3,434 $ 4,312 26% Households Grouped by Income Level Income Under $5,000 38 25.67 -32% Income of $5,000-9,999 96 142.67 49% Income of $10,000-14,999 235 240.33 2% Income of $15,000-24,999 403 354.33 -12% Income of $25,000-49,999 453 453 0% Income over $50,000 29 296.67 923% Last Update: 5/28/96WT02-B13-71IA088-000637-B002-66http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/carucom/imper.html 128.120.36.171 19970122194613 text/html 12614HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:46:58 GMTLast-Modified: Tuesday, 01-Oct-96 02:15:56 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 12357 Imperial Imperial Imperial Imperial Change 1980 1990 1980-1990 Tract Population 4963 10424 110% %White 71% 69% -1% %Black 6% 3% -3% %Hispanic 35% 62% 28% %Under 18 35% 35% 0% %Over 65 7% 7% 0% %Under 6 9% 12% 3% %Foreign Born 18% 29% 11% Area Population na na na Area Foreign Born na na na %Area Foreign Born na na na Education (%pop over 25) % 0-8 years 27% 23% -4% % 9-11 years 18% 18% 0% %Completed H.S. 24% 21% -3% %Some College 22% 22% 0% %Bachelors or Graduate Degree 8% 7% -1% Persons over 25 2561 5738.17 124% H.S. Dropout Rate 7% 13% 7% Labor Market Structure Employed Persons 1999 3813.33 91% %Operators, Nonfarm Laborers and Service 31% 30% 0% %Professional & Technical 11% 11% 0% %Managers & Administrators 9% 7% -2% %Sales Workers 8% 11% 2% %Clerical 16% 16% 0% %Craft Workers 15% 15% 0% %Operators 13% 11% -3% %Nonfarm Laborers 5% 4% -2% %Service Workers 12% 16% 4% %Farm Workers 10% 10% 1% %Males Working less than 26 weeks 28% 39% 11% Males over 16 1717 3528 105% Poverty And Welfare %Persons in Impoverished Families 9% 20% 11% %Whites in Poverty 7% 19% 12% %Blacks in Poverty 9% 19% %Hispanics in Poverty 13% 27% 14% % Families Receiving Welfare or PA 16% 15% -1% Income Aggregate Income $ 37,995,601 $ 63,928,239 68% Number of Families 24,626 32,626 32% Average Family Income $ 31,453 $ 25,717 -18% Aggregate Wage and Salary Income $ 31,206,687 $ 56,069,376 80% Wage & Salary Households 1,199 2,360 97% Average Wage & Salary Income $ 26,027 $ 23,757 -9% Aggregate Self-Employed Income $ 5,492,731 $ 5,284,184 -4% Self-Employed Households 156 404 159% Average Self-Employed Income $ 35,210 $ 13,074 -63% Aggregate Earned Income $ 36,699,417 $ 61,353,560 67% Earned Income Households 1,228 2,458 100% Average Earned Income $ 29,886 $ 24,962 -16% Average Welfare Income per Household $ 2,987 $ 4,575 53% Households Grouped by Income Level Income Under $5,000 54 108.67 101% Income of $5,000-9,999 86 213.17 148% Income of $10,000-14,999 180 294.67 64% Income of $15,000-24,999 342 405.83 19% Income of $25,000-49,999 387 933 141% Income over $50,000 79 530.5 572% Last Update: 5/28/96WT02-B13-72IA088-000637-B002-103http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/carucom/seele.html 128.120.36.171 19970122194627 text/html 12601HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:47:20 GMTLast-Modified: Tuesday, 01-Oct-96 02:16:21 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 12344 Seeley Seeley Seeley Seeley Change 1980 1990 1980-1990 Tract Population 2999 1464 -51% %White 68% 86% 17% %Black 2% 2% 0% %Hispanic 33% 43% 11% %Under 18 36% 27% -9% %Over 65 6% 9% 3% %Under 6 12% 8% -5% %Foreign Born 18% 17% 0% Area Population na na na Area Foreign Born na na na %Area Foreign Born na na na Education (%pop over 25) % 0-8 years 21% 19% -2% % 9-11 years 17% 15% -2% %Completed H.S. 33% 27% -6% %Some College 21% 22% 1% %Bachelors or Graduate Degree 8% 9% 1% Persons over 25 1475 840 -43% H.S. Dropout Rate 15% 2% -13% Labor Market Structure Employed Persons 941 470 -50% %Operators, Nonfarm Laborers and Service 27% 29% 1% %Professional & Technical 11% 16% 5% %Managers & Administrators 8% 8% 0% %Sales Workers 7% 6% -1% %Clerical 14% 10% -4% %Craft Workers 14% 10% -4% %Operators 13% 11% -2% %Nonfarm Laborers 4% 6% 3% %Service Workers 11% 11% 1% %Farm Workers 19% 22% 3% %Males Working less than 26 weeks 28% 28% 0% Males over 16 1087 632 -42% Poverty And Welfare %Persons in Impoverished Families 22% 14% -8% %Whites in Poverty 13% 14% 1% %Blacks in Poverty 0% 25% %Hispanics in Poverty 45% 24% -21% % Families Receiving Welfare or PA 11% 11% 0% Income Aggregate Income $ 15,494,339 $ 10,404,053 -33% Number of Families 17,360 37,559 116% Average Family Income $ 22,009 $ 28,119 28% Aggregate Wage and Salary Income $ 12,488,495 $ 8,138,485 -35% Wage & Salary Households 646 329 -49% Average Wage & Salary Income $ 19,332 $ 24,737 28% Aggregate Self-Employed Income $ 2,701,396 $ 1,775,607 -34% Self-Employed Households 163 58 -64% Average Self-Employed Income $ 16,573 $ 30,614 85% Aggregate Earned Income $ 15,189,891 $ 9,914,093 -35% Earned Income Households 721 345 -52% Average Earned Income $ 21,068 $ 28,736 36% Average Welfare Income per Household $ 3,200 $ 3,393 6% Households Grouped by Income Level Income Under $5,000 49 16.5 -66% Income of $5,000-9,999 59 17.5 -70% Income of $10,000-14,999 175 31 -82% Income of $15,000-24,999 200 100.5 -50% Income of $25,000-49,999 128 130 2% Income over $50,000 25 74.5 198% Last Update: 5/28/96WT02-B13-73IA088-000637-B002-127http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/carucom/westm.html 128.120.36.171 19970122194640 text/html 12626HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:47:34 GMTLast-Modified: Tuesday, 01-Oct-96 02:16:37 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 12369 Westmoreland Westmoreland Westmorland Westmorland Change 1980 1990 1980-1990 Tract Population 2204 1613 -27% %White 47% 90% 44% %Black 1% 1% 1% %Hispanic 59% 34% -25% %Under 18 40% 21% -19% %Over 65 8% 22% 14% %Under 6 14% 6% -7% %Foreign Born 28% 15% -13% Area Population na na na Area Foreign Born na na na %Area Foreign Born na na na Education (%pop over 25) % 0-8 years 44% 19% -25% % 9-11 years 18% 23% 5% %Completed H.S. 25% 29% 4% %Some College 11% 19% 8% %Bachelors or Graduate Degree 3% 6% 3% Persons over 25 1043 1157.5 11% H.S. Dropout Rate 30% 24% -7% Labor Market Structure Employed Persons 762 454 -40% %Operators, Nonfarm Laborers and Service 30% 24% -6% %Professional & Technical 6% 10% 5% %Managers & Administrators 4% 8% 4% %Sales Workers 6% 12% 7% %Clerical 8% 13% 4% %Craft Workers 6% 18% 11% %Operators 14% 8% -6% %Nonfarm Laborers 5% 3% -2% %Service Workers 11% 12% 1% %Farm Workers 40% 15% -24% %Males Working less than 26 weeks 34% 57% 22% Males over 16 701 662 -6% Poverty And Welfare %Persons in Impoverished Families 16% 13% -3% %Whites in Poverty 6% 12% 6% %Blacks in Poverty . 40% %Hispanics in Poverty 22% 19% -3% % Families Receiving Welfare or PA 18% 17% -1% Income Aggregate Income $ 11,390,425 $ 11,213,157 -2% Number of Families 16,072 27,313 70% Average Family Income $ 21,737 $ 23,900 10% Aggregate Wage and Salary Income $ 7,824,205 $ 7,035,228 -10% Wage & Salary Households 458 361 -21% Average Wage & Salary Income $ 17,083 $ 19,506 14% Aggregate Self-Employed Income $ 2,201,462 $ 1,198,271 -46% Self-Employed Households 120 93 -22% Average Self-Employed Income $ 18,346 $ 12,839 -30% Aggregate Earned Income $ 10,025,667 $ 8,233,499 -18% Earned Income Households 514 394 -23% Average Earned Income $ 19,505 $ 20,897 7% Average Welfare Income per Household $ 3,813 $ 3,904 2% Households Grouped by Income Level Income Under $5,000 41 13.67 -67% Income of $5,000-9,999 32 46.83 46% Income of $10,000-14,999 147 75 -49% Income of $15,000-24,999 147 106.67 -27% Income of $25,000-49,999 100 147 47% Income over $50,000 20 80 300% Last Update: 5/28/96WT02-B13-74IA088-000637-B002-148http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/carucom/arvin.html 128.120.36.171 19970122194650 text/html 12593HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:47:46 GMTLast-Modified: Friday, 24-Nov-95 02:34:50 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 12337 Arvin Arvin Arvin Arvin Change 1980 1990 1980-1990 Tract Population 7320 9763 33% %White 61% 38% -23% %Black 3% 0% -3% %Hispanic 56% 73% 17% %Under 18 38% 35% -3% %Over 65 8% 7% -1% %Under 6 13% 13% 0% %Foreign Born 29% 42% 14% Area Population 402,976 543,477 35% Area Foreign Born 34,522 66,141 92% %Area Foreign Born 9% 12% 4% Education (%pop over 25) % 0-8 years 53% 55% 2% % 9-11 years 15% 19% 4% %Completed H.S. 22% 12% -10% %Some College 5% 9% 4% %Bachelors or Graduate Degree 4% 3% -1% Persons over 25 3483 4974 43% H.S. Dropout Rate 44% 25% -19% Labor Market Structure Employed Persons 2504 3412 36% %Operators, Nonfarm Laborers and Service 27% 29% 2% %Professional & Technical 5% 4% -1% %Managers & Administrators 4% 4% 1% %Sales Workers 5% 4% -1% %Clerical 10% 6% -4% %Craft Workers 10% 8% -3% %Operators 11% 13% 1% %Nonfarm Laborers 4% 7% 2% %Service Workers 12% 10% -2% %Farm Workers 38% 45% 7% %Males Working less than 26 weeks 41% 44% 3% Males over 16 2433 3447 42% Poverty And Welfare %Persons in Impoverished Families 24% 30% 5% %Whites in Poverty 16% 17% 1% %Blacks in Poverty 25% 0% %Hispanics in Poverty 34% 35% 2% % Families Receiving Welfare or PA 18% 21% 3% Income Aggregate Income $ 33,214,842 $ 47,558,572 43% Number of Families 15,521 26,602 71% Average Family Income $ 19,222 $ 21,886 14% Aggregate Wage and Salary Income $ 27,872,184 $ 41,000,130 47% Wage & Salary Households 1,591 2,080 31% Average Wage & Salary Income $ 17,519 $ 19,712 13% Aggregate Self-Employed Income $ 3,169,733 $ 1,783,569 -44% Self-Employed Households 191 191 0% Average Self-Employed Income $ 16,595 $ 9,338 -44% Aggregate Earned Income $ 31,041,917 $ 42,783,699 38% Earned Income Households 1,648 2,102 28% Average Earned Income $ 18,836 $ 20,354 8% Average Welfare Income per Household $ 2,754 $ 4,975 81% Households Grouped by Income Level Income Under $5,000 220 116 -47% Income of $5,000-9,999 146 273 87% Income of $10,000-14,999 390 391 0% Income of $15,000-24,999 479 512 7% Income of $25,000-49,999 255 696 173% Income over $50,000 39 185 374% Last Update: 5/28/96WT02-B13-75IA088-000637-B002-174http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/carucom/butto.html 128.120.36.171 19970122194712 text/html 12623HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:48:00 GMTLast-Modified: Friday, 24-Nov-95 02:35:31 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 12367 Buttonwillow Buttonwillow Buttonwillow Buttonwillow Change 1980 1990 1980-1990 Tract Population 2469 2743 11% %White 70% 64% -6% %Black 9% 7% -1% %Hispanic 28% 44% 15% %Under 18 31% 36% 6% %Over 65 12% 9% -3% %Under 6 12% 14% 2% %Foreign Born 15% 19% 4% Area Population 402,976 543,477 35% Area Foreign Born 34,522 66,141 92% %Area Foreign Born 9% 12% 4% Education (%pop over 25) % 0-8 years 34% 24% -10% % 9-11 years 22% 31% 8% %Completed H.S. 24% 22% -1% %Some College 14% 14% 1% %Bachelors or Graduate Degree 7% 4% -3% Persons over 25 1316 1485 13% H.S. Dropout Rate 30% 26% -4% Labor Market Structure Employed Persons 1073 1022 -5% %Operators, Nonfarm Laborers and Service 27% 29% 2% %Professional & Technical 4% 6% 2% %Managers & Administrators 7% 6% -1% %Sales Workers 8% 7% -1% %Clerical 7% 9% 1% %Craft Workers 10% 10% 0% %Operators 10% 11% 2% %Nonfarm Laborers 5% 3% -2% %Service Workers 13% 15% 2% %Farm Workers 36% 33% -3% %Males Working less than 26 weeks 35% 37% 2% Males over 16 948 964 2% Poverty And Welfare %Persons in Impoverished Families 14% 17% 2% %Whites in Poverty 6% 11% 5% %Blacks in Poverty 55% 58% %Hispanics in Poverty 20% 14% -6% % Families Receiving Welfare or PA 12% 9% -2% Income Aggregate Income $ 16,833,999 $ 18,816,458 12% Number of Families 19,347 36,314 88% Average Family Income $ 24,117 $ 26,881 11% Aggregate Wage and Salary Income $ 12,483,107 $ 15,079,991 21% Wage & Salary Households 631 600 -5% Average Wage & Salary Income $ 19,783 $ 25,133 27% Aggregate Self-Employed Income $ 3,694,144 $ 2,813,151 -24% Self-Employed Households 126 102 -19% Average Self-Employed Income $ 29,319 $ 27,580 -6% Aggregate Earned Income $ 16,177,251 $ 17,893,142 11% Earned Income Households 689 644 -7% Average Earned Income $ 23,479 $ 27,784 18% Average Welfare Income per Household $ 2,585 $ 3,085 19% Households Grouped by Income Level Income Under $5,000 71 89 25% Income of $5,000-9,999 73 14 -81% Income of $10,000-14,999 190 65 -66% Income of $15,000-24,999 134 148 10% Income of $25,000-49,999 151 252 67% Income over $50,000 36 132 267% Last Update: 5/28/96WT02-B13-76IA088-000637-B002-194http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/carucom/lamon.html 128.120.36.171 19970122194722 text/html 12629HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:48:17 GMTLast-Modified: Friday, 24-Nov-95 02:36:21 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 12373 Lamont-Weedpatch Lamont-Weedpatch Lamont-Weedpatch Lamont-Weedpatch Change 1980 1990 1980-1990 Tract Population 11169 13409 20% %White 59% 30% -29% %Black 0% 0% 0% %Hispanic 59% 78% 19% %Under 18 37% 38% 1% %Over 65 9% 7% -2% %Under 6 13% 14% 1% %Foreign Born 24% 37% 12% Area Population 402,976 543,477 35% Area Foreign Born 34,522 66,141 92% %Area Foreign Born 9% 12% 4% Education (%pop over 25) % 0-8 years 56% 52% -4% % 9-11 years 18% 19% 1% %Completed H.S. 17% 19% 2% %Some College 6% 5% 0% %Bachelors or Graduate Degree 2% 1% -2% Persons over 25 5411 6666 23% H.S. Dropout Rate 35% 32% -3% Labor Market Structure Employed Persons 3224 4507 40% %Operators, Nonfarm Laborers and Service 35% 33% -2% %Professional & Technical 4% 3% -1% %Managers & Administrators 2% 4% 1% %Sales Workers 6% 4% -2% %Clerical 10% 10% 0% %Craft Workers 11% 9% -2% %Operators 10% 13% 3% %Nonfarm Laborers 14% 7% -6% %Service Workers 12% 13% 1% %Farm Workers 32% 37% 6% %Males Working less than 26 weeks 43% 45% 2% Males over 16 3728 4490 20% Poverty And Welfare %Persons in Impoverished Families 24% 31% 7% %Whites in Poverty 18% 22% 4% %Blacks in Poverty . 0% %Hispanics in Poverty 29% 34% 5% % Families Receiving Welfare or PA 25% 22% -3% Income Aggregate Income $ 46,987,931 $ 50,616,770 0% Number of Families 13,861 23,255 0% Average Family Income $ 17,725 $ 17,490 0% Aggregate Wage and Salary Income $ 37,823,792 $ 45,569,225 0% Wage & Salary Households 2,333 2,656 14% Average Wage & Salary Income $ 16,213 $ 17,157 0% Aggregate Self-Employed Income $ 2,279,454 $ 2,310,816 0% Self-Employed Households 170 255 50% Average Self-Employed Income $ 13,409 $ 9,062 0% Aggregate Earned Income $ 40,103,246 $ 47,880,041 0% Earned Income Households 2,384 2,691 13% Average Earned Income $ 16,822 $ 17,793 0% Average Welfare Income per Household $ 3,849 $ 3,815 0% Households Grouped by Income Level Income Under $5,000 369 209 -43% Income of $5,000-9,999 312 400 28% Income of $10,000-14,999 596 469 -21% Income of $15,000-24,999 782 777 -1% Income of $25,000-49,999 286 901 215% Income over $50,000 21 138 557% Last Update: 5/28/96WT02-B13-77IA088-000637-B002-204http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/carucom/mcfar.HTML 128.120.36.171 19970122194733 text/html 12615HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:48:27 GMTLast-Modified: Tuesday, 01-Oct-96 02:16:55 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 12358 McFarland McFarland McFarland McFarland Change 1980 1990 1980-1990 Tract Population 5298 9668 82% %White 45% 29% -16% %Black 0% 1% 1% %Hispanic 74% 76% 2% %Under 18 41% 39% -2% %Over 65 8% 8% 0% %Under 6 15% 14% -1% %Foreign Born 28% 33% 5% Area Population 402,976 543,477 35% Area Foreign Born 34,522 66,141 92% %Area Foreign Born 9% 12% 4% Education (%pop over 25) % 0-8 years 56% 46% -10% % 9-11 years 14% 20% 7% %Completed H.S. 21% 19% -2% %Some College 6% 9% 3% %Bachelors or Graduate Degree 4% 4% 0% Persons over 25 2383 4802 102% H.S. Dropout Rate 28% 15% -13% Labor Market Structure Employed Persons 1684 2757.5 64% %Operators, Nonfarm Laborers and Service 27% 30% 3% %Professional & Technical 4% 6% 2% %Managers & Administrators 3% 4% 0% %Sales Workers 5% 7% 2% %Clerical 9% 10% 1% %Craft Workers 7% 6% 0% %Operators 7% 14% 7% %Nonfarm Laborers 4% 5% 1% %Service Workers 15% 11% -4% %Farm Workers 46% 38% -8% %Males Working less than 26 weeks 40% 40% 0% Males over 16 1652 3243 96% Poverty And Welfare %Persons in Impoverished Families 22% 28% 5% %Whites in Poverty 20% 17% -3% %Blacks in Poverty . 66% %Hispanics in Poverty 27% 33% 6% % Families Receiving Welfare or PA 19% 20% 1% Income Aggregate Income $ 23,041,911 $ 44,014,220 91% Number of Families 14,160 25,268 78% Average Family Income $ 18,703 $ 20,635 10% Aggregate Wage and Salary Income $ 18,339,545 $ 34,229,464 87% Wage & Salary Households 1,117 1,971 76% Average Wage & Salary Income $ 16,419 $ 17,367 6% Aggregate Self-Employed Income $ 1,285,091 $ 5,324,708 314% Self-Employed Households 110 277 151% Average Self-Employed Income $ 11,683 $ 19,258 65% Aggregate Earned Income $ 19,624,636 $ 39,554,171 102% Earned Income Households 1,142 2,046 79% Average Earned Income $ 17,184 $ 19,332 12% Average Welfare Income per Household $ 3,498 $ 4,128 18% Households Grouped by Income Level Income Under $5,000 118 104 -12% Income of $5,000-9,999 174 225.5 30% Income of $10,000-14,999 292 336 15% Income of $15,000-24,999 348 590.5 70% Income of $25,000-49,999 188 695.5 270% Income over $50,000 9 181.5 1917% Last Update: 5/28/96WT02-B13-78IA088-000637-B002-229http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/carucom/shaft.html 128.120.36.171 19970122194746 text/html 12623HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:48:38 GMTLast-Modified: Friday, 24-Nov-95 02:38:32 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 12367 Shafter City Shafter City Shafter City Shafter City Change 1980 1990 1980-1990 Tract Population 6904 8149 18% %White 79% 54% -25% %Black 0% 0% 0% %Hispanic 33% 51% 18% %Under 18 35% 35% 0% %Over 65 12% 10% -2% %Under 6 12% 13% 1% %Foreign Born 10% 22% 12% Area Population 402,976 543,477 35% Area Foreign Born 34,522 66,141 92% %Area Foreign Born 9% 12% 4% Education (%pop over 25) % 0-8 years 35% 29% -6% % 9-11 years 19% 25% 7% %Completed H.S. 23% 20% -3% %Some College 16% 15% -1% %Bachelors or Graduate Degree 7% 8% 0% Persons over 25 3691 4386 19% H.S. Dropout Rate 15% 21% 6% Labor Market Structure Employed Persons 2633 2880 9% %Operators, Nonfarm Laborers and Service 31% 32% 1% %Professional & Technical 8% 13% 5% %Managers & Administrators 6% 5% -2% %Sales Workers 7% 7% 1% %Clerical 14% 12% -2% %Craft Workers 11% 11% 0% %Operators 9% 15% 6% %Nonfarm Laborers 6% 5% -1% %Service Workers 16% 12% -4% %Farm Workers 23% 20% -3% %Males Working less than 26 weeks 36% 38% 3% Males over 16 2311 2683 16% Poverty And Welfare %Persons in Impoverished Families 8% 23% 15% %Whites in Poverty 5% 13% 8% %Blacks in Poverty . 16% %Hispanics in Poverty 16% 34% 19% % Families Receiving Welfare or PA 16% 20% 4% Income Aggregate Income $ 42,871,784 $ 55,996,295 31% Number of Families 18,060 34,127 89% Average Family Income $ 23,595 $ 27,449 16% Aggregate Wage and Salary Income $ 34,524,157 $ 45,929,068 33% Wage & Salary Households 1,674 1,907 14% Average Wage & Salary Income $ 20,624 $ 24,084 17% Aggregate Self-Employed Income $ 3,962,518 $ 4,595,122 16% Self-Employed Households 241 208 -14% Average Self-Employed Income $ 16,442 $ 22,092 34% Aggregate Earned Income $ 38,486,675 $ 50,524,190 31% Earned Income Households 1,756 1,935 10% Average Earned Income $ 21,917 $ 26,111 19% Average Welfare Income per Household $ 3,594 $ 4,259 19% Households Grouped by Income Level Income Under $5,000 82 169 106% Income of $5,000-9,999 220 135 -39% Income of $10,000-14,999 404 244 -40% Income of $15,000-24,999 592 528 -11% Income of $25,000-49,999 352 589 67% Income over $50,000 47 375 698% Last Update: 5/28/96WT02-B13-79IA088-000637-B002-252http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/carucom/wasco.html 128.120.36.171 19970122194804 text/html 12619HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:48:56 GMTLast-Modified: Tuesday, 01-Oct-96 02:17:18 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 12362 Wasco Wasco Wasco Wasco Change 1980 1990 1980-1990 Tract Population 8328 11582 39% %White 54% 38% -16% %Black 8% 6% -2% %Hispanic 48% 63% 15% %Under 18 34% 37% 4% %Over 65 9% 8% -1% %Under 6 13% 13% 0% %Foreign Born 21% 31% 10% Area Population 402,976 543,477 35% Area Foreign Born 34,522 66,141 92% %Area Foreign Born 9% 12% 4% Education (%pop over 25) % 0-8 years 44% 38% -7% % 9-11 years 16% 20% 4% %Completed H.S. 21% 23% 2% %Some College 11% 11% 1% %Bachelors or Graduate Degree 8% 5% -3% Persons over 25 4262 5986.5 40% H.S. Dropout Rate 37% 11% -27% Labor Market Structure Employed Persons 3007 3882.5 29% %Operators, Nonfarm Laborers and Service 23% 31% 8% %Professional & Technical 9% 7% -2% %Managers & Administrators 5% 4% -1% %Sales Workers 10% 9% -1% %Clerical 10% 10% 1% %Craft Workers 11% 8% -3% %Operators 8% 11% 4% %Nonfarm Laborers 5% 4% 0% %Service Workers 11% 16% 5% %Farm Workers 33% 31% -2% %Males Working less than 26 weeks 33% 35% 2% Males over 16 2792 3748 34% Poverty And Welfare %Persons in Impoverished Families 15% 28% 13% %Whites in Poverty 9% 16% 7% %Blacks in Poverty 48% 36% %Hispanics in Poverty 16% 32% 16% % Families Receiving Welfare or PA 19% 19% 1% Income Aggregate Income $ 54,203,811 $ 56,098,526 3% Number of Families 19,580 25,020 28% Average Family Income $ 25,400 $ 19,805 -22% Aggregate Wage and Salary Income $ 40,880,977 $ 49,213,318 20% Wage & Salary Households 1,988 2,673 34% Average Wage & Salary Income $ 20,564 $ 18,415 -10% Aggregate Self-Employed Income $ 8,424,551 $ 2,329,207 -72% Self-Employed Households 312 264 -16% Average Self-Employed Income $ 27,002 $ 8,839 -67% Aggregate Earned Income $ 49,305,528 $ 51,542,525 5% Earned Income Households 2,075 2,693 30% Average Earned Income $ 23,762 $ 19,143 -19% Average Welfare Income per Household $ 3,212 $ 4,171 30% Households Grouped by Income Level Income Under $5,000 222 128 -42% Income of $5,000-9,999 191 322.5 69% Income of $10,000-14,999 565 430.5 -24% Income of $15,000-24,999 486 915.5 88% Income of $25,000-49,999 354 743.5 110% Income over $50,000 148 292.5 98% Last Update: 5/28/96WT02-B13-80IA088-000637-B002-269http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/carucom/armon.html 128.120.36.171 19970122194831 text/html 12580HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:49:14 GMTLast-Modified: Friday, 24-Nov-95 02:39:52 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 12324 Armona Armona Armona Armona Change 1980 1990 1980-1990 Tract Population 3507 4114 17% %White 79% 75% -4% %Black 5% 2% -2% %Hispanic 17% 29% 12% %Under 18 38% 33% -5% %Over 65 7% 9% 2% %Under 6 12% 12% 0% %Foreign Born 8% 12% 4% Area Population na na na Area Foreign Born na na na %Area Foreign Born na na na Education (%pop over 25) % 0-8 years 19% 14% -5% % 9-11 years 19% 17% -2% %Completed H.S. 40% 31% -9% %Some College 15% 21% 6% %Bachelors or Graduate Degree 6% 8% 2% Persons over 25 1811 2374 31% H.S. Dropout Rate 6% 13% 7% Labor Market Structure Employed Persons 1347 1591 18% %Operators, Nonfarm Laborers and Service 35% 35% 0% %Professional & Technical 10% 12% 2% %Managers & Administrators 7% 4% -3% %Sales Workers 7% 9% 2% %Clerical 14% 13% -1% %Craft Workers 14% 15% 1% %Operators 15% 15% 0% %Nonfarm Laborers 3% 5% 2% %Service Workers 17% 15% -2% %Farm Workers 13% 12% -2% %Males Working less than 26 weeks 30% 36% 6% Males over 16 1069 1457 36% Poverty And Welfare %Persons in Impoverished Families 12% 17% 4% %Whites in Poverty 10% 12% 2% %Blacks in Poverty 54% 0% %Hispanics in Poverty 26% 36% 9% % Families Receiving Welfare or PA 13% 14% 1% Income Aggregate Income $ 20,820,922 $ 27,693,129 33% Number of Families 19,225 30,161 57% Average Family Income $ 22,956 $ 26,076 14% Aggregate Wage and Salary Income $ 16,892,979 $ 21,792,604 29% Wage & Salary Households 849 961 13% Average Wage & Salary Income $ 19,898 $ 22,677 14% Aggregate Self-Employed Income $ 3,965,164 $ 2,345,508 -41% Self-Employed Households 210 219 4% Average Self-Employed Income $ 18,882 $ 10,710 -43% Aggregate Earned Income $ 20,858,143 $ 24,138,112 16% Earned Income Households 894 1,046 17% Average Earned Income $ 23,331 $ 23,077 -1% Average Welfare Income per Household $ 3,027 $ 4,577 51% Households Grouped by Income Level Income Under $5,000 52 38 -27% Income of $5,000-9,999 83 68 -18% Income of $10,000-14,999 186 112 -40% Income of $15,000-24,999 286 215 -25% Income of $25,000-49,999 171 447 161% Income over $50,000 34 182 435% Last Update: 5/28/96WT02-B13-81IA088-000637-B002-304http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/carucom/avena.html 128.120.36.171 19970122194842 text/html 12599HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:49:36 GMTLast-Modified: Friday, 24-Nov-95 02:40:30 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 12343 Avenal Avenal Avenal Avenal Change 1980 1990 1980-1990 Tract Population 4519 9415 108% %White 71% 44% -28% %Black 0% 20% 20% %Hispanic 46% 50% 4% %Under 18 34% 18% -16% %Over 65 11% 4% -7% %Under 6 12% 7% -6% %Foreign Born 24% 23% -1% Area Population na na na Area Foreign Born na na na %Area Foreign Born na na na Education (%pop over 25) % 0-8 years 41% 21% -20% % 9-11 years 18% 27% 9% %Completed H.S. 21% 24% 3% %Some College 12% 22% 10% %Bachelors or Graduate Degree 8% 2% -5% Persons over 25 2311 6253.5 171% H.S. Dropout Rate 43% 25% -18% Labor Market Structure Employed Persons 1736 1595.5 -8% %Operators, Nonfarm Laborers and Service 27% 28% 2% %Professional & Technical 11% 3% -8% %Managers & Administrators 6% 4% -2% %Sales Workers 6% 10% 4% %Clerical 9% 10% 2% %Craft Workers 10% 10% 0% %Operators 7% 7% 1% %Nonfarm Laborers 8% 4% -4% %Service Workers 12% 17% 5% %Farm Workers 31% 35% 3% %Males Working less than 26 weeks 39% 65% 26% Males over 16 1636 5444 233% Poverty And Welfare %Persons in Impoverished Families 12% 29% 18% %Whites in Poverty 11% 28% 18% %Blacks in Poverty . 28% %Hispanics in Poverty 13% 38% 25% % Families Receiving Welfare or PA 14% 17% 2% Income Aggregate Income $ 22,556,317 $ 22,094,754 -2% Number of Families 17,613 27,327 55% Average Family Income $ 21,002 $ 21,503 2% Aggregate Wage and Salary Income $ 20,661,578 $ 18,237,645 -12% Wage & Salary Households 1,014 981 -3% Average Wage & Salary Income $ 20,376 $ 18,600 -9% Aggregate Self-Employed Income $ 1,482,749 $ 2,691,349 82% Self-Employed Households 129 105 -19% Average Self-Employed Income $ 11,494 $ 25,755 124% Aggregate Earned Income $ 22,144,326 $ 20,928,994 -5% Earned Income Households 1,036 1,001 -3% Average Earned Income $ 21,375 $ 20,908 -2% Average Welfare Income per Household $ 2,637 $ 4,876 85% Households Grouped by Income Level Income Under $5,000 122 57.5 -53% Income of $5,000-9,999 135 76.5 -43% Income of $10,000-14,999 206 164 -20% Income of $15,000-24,999 275 261.5 -5% Income of $25,000-49,999 248 355 43% Income over $50,000 9 113 1156% Last Update: 5/28/96WT02-B13-82IA088-000637-B003-6http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/carucom/corco.html 128.120.36.171 19970122194854 text/html 12623HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:49:48 GMTLast-Modified: Tuesday, 01-Oct-96 02:17:50 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 12366 Corcoran Corcoran Corcoran Corcoran Change 1980 1990 1980-1990 Tract Population 9237 9220 0% %White 167% 105% -62% %Black 19% 14% -4% %Hispanic 181% 193% 12% %Under 18 116% 114% -1% %Over 65 23% 23% 0% %Under 6 43% 42% -1% %Foreign Born 35% 54% 19% Area Population na na na Area Foreign Born na na na %Area Foreign Born na na na Education (%pop over 25) % 0-8 years 134% 95% -39% % 9-11 years 51% 60% 9% %Completed H.S. 66% 75% 9% %Some College 31% 39% 8% %Bachelors or Graduate Degree 18% 19% 1% Persons over 25 4547 4776 5% H.S. Dropout Rate 80% 55% -25% Labor Market Structure Employed Persons 2963 2993.5 1% %Operators, Nonfarm Laborers and Service 89% 99% 10% %Professional & Technical 24% 30% 6% %Managers & Administrators 12% 16% 4% %Sales Workers 20% 16% -3% %Clerical 35% 32% -3% %Craft Workers 33% 38% 5% %Operators 39% 44% 5% %Nonfarm Laborers 14% 13% -1% %Service Workers 35% 42% 6% %Farm Workers 87% 69% -18% %Males Working less than 26 weeks 129% 126% -2% Males over 16 3084 3038 -1% Poverty And Welfare %Persons in Impoverished Families 66% 78% 12% %Whites in Poverty 53% 46% -8% %Blacks in Poverty 132% 94% %Hispanics in Poverty 71% 92% 21% % Families Receiving Welfare or PA 77% 76% -1% Income Aggregate Income $ 51,490,012 $ 51,072,059 -1% Number of Families 46,908 83,266 78% Average Family Income $ 61,962 $ 67,985 10% Aggregate Wage and Salary Income $ 41,262,718 $ 42,537,660 3% Wage & Salary Households 2,176 2,026 -7% Average Wage & Salary Income $ 53,491 $ 61,732 15% Aggregate Self-Employed Income $ 4,279,011 $ 3,640,284 -15% Self-Employed Households 240 248 3% Average Self-Employed Income $ 47,893 $ 36,438 -24% Aggregate Earned Income $ 45,541,729 $ 46,177,943 1% Earned Income Households 2,256 2,111 -6% Average Earned Income $ 56,927 $ 63,708 12% Average Welfare Income per Household $ 12,668 $ 14,088 11% Households Grouped by Income Level Income Under $5,000 247 132.5 -46% Income of $5,000-9,999 277 244.5 -12% Income of $10,000-14,999 382 359.5 -6% Income of $15,000-24,999 687 510 -26% Income of $25,000-49,999 386 662.5 72% Income over $50,000 103 299 190% Last Update: 5/28/96WT02-B13-83IA088-000637-B003-34http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/carucom/kettl.html 128.120.36.171 19970122194908 text/html 12620HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:50:01 GMTLast-Modified: Tuesday, 01-Oct-96 02:18:43 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 12363 Kettleman City Kettleman City Kettleman City Kettleman City Change 1980 1990 1980-1990 Tract Population 3279 10908 233% %White 57% 42% -15% %Black 4% 19% 15% %Hispanic 57% 51% -6% %Under 18 37% 23% -14% %Over 65 5% 4% 0% %Under 6 13% 8% -5% %Foreign Born 21% 23% 2% Area Population na na na Area Foreign Born na na na %Area Foreign Born na na na Education (%pop over 25) % 0-8 years 50% 22% -28% % 9-11 years 17% 27% 9% %Completed H.S. 17% 24% 7% %Some College 10% 21% 11% %Bachelors or Graduate Degree 6% 3% -4% Persons over 25 1614 6915.5 328% H.S. Dropout Rate 30% 24% -7% Labor Market Structure Employed Persons 1271 1982 56% %Operators, Nonfarm Laborers and Service 23% 29% 5% %Professional & Technical 3% 4% 0% %Managers & Administrators 4% 4% 0% %Sales Workers 4% 9% 5% %Clerical 8% 11% 2% %Craft Workers 8% 11% 2% %Operators 7% 9% 2% %Nonfarm Laborers 3% 4% 1% %Service Workers 13% 16% 3% %Farm Workers 48% 33% -16% %Males Working less than 26 weeks 39% 64% 25% Males over 16 1236 5872 375% Poverty And Welfare %Persons in Impoverished Families 19% 31% 12% %Whites in Poverty 16% 27% 11% %Blacks in Poverty 100% 36% %Hispanics in Poverty 18% 41% 23% % Families Receiving Welfare or PA 13% 22% 9% Income Aggregate Income $ 15,903,010 $ 28,308,159 78% Number of Families 16,490 27,073 64% Average Family Income $ 20,467 $ 21,149 3% Aggregate Wage and Salary Income $ 13,190,765 $ 23,252,812 76% Wage & Salary Households 713 1,244 74% Average Wage & Salary Income $ 18,500 $ 18,692 1% Aggregate Self-Employed Income $ 2,058,204 $ 3,208,923 56% Self-Employed Households 129 139 8% Average Self-Employed Income $ 15,955 $ 23,086 45% Aggregate Earned Income $ 15,248,968 $ 26,461,735 74% Earned Income Households 762 1,278 68% Average Earned Income $ 20,012 $ 20,714 4% Average Welfare Income per Household $ 3,181 $ 5,053 59% Households Grouped by Income Level Income Under $5,000 69 68 -1% Income of $5,000-9,999 104 124 19% Income of $10,000-14,999 212 233.5 10% Income of $15,000-24,999 242 325.5 35% Income of $25,000-49,999 96 440.5 359% Income over $50,000 22 147 568% Last Update: 5/28/96WT02-B13-84IA088-000637-B003-59http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/carucom/delhi.html 128.120.36.171 19970122194945 text/html 12606HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:50:28 GMTLast-Modified: Friday, 24-Nov-95 02:42:55 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 12350 Delhi Delhi Delhi Delhi Change 1980 1990 1980-1990 Tract Population 6170 5153 -16% %White 83% 77% -6% %Black 1% 1% 0% %Hispanic 21% 27% 6% %Under 18 34% 33% -1% %Over 65 10% 11% 1% %Under 6 12% 11% -1% %Foreign Born 13% 21% 8% Area Population na 178,403 na Area Foreign Born na 35,357 na %Area Foreign Born na 20% na Education (%pop over 25) % 0-8 years 31% 23% -8% % 9-11 years 19% 16% -3% %Completed H.S. 32% 29% -3% %Some College 14% 17% 3% %Bachelors or Graduate Degree 4% 8% 4% Persons over 25 3362 2971.67 -12% H.S. Dropout Rate 26% 17% -9% Labor Market Structure Employed Persons 2123 2181 3% %Operators, Nonfarm Laborers and Service 36% 30% -5% %Professional & Technical 6% 10% 4% %Managers & Administrators 4% 8% 4% %Sales Workers 5% 9% 4% %Clerical 11% 8% -3% %Craft Workers 14% 13% 0% %Operators 17% 14% -2% %Nonfarm Laborers 8% 6% -2% %Service Workers 11% 10% -1% %Farm Workers 25% 21% -4% %Males Working less than 26 weeks 36% 32% -4% Males over 16 2261 1878 -17% Poverty And Welfare %Persons in Impoverished Families 14% 16% 2% %Whites in Poverty 13% 11% -2% %Blacks in Poverty 77% 44% %Hispanics in Poverty 20% 33% 13% % Families Receiving Welfare or PA 13% 14% 1% Income Aggregate Income $ 36,561,845 $ 41,156,777 13% Number of Families 17,519 38,160 118% Average Family Income $ 22,752 $ 32,112 41% Aggregate Wage and Salary Income $ 25,536,626 $ 28,858,496 13% Wage & Salary Households 1,405 1,173 -17% Average Wage & Salary Income $ 18,176 $ 24,602 35% Aggregate Self-Employed Income $ 7,800,073 $ 8,571,979 10% Self-Employed Households 503 411 -18% Average Self-Employed Income $ 15,507 $ 20,856 34% Aggregate Earned Income $ 33,336,699 $ 37,430,475 12% Earned Income Households 1,568 1,282 -18% Average Earned Income $ 21,261 $ 29,197 37% Average Welfare Income per Household $ 3,373 $ 4,729 40% Households Grouped by Income Level Income Under $5,000 163 29.67 -82% Income of $5,000-9,999 212 74 -65% Income of $10,000-14,999 342 136 -60% Income of $15,000-24,999 435 243.33 -44% Income of $25,000-49,999 302 493.67 63% Income over $50,000 71 305 330% Last Update: 5/28/96WT02-B13-85IA088-000637-B003-74http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/carucom/dospa.html 128.120.36.171 19970122194957 text/html 12603HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:50:54 GMTLast-Modified: Friday, 24-Nov-95 02:43:45 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 12347 Dos Palos Dos Palos Dos Palos Dos Palos Change 1980 1990 1980-1990 Tract Population 6428 7477 16% %White 66% 55% -11% %Black 10% 9% -1% %Hispanic 32% 44% 13% %Under 18 35% 36% 1% %Over 65 11% 11% 0% %Under 6 12% 13% 1% %Foreign Born 14% 19% 5% Area Population na 178,403 na Area Foreign Born na 35,357 na %Area Foreign Born na 20% na Education (%pop over 25) % 0-8 years 34% 31% -3% % 9-11 years 19% 20% 2% %Completed H.S. 26% 26% 0% %Some College 13% 14% 1% %Bachelors or Graduate Degree 8% 5% -2% Persons over 25 3449 4099 19% H.S. Dropout Rate 17% 11% -6% Labor Market Structure Employed Persons 2093 2365 13% %Operators, Nonfarm Laborers and Service 27% 32% 5% %Professional & Technical 8% 7% -1% %Managers & Administrators 5% 4% -1% %Sales Workers 6% 10% 3% %Clerical 12% 10% -2% %Craft Workers 15% 13% -2% %Operators 11% 16% 5% %Nonfarm Laborers 3% 5% 2% %Service Workers 14% 11% -2% %Farm Workers 26% 24% -2% %Males Working less than 26 weeks 41% 40% -1% Males over 16 2185 2516 15% Poverty And Welfare %Persons in Impoverished Families 19% 22% 3% %Whites in Poverty 15% 14% 0% %Blacks in Poverty 42% 37% %Hispanics in Poverty 22% 28% 6% % Families Receiving Welfare or PA 17% 20% 3% Income Aggregate Income $ 39,340,649 $ 39,607,181 1% Number of Families 18,082 27,701 53% Average Family Income $ 23,857 $ 21,329 -11% Aggregate Wage and Salary Income $ 26,017,712 $ 30,861,600 19% Wage & Salary Households 1,442 1,615 12% Average Wage & Salary Income $ 18,043 $ 19,109 6% Aggregate Self-Employed Income $ 8,697,130 $ 5,931,735 -32% Self-Employed Households 409 386 -6% Average Self-Employed Income $ 21,264 $ 15,367 -28% Aggregate Earned Income $ 34,714,842 $ 36,793,335 6% Earned Income Households 1,582 1,736 10% Average Earned Income $ 21,944 $ 21,194 -3% Average Welfare Income per Household $ 3,626 $ 4,795 32% Households Grouped by Income Level Income Under $5,000 204 97 -52% Income of $5,000-9,999 219 153 -30% Income of $10,000-14,999 300 294 -2% Income of $15,000-24,999 461 544 18% Income of $25,000-49,999 286 535 87% Income over $50,000 62 234 277% Last Update: 5/28/96WT02-B13-86IA088-000637-B003-97http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/carucom/livin.html 128.120.36.171 19970122195014 text/html 12618HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:51:07 GMTLast-Modified: Friday, 24-Nov-95 02:44:35 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 12362 Livingston Livingston Livingston Livingston Change 1980 1990 1980-1990 Tract Population 8130 6629 -18% %White 55% 40% -14% %Black 1% 0% -1% %Hispanic 50% 59% 9% %Under 18 37% 37% 0% %Over 65 7% 7% 0% %Under 6 13% 12% 0% %Foreign Born 36% 45% 8% Area Population na 178,403 na Area Foreign Born na 35,357 na %Area Foreign Born na 20% na Education (%pop over 25) % 0-8 years 43% 44% 1% % 9-11 years 17% 18% 1% %Completed H.S. 21% 14% -7% %Some College 11% 12% 1% %Bachelors or Graduate Degree 8% 7% -2% Persons over 25 3992 3400.5 -15% H.S. Dropout Rate 21% 24% 2% Labor Market Structure Employed Persons 3055 2525 -17% %Operators, Nonfarm Laborers and Service 41% 40% -1% %Professional & Technical 6% 7% 1% %Managers & Administrators 5% 4% -1% %Sales Workers 6% 5% -1% %Clerical 9% 6% -3% %Craft Workers 16% 9% -6% %Operators 18% 21% 3% %Nonfarm Laborers 14% 9% -5% %Service Workers 8% 9% 1% %Farm Workers 18% 29% 11% %Males Working less than 26 weeks 31% 36% 5% Males over 16 2679 2361 -12% Poverty And Welfare %Persons in Impoverished Families 14% 21% 6% %Whites in Poverty 12% 17% 5% %Blacks in Poverty 91% 64% %Hispanics in Poverty 18% 26% 9% % Families Receiving Welfare or PA 15% 14% -1% Income Aggregate Income $ 48,392,864 $ 36,100,371 -25% Number of Families 17,919 30,076 68% Average Family Income $ 24,627 $ 25,105 2% Aggregate Wage and Salary Income $ 35,577,688 $ 28,530,995 -20% Wage & Salary Households 1,903 1,330 -30% Average Wage & Salary Income $ 18,696 $ 21,452 15% Aggregate Self-Employed Income $ 7,437,621 $ 4,260,897 -43% Self-Employed Households 527 273 -48% Average Self-Employed Income $ 14,113 $ 15,608 11% Aggregate Earned Income $ 43,015,309 $ 32,791,891 -24% Earned Income Households 1,978 1,425 -28% Average Earned Income $ 21,747 $ 23,012 6% Average Welfare Income per Household $ 4,453 $ 4,330 -3% Households Grouped by Income Level Income Under $5,000 68 48.5 -29% Income of $5,000-9,999 187 101 -46% Income of $10,000-14,999 447 152.5 -66% Income of $15,000-24,999 707 316.5 -55% Income of $25,000-49,999 355 599 69% Income over $50,000 66 220.5 234% Last Update: 5/28/96WT02-B13-87IA088-000637-B003-111http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/carucom/plana.html 128.120.36.171 19970122195025 text/html 12585HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:51:20 GMTLast-Modified: Friday, 24-Nov-95 02:45:18 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 12329 Planada Planada Planada Planada Change 1980 1990 1980-1990 Tract Population 5527 6698 21% %White 64% 66% 2% %Black 0% 0% 0% %Hispanic 65% 71% 7% %Under 18 36% 37% 0% %Over 65 7% 8% 1% %Under 6 12% 12% 0% %Foreign Born 30% 31% 1% Area Population na 178,403 na Area Foreign Born na 35,357 na %Area Foreign Born na 20% na Education (%pop over 25) % 0-8 years 47% 45% -2% % 9-11 years 15% 13% -1% %Completed H.S. 23% 17% -5% %Some College 12% 14% 2% %Bachelors or Graduate Degree 4% 6% 2% Persons over 25 2731 3506 28% H.S. Dropout Rate 25% 16% -8% Labor Market Structure Employed Persons 1794 2398 34% %Operators, Nonfarm Laborers and Service 27% 25% -2% %Professional & Technical 4% 8% 5% %Managers & Administrators 2% 4% 2% %Sales Workers 5% 8% 3% %Clerical 8% 8% 0% %Craft Workers 7% 13% 6% %Operators 9% 12% 3% %Nonfarm Laborers 8% 5% -2% %Service Workers 10% 8% -2% %Farm Workers 48% 34% -14% %Males Working less than 26 weeks 43% 36% -7% Males over 16 2018 2365 17% Poverty And Welfare %Persons in Impoverished Families 21% 27% 6% %Whites in Poverty 22% 26% 4% %Blacks in Poverty . 100% %Hispanics in Poverty 25% 33% 8% % Families Receiving Welfare or PA 19% 15% -4% Income Aggregate Income $ 28,571,559 $ 35,541,015 24% Number of Families 16,781 27,903 66% Average Family Income $ 21,612 $ 22,930 6% Aggregate Wage and Salary Income $ 18,860,455 $ 29,022,552 54% Wage & Salary Households 1,151 1,442 25% Average Wage & Salary Income $ 16,386 $ 20,127 23% Aggregate Self-Employed Income $ 6,209,691 $ 3,427,422 -45% Self-Employed Households 318 267 -16% Average Self-Employed Income $ 19,527 $ 12,837 -34% Aggregate Earned Income $ 25,070,146 $ 32,449,973 29% Earned Income Households 1,231 1,520 23% Average Earned Income $ 20,366 $ 21,349 5% Average Welfare Income per Household $ 4,523 $ 4,132 -9% Households Grouped by Income Level Income Under $5,000 163 38 -77% Income of $5,000-9,999 155 120 -23% Income of $10,000-14,999 308 269 -13% Income of $15,000-24,999 317 429 35% Income of $25,000-49,999 172 524 205% Income over $50,000 71 170 139% Last Update: 5/28/96WT02-B13-88IA088-000637-B003-136http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/carucom/castro.html 128.120.36.171 19970122195055 text/html 12611HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:51:35 GMTLast-Modified: Friday, 24-Nov-95 02:46:03 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 12355 Castroville Castroville Castroville Castroville Change 1980 1990 1980-1990 Tract Population 4396 5272 20% %White 35% 42% 7% %Black 1% 0% -1% %Hispanic 74% 79% 5% %Under 18 40% 38% -2% %Over 65 6% 6% 0% %Under 6 14% 14% 0% %Foreign Born 35% 38% 4% Area Population 290,444 355,660 22% Area Foreign Born 53,848 76,666 42% %Area Foreign Born 19% 22% 3% Education (%pop over 25) % 0-8 years 51% 49% -2% % 9-11 years 15% 16% 1% %Completed H.S. 19% 15% -4% %Some College 12% 9% -3% %Bachelors or Graduate Degree 3% 5% 2% Persons over 25 2040 2651 30% H.S. Dropout Rate 31% 17% -14% Labor Market Structure Employed Persons 1549 2037 32% %Operators, Nonfarm Laborers and Service 36% 33% -4% %Professional & Technical 5% 5% 0% %Managers & Administrators 5% 8% 3% %Sales Workers 4% 8% 4% %Clerical 8% 9% 1% %Craft Workers 10% 9% -1% %Operators 22% 18% -4% %Nonfarm Laborers 7% 4% -3% %Service Workers 7% 11% 4% %Farm Workers 31% 28% -3% %Males Working less than 26 weeks 38% 34% -5% Males over 16 1445 1779 23% Poverty And Welfare %Persons in Impoverished Families 15% 20% 5% %Whites in Poverty 11% 19% 8% %Blacks in Poverty 0% . %Hispanics in Poverty 16% 23% 7% % Families Receiving Welfare or PA 15% 10% -5% Income Aggregate Income $ 25,515,862 $ 28,671,754 12% Number of Families 18,162 30,631 69% Average Family Income $ 23,670 $ 25,854 9% Aggregate Wage and Salary Income $ 20,967,518 $ 24,616,929 17% Wage & Salary Households 1,023 1,089 6% Average Wage & Salary Income $ 20,496 $ 22,605 10% Aggregate Self-Employed Income $ 2,175,419 $ 1,373,351 -37% Self-Employed Households 81 85 5% Average Self-Employed Income $ 26,857 $ 16,157 -40% Aggregate Earned Income $ 23,142,937 $ 25,990,280 12% Earned Income Households 1,050 1,109 6% Average Earned Income $ 22,041 $ 23,436 6% Average Welfare Income per Household $ 3,603 $ 4,654 29% Households Grouped by Income Level Income Under $5,000 90 18 -80% Income of $5,000-9,999 102 51 -50% Income of $10,000-14,999 182 113 -38% Income of $15,000-24,999 437 298 -32% Income of $25,000-49,999 205 417 103% Income over $50,000 36 212 489% Last Update: 5/28/96WT02-B13-89IA088-000637-B003-169http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/carucom/gonzo.HTML 128.120.36.171 19970122195112 text/html 12627HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:52:06 GMTLast-Modified: Friday, 24-Nov-95 02:46:44 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 12371 Gonzales Gonzales Gonzales Gonzales Change 1980 1990 1980-1990 Tract Population 6527 3896 -40% %White 37% 29% -8% %Black 0% 1% 1% %Hispanic 74% 78% 4% %Under 18 38% 38% 0% %Over 65 7% 6% -1% %Under 6 13% 13% -1% %Foreign Born 43% 43% -1% Area Population 290,444 355,660 22% Area Foreign Born 53,848 76,666 42% %Area Foreign Born 19% 22% 3% Education (%pop over 25) % 0-8 years 52% 46% -5% % 9-11 years 14% 16% 2% %Completed H.S. 20% 19% -1% %Some College 8% 12% 4% %Bachelors or Graduate Degree 6% 5% -1% Persons over 25 3113 1901 -39% H.S. Dropout Rate 36% 34% -3% Labor Market Structure Employed Persons 2527 1426.5 -44% %Operators, Nonfarm Laborers and Service 23% 29% 7% %Professional & Technical 4% 3% -2% %Managers & Administrators 3% 6% 2% %Sales Workers 2% 5% 3% %Clerical 10% 11% 1% %Craft Workers 6% 6% 0% %Operators 8% 15% 7% %Nonfarm Laborers 4% 3% -1% %Service Workers 11% 12% 0% %Farm Workers 52% 40% -11% %Males Working less than 26 weeks 41% 45% 4% Males over 16 2337 1361 -42% Poverty And Welfare %Persons in Impoverished Families 19% 26% 7% %Whites in Poverty 11% 8% -3% %Blacks in Poverty . 30% %Hispanics in Poverty 21% 31% 10% % Families Receiving Welfare or PA 12% 13% 1% Income Aggregate Income $ 33,601,165 $ 26,691,838 -21% Number of Families 18,423 38,899 111% Average Family Income $ 24,455 $ 33,075 35% Aggregate Wage and Salary Income $ 27,604,150 $ 18,485,555 -33% Wage & Salary Households 1,303 755 -42% Average Wage & Salary Income $ 21,185 $ 24,500 16% Aggregate Self-Employed Income $ 3,093,416 $ 4,327,242 40% Self-Employed Households 195 87 -56% Average Self-Employed Income $ 15,864 $ 50,026 215% Aggregate Earned Income $ 30,697,567 $ 22,812,796 -26% Earned Income Households 1,373 767 -44% Average Earned Income $ 22,358 $ 29,762 33% Average Welfare Income per Household $ 3,871 $ 3,454 -11% Households Grouped by Income Level Income Under $5,000 105 39.5 -62% Income of $5,000-9,999 147 57 -61% Income of $10,000-14,999 278 62.5 -78% Income of $15,000-24,999 397 187 -53% Income of $25,000-49,999 264 326.5 24% Income over $50,000 71 134.5 89% Last Update: 5/28/96WT02-B13-90IA088-000637-B003-195http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/carucom/green.HTML 128.120.36.171 19970122195126 text/html 12629HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:52:21 GMTLast-Modified: Tuesday, 01-Oct-96 02:18:59 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 12372 Greenfield Greenfield Greenfield Greenfield Change 1980 1990 1980-1990 Tract Population 5847 8776 50% %White 54% 44% -10% %Black 1% 1% 0% %Hispanic 63% 72% 9% %Under 18 40% 36% -4% %Over 65 6% 6% 0% %Under 6 16% 13% -3% %Foreign Born 32% 37% 5% Area Population 290,444 355,660 22% Area Foreign Born 53,848 76,666 42% %Area Foreign Born 19% 22% 3% Education (%pop over 25) % 0-8 years 55% 42% -13% % 9-11 years 12% 15% 3% %Completed H.S. 20% 18% -1% %Some College 9% 13% 4% %Bachelors or Graduate Degree 4% 7% 3% Persons over 25 2647 4488.58 70% H.S. Dropout Rate 36% 30% -6% Labor Market Structure Employed Persons 1892 3462.83 83% %Operators, Nonfarm Laborers and Service 22% 26% 3% %Professional & Technical 5% 7% 2% %Managers & Administrators 4% 5% 1% %Sales Workers 5% 5% 1% %Clerical 8% 11% 3% %Craft Workers 9% 8% -1% %Operators 7% 10% 3% %Nonfarm Laborers 4% 5% 1% %Service Workers 12% 11% 0% %Farm Workers 47% 38% -9% %Males Working less than 26 weeks 37% 35% -2% Males over 16 1911 3086 61% Poverty And Welfare %Persons in Impoverished Families 17% 14% -3% %Whites in Poverty 12% 7% -5% %Blacks in Poverty 0% 7% %Hispanics in Poverty 22% 17% -5% % Families Receiving Welfare or PA 10% 11% 1% Income Aggregate Income $ 28,780,024 $ 54,058,007 88% Number of Families 16,396 34,486 110% Average Family Income $ 21,969 $ 28,115 28% Aggregate Wage and Salary Income $ 23,198,350 $ 47,082,156 103% Wage & Salary Households 1,266 1,930 52% Average Wage & Salary Income $ 18,324 $ 24,401 33% Aggregate Self-Employed Income $ 3,664,405 $ 5,317,929 45% Self-Employed Households 188 306 63% Average Self-Employed Income $ 19,492 $ 17,360 -11% Aggregate Earned Income $ 26,862,755 $ 52,400,085 95% Earned Income Households 1,350 1,986 47% Average Earned Income $ 19,898 $ 26,386 33% Average Welfare Income per Household $ 3,726 $ 3,749 1% Households Grouped by Income Level Income Under $5,000 159 60.42 -62% Income of $5,000-9,999 94 79.92 -15% Income of $10,000-14,999 298 193.5 -35% Income of $15,000-24,999 414 414 0% Income of $25,000-49,999 206 810.33 293% Income over $50,000 51 364.58 615% Last Update: 5/28/96WT02-B13-91IA088-000637-B003-214http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/carucom/kingc.HTML 128.120.36.171 19970122195137 text/html 12641HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:52:33 GMTLast-Modified: Tuesday, 01-Oct-96 02:19:19 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 12384 King City King City King City King City Change 1980 1990 1980-1990 Tract Population 8259 5981 -28% %White 68% 49% -18% %Black 1% 1% 1% %Hispanic 48% 66% 18% %Under 18 35% 35% 0% %Over 65 6% 7% 0% %Under 6 14% 13% -1% %Foreign Born 28% 34% 6% Area Population 290,444 355,660 22% Area Foreign Born 53,848 76,666 42% %Area Foreign Born 19% 22% 3% Education (%pop over 25) % 0-8 years 34% 38% 4% % 9-11 years 9% 15% 6% %Completed H.S. 29% 19% -10% %Some College 15% 16% 1% %Bachelors or Graduate Degree 14% 9% -5% Persons over 25 4239 3092.75 -27% H.S. Dropout Rate 37% 32% -4% Labor Market Structure Employed Persons 3330 2334.08 -30% %Operators, Nonfarm Laborers and Service 29% 26% -3% %Professional & Technical 9% 9% -1% %Managers & Administrators 7% 6% -1% %Sales Workers 5% 6% 1% %Clerical 13% 11% -1% %Craft Workers 9% 9% 0% %Operators 12% 10% -2% %Nonfarm Laborers 4% 4% 0% %Service Workers 13% 12% -1% %Farm Workers 29% 34% 5% %Males Working less than 26 weeks 26% 33% 7% Males over 16 2938 2145 -27% Poverty And Welfare %Persons in Impoverished Families 13% 14% 1% %Whites in Poverty 11% 6% -5% %Blacks in Poverty 51% 7% %Hispanics in Poverty 19% 18% -1% % Families Receiving Welfare or PA 8% 10% 1% Income Aggregate Income $ 58,238,519 $ 39,762,057 -32% Number of Families 20,877 35,686 71% Average Family Income $ 28,506 $ 29,755 4% Aggregate Wage and Salary Income $ 46,967,318 $ 33,554,966 -29% Wage & Salary Households 2,187 1,356 -38% Average Wage & Salary Income $ 21,476 $ 24,744 15% Aggregate Self-Employed Income $ 10,798,574 $ 4,447,687 -59% Self-Employed Households 373 228 -39% Average Self-Employed Income $ 28,951 $ 19,507 -33% Aggregate Earned Income $ 57,765,892 $ 38,002,653 -34% Earned Income Households 2,280 1,392 -39% Average Earned Income $ 25,336 $ 27,304 8% Average Welfare Income per Household $ 2,678 $ 3,580 34% Households Grouped by Income Level Income Under $5,000 125 40.75 -67% Income of $5,000-9,999 170 42.92 -75% Income of $10,000-14,999 301 131.5 -56% Income of $15,000-24,999 708 268.67 -62% Income of $25,000-49,999 540 574.42 6% Income over $50,000 95 278.08 193% Last Update: 5/28/96WT02-B13-92IA088-000637-B003-235http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/carucom/laslo.HTML 128.120.36.171 19970122195149 text/html 12627HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:52:42 GMTLast-Modified: Tuesday, 01-Oct-96 02:19:34 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 12370 Las Lomas Las Lomas Las Lomas Las Lomas Change 1980 1990 1980-1990 Tract Population 3346 5952 78% %White 64% 69% 6% %Black 0% 0% 0% %Hispanic 46% 46% 0% %Under 18 38% 33% -4% %Over 65 5% 6% 1% %Under 6 12% 12% 0% %Foreign Born 20% 27% 8% Area Population 290,444 355,660 22% Area Foreign Born 53,848 76,666 42% %Area Foreign Born 19% 22% 3% Education (%pop over 25) % 0-8 years 32% 22% -11% % 9-11 years 20% 17% -4% %Completed H.S. 29% 23% -6% %Some College 12% 18% 7% %Bachelors or Graduate Degree 7% 14% 7% Persons over 25 1627 3211.5 97% H.S. Dropout Rate 34% 18% -16% Labor Market Structure Employed Persons 1303 2650 103% %Operators, Nonfarm Laborers and Service 34% 27% -7% %Professional & Technical 9% 12% 2% %Managers & Administrators 3% 6% 3% %Sales Workers 7% 10% 3% %Clerical 11% 13% 2% %Craft Workers 11% 14% 3% %Operators 15% 13% -2% %Nonfarm Laborers 8% 4% -4% %Service Workers 11% 9% -2% %Farm Workers 25% 18% -7% %Males Working less than 26 weeks 37% 32% -5% Males over 16 1086 2097 93% Poverty And Welfare %Persons in Impoverished Families 9% 7% -2% %Whites in Poverty 8% 6% -2% %Blacks in Poverty . 21% %Hispanics in Poverty 9% 13% 4% % Families Receiving Welfare or PA 8% 6% -2% Income Aggregate Income $ 18,164,606 $ 50,323,723 177% Number of Families 19,428 47,199 143% Average Family Income $ 24,514 $ 38,095 55% Aggregate Wage and Salary Income $ 16,037,791 $ 41,858,178 161% Wage & Salary Households 701 1,249 78% Average Wage & Salary Income $ 22,878 $ 33,527 47% Aggregate Self-Employed Income $ 1,244,964 $ 6,261,901 403% Self-Employed Households 82 293 257% Average Self-Employed Income $ 15,182 $ 21,408 41% Aggregate Earned Income $ 17,282,755 $ 48,120,079 178% Earned Income Households 733 1,333 82% Average Earned Income $ 23,578 $ 36,113 53% Average Welfare Income per Household $ 1,733 $ 3,109 79% Households Grouped by Income Level Income Under $5,000 55 21.5 -61% Income of $5,000-9,999 27 9 -67% Income of $10,000-14,999 93 64.5 -31% Income of $15,000-24,999 282 146.5 -48% Income of $25,000-49,999 198 598 202% Income over $50,000 18 481.5 2575% Last Update: 5/28/96WT02-B13-93IA088-000637-B003-267http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/carucom/soled.HTML 128.120.36.171 19970122195210 text/html 12624HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:53:02 GMTLast-Modified: Tuesday, 01-Oct-96 02:19:53 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 12367 Soledad Soledad Soledad Soledad Change 1980 1990 1980-1990 Tract Population 7589 5898 -22% %White 41% 39% -2% %Black 0% 1% 1% %Hispanic 77% 79% 1% %Under 18 38% 37% -1% %Over 65 7% 6% -1% %Under 6 13% 13% 0% %Foreign Born 38% 40% 2% Area Population 290,444 355,660 22% Area Foreign Born 53,848 76,666 42% %Area Foreign Born 19% 22% 3% Education (%pop over 25) % 0-8 years 59% 47% -12% % 9-11 years 11% 16% 5% %Completed H.S. 18% 19% 1% %Some College 8% 11% 3% %Bachelors or Graduate Degree 4% 4% 0% Persons over 25 3584 2939.33 -18% H.S. Dropout Rate 34% 33% -1% Labor Market Structure Employed Persons 2616 2304.33 -12% %Operators, Nonfarm Laborers and Service 24% 26% 3% %Professional & Technical 4% 5% 2% %Managers & Administrators 3% 3% -1% %Sales Workers 5% 4% -1% %Clerical 9% 12% 3% %Craft Workers 8% 7% -1% %Operators 7% 11% 4% %Nonfarm Laborers 5% 5% 0% %Service Workers 11% 11% 0% %Farm Workers 47% 42% -5% %Males Working less than 26 weeks 34% 36% 2% Males over 16 2553 2037 -20% Poverty And Welfare %Persons in Impoverished Families 15% 14% -1% %Whites in Poverty 18% 8% -10% %Blacks in Poverty . 10% %Hispanics in Poverty 17% 16% -1% % Families Receiving Welfare or PA 15% 13% -2% Income Aggregate Income $ 35,854,782 $ 31,696,247 -12% Number of Families 16,629 31,876 92% Average Family Income $ 22,024 $ 25,686 17% Aggregate Wage and Salary Income $ 31,160,485 $ 28,760,896 -8% Wage & Salary Households 1,598 1,233 -23% Average Wage & Salary Income $ 19,500 $ 23,326 20% Aggregate Self-Employed Income $ 2,338,738 $ 2,083,075 -11% Self-Employed Households 126 166 32% Average Self-Employed Income $ 18,561 $ 12,523 -33% Aggregate Earned Income $ 33,499,223 $ 30,843,971 -8% Earned Income Households 1,660 1,265 -24% Average Earned Income $ 20,180 $ 24,389 21% Average Welfare Income per Household $ 3,506 $ 3,905 11% Households Grouped by Income Level Income Under $5,000 81 43.67 -46% Income of $5,000-9,999 115 54.67 -52% Income of $10,000-14,999 374 118 -68% Income of $15,000-24,999 580 274 -53% Income of $25,000-49,999 295 546.33 85% Income over $50,000 39 197.33 406% Last Update: 5/28/96WT02-B13-94IA088-000637-B004-24http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/carucom/calis.HTML 128.120.36.171 19970122195221 text/html 12617HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:53:15 GMTLast-Modified: Friday, 24-Nov-95 02:50:37 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 12361 Calistoga Calistoga Calistoga Calistoga Change 1980 1990 1980-1990 Tract Population 3879 4468 15% %White 87% 88% 1% %Black 0% 0% 0% %Hispanic 18% 24% 6% %Under 18 16% 20% 3% %Over 65 33% 28% -5% %Under 6 4% 6% 1% %Foreign Born 20% 21% 2% Area Population 334,243 6,253,311 1771% Area Foreign Born 30,756 1,250,693 3967% %Area Foreign Born 9% 20% 11% Education (%pop over 25) % 0-8 years 16% 13% -4% % 9-11 years 15% 11% -4% %Completed H.S. 37% 29% -8% %Some College 17% 21% 4% %Bachelors or Graduate Degree 15% 19% 5% Persons over 25 2884 3229 12% H.S. Dropout Rate 12% 19% 7% Labor Market Structure Employed Persons 1369 1979 45% %Operators, Nonfarm Laborers and Service 32% 36% 4% %Professional & Technical 12% 13% 1% %Managers & Administrators 7% 14% 7% %Sales Workers 11% 8% -3% %Clerical 12% 11% -1% %Craft Workers 10% 6% -4% %Operators 9% 7% -2% %Nonfarm Laborers 4% 4% -1% %Service Workers 18% 25% 7% %Farm Workers 16% 13% -4% %Males Working less than 26 weeks 56% 43% -13% Males over 16 1548 1714 11% Poverty And Welfare %Persons in Impoverished Families 13% 9% -4% %Whites in Poverty 9% 7% -2% %Blacks in Poverty . 0% %Hispanics in Poverty 27% 13% -14% % Families Receiving Welfare or PA 8% 6% -2% Income Aggregate Income $ 42,518,434 $ 37,442,711 -12% Number of Families 28,261 37,030 31% Average Family Income $ 37,428 $ 31,893 -15% Aggregate Wage and Salary Income $ 17,133,089 $ 33,459,014 95% Wage & Salary Households 1,002 1,199 20% Average Wage & Salary Income $ 17,099 $ 27,906 63% Aggregate Self-Employed Income $ 19,084,830 $ 3,004,779 -84% Self-Employed Households 188 280 49% Average Self-Employed Income $ 101,515 $ 10,731 -89% Aggregate Earned Income $ 36,217,919 $ 36,463,793 1% Earned Income Households 1,056 1,287 22% Average Earned Income $ 34,297 $ 28,332 -17% Average Welfare Income per Household $ 2,672 $ 3,206 20% Households Grouped by Income Level Income Under $5,000 76 14 -82% Income of $5,000-9,999 183 46 -75% Income of $10,000-14,999 213 91 -57% Income of $15,000-24,999 279 290 4% Income of $25,000-49,999 224 424 89% Income over $50,000 49 309 531% Last Update: 5/28/96WT02-B13-95IA088-000637-B004-54http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/carucom/sthel.HTML 128.120.36.171 19970122195234 text/html 12638HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:53:28 GMTLast-Modified: Tuesday, 01-Oct-96 02:20:08 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 12381 St Helena St Helena St. Helena St. Helena Change 1980 1990 1980-1990 Tract Population 4898 4866 -1% %White 89% 88% -1% %Black 0% 2% 1% %Hispanic 16% 14% -2% %Under 18 20% 20% 0% %Over 65 30% 17% -12% %Under 6 5% 7% 2% %Foreign Born 14% 14% 0% Area Population 334,243 6,253,311 1771% Area Foreign Born 30,756 1,250,693 3967% %Area Foreign Born 9% 20% 11% Education (%pop over 25) % 0-8 years 13% 7% -5% % 9-11 years 11% 8% -3% %Completed H.S. 31% 14% -17% %Some College 21% 24% 4% %Bachelors or Graduate Degree 25% 39% 14% Persons over 25 3493 3036.67 -13% H.S. Dropout Rate 15% 2% -12% Labor Market Structure Employed Persons 1837 2563.5 40% %Operators, Nonfarm Laborers and Service 26% 27% 1% %Professional & Technical 17% 23% 6% %Managers & Administrators 11% 11% 0% %Sales Workers 12% 8% -4% %Clerical 13% 17% 4% %Craft Workers 10% 8% -2% %Operators 4% 5% 2% %Nonfarm Laborers 5% 4% -1% %Service Workers 17% 18% 0% %Farm Workers 11% 6% -6% %Males Working less than 26 weeks 48% 34% -14% Males over 16 1820 1912 5% Poverty And Welfare %Persons in Impoverished Families 8% 7% -2% %Whites in Poverty 9% 5% -3% %Blacks in Poverty . 16% %Hispanics in Poverty 4% 12% 8% % Families Receiving Welfare or PA 9% 4% -4% Income Aggregate Income $ 39,258,101 $ 50,652,661 29% Number of Families 18,612 48,263 159% Average Family Income $ 28,407 $ 44,812 58% Aggregate Wage and Salary Income $ 25,433,780 $ 41,999,408 65% Wage & Salary Households 1,197 1,230 3% Average Wage & Salary Income $ 21,248 $ 34,150 61% Aggregate Self-Employed Income $ 3,884,642 $ 7,353,119 89% Self-Employed Households 287 408 42% Average Self-Employed Income $ 13,535 $ 18,037 33% Aggregate Earned Income $ 29,318,422 $ 49,352,526 68% Earned Income Households 1,298 1,337 3% Average Earned Income $ 22,587 $ 36,927 63% Average Welfare Income per Household $ 3,483 $ 3,488 0% Households Grouped by Income Level Income Under $5,000 79 15.33 -81% Income of $5,000-9,999 100 28.67 -71% Income of $10,000-14,999 225 58 -74% Income of $15,000-24,999 381 145.17 -62% Income of $25,000-49,999 439 435.33 -1% Income over $50,000 103 447.83 335% Last Update: 5/28/96WT02-B13-96IA088-000637-B004-68http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/carucom/locke.HTML 128.120.36.171 19970122195246 text/html 12622HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:53:42 GMTLast-Modified: Tuesday, 01-Oct-96 02:20:20 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 12365 Lockeford Lockeford Lockeford Lockeford Change 1980 1990 1980-1990 Tract Population 7507 10762 43% %White 90% 92% 2% %Black 1% 1% 0% %Hispanic 13% 16% 3% %Under 18 31% 27% -5% %Over 65 9% 12% 2% %Under 6 9% 8% -1% %Foreign Born 8% 13% 5% Area Population 347,262 480,628 38% Area Foreign Born 36,847 78,631 113% %Area Foreign Born 11% 16% 6% Education (%pop over 25) % 0-8 years 18% 13% -5% % 9-11 years 16% 15% -1% %Completed H.S. 37% 28% -9% %Some College 19% 22% 3% %Bachelors or Graduate Degree 10% 12% 1% Persons over 25 4443 7020.33 58% H.S. Dropout Rate 12% 15% 2% Labor Market Structure Employed Persons 3059 4961 62% %Operators, Nonfarm Laborers and Service 29% 24% -5% %Professional & Technical 12% 13% 1% %Managers & Administrators 8% 9% 0% %Sales Workers 9% 8% 0% %Clerical 11% 16% 5% %Craft Workers 14% 14% 0% %Operators 13% 12% -1% %Nonfarm Laborers 7% 5% -2% %Service Workers 9% 7% -2% %Farm Workers 17% 17% -1% %Males Working less than 26 weeks 32% 32% 0% Males over 16 2733 4181 53% Poverty And Welfare %Persons in Impoverished Families 7% 11% 4% %Whites in Poverty 5% 9% 3% %Blacks in Poverty 33% 2% %Hispanics in Poverty 14% 35% 21% % Families Receiving Welfare or PA 7% 9% 2% Income Aggregate Income $ 61,429,721 $ 117,061,974 91% Number of Families 22,006 45,683 108% Average Family Income $ 30,261 $ 39,120 29% Aggregate Wage and Salary Income $ 45,062,931 $ 84,927,314 88% Wage & Salary Households 1,855 2,806 51% Average Wage & Salary Income $ 24,293 $ 30,331 25% Aggregate Self-Employed Income $ 10,193,392 $ 20,783,809 104% Self-Employed Households 759 1,090 44% Average Self-Employed Income $ 13,430 $ 19,074 42% Aggregate Earned Income $ 55,256,323 $ 105,585,310 91% Earned Income Households 2,069 3,029 46% Average Earned Income $ 26,707 $ 34,952 31% Average Welfare Income per Household $ 3,000 $ 4,029 34% Households Grouped by Income Level Income Under $5,000 114 61.33 -46% Income of $5,000-9,999 145 114.67 -21% Income of $10,000-14,999 300 205.33 -32% Income of $15,000-24,999 572 536.67 -6% Income of $25,000-49,999 681 987.33 45% Income over $50,000 151 1088 621% Last Update: 5/28/96WT02-B13-97IA088-000637-B004-85http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/carucom/hughs.HTML 128.120.36.171 19970122195310 text/html 12616HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:53:52 GMTLast-Modified: Sunday, 26-Nov-95 04:16:34 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 12360 Hughson Hughson Hughson Hughson Change 1980 1990 1980-1990 Tract Population 3891 4288 10% %White 85% 75% -10% %Black 0% 1% 0% %Hispanic 24% 35% 11% %Under 18 33% 30% -3% %Over 65 10% 12% 2% %Under 6 8% 12% 4% %Foreign Born 13% 18% 5% Area Population 265,846 370,522 39% Area Foreign Born 26,600 52,844 99% %Area Foreign Born 10% 14% 4% Education (%pop over 25) % 0-8 years 33% 22% -11% % 9-11 years 19% 18% -2% %Completed H.S. 29% 23% -6% %Some College 12% 26% 14% %Bachelors or Graduate Degree 6% 5% -1% Persons over 25 2113 2558 21% H.S. Dropout Rate 32% 14% -18% Labor Market Structure Employed Persons 1261 1776 41% %Operators, Nonfarm Laborers and Service 36% 29% -7% %Professional & Technical 8% 9% 1% %Managers & Administrators 3% 8% 5% %Sales Workers 9% 11% 1% %Clerical 9% 15% 6% %Craft Workers 13% 11% -3% %Operators 18% 13% -6% %Nonfarm Laborers 6% 7% 1% %Service Workers 11% 9% -2% %Farm Workers 21% 17% -4% %Males Working less than 26 weeks 46% 34% -11% Males over 16 1361 1473 8% Poverty And Welfare %Persons in Impoverished Families 16% 16% 0% %Whites in Poverty 15% 14% -1% %Blacks in Poverty . 29% %Hispanics in Poverty 31% 24% -7% % Families Receiving Welfare or PA 15% 9% -7% Income Aggregate Income $ 22,412,373 $ 32,321,946 44% Number of Families 15,836 36,163 128% Average Family Income $ 23,225 $ 29,198 26% Aggregate Wage and Salary Income $ 16,583,428 $ 23,898,916 44% Wage & Salary Households 927 994 7% Average Wage & Salary Income $ 17,889 $ 24,043 34% Aggregate Self-Employed Income $ 1,788,835 $ 5,513,012 208% Self-Employed Households 197 301 53% Average Self-Employed Income $ 9,080 $ 18,316 102% Aggregate Earned Income $ 18,372,263 $ 29,411,928 60% Earned Income Households 956 1,063 11% Average Earned Income $ 19,218 $ 27,669 44% Average Welfare Income per Household $ 2,897 $ 4,869 68% Households Grouped by Income Level Income Under $5,000 62 19 -69% Income of $5,000-9,999 102 74 -27% Income of $10,000-14,999 120 121 1% Income of $15,000-24,999 390 226 -42% Income of $25,000-49,999 189 396 110% Income over $50,000 29 271 834% Last Update: 5/30/96WT02-B13-98IA088-000637-B004-115http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/carucom/patte.HTML 128.120.36.171 19970122195331 text/html 12637HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:54:22 GMTLast-Modified: Tuesday, 01-Oct-96 02:20:59 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 12380 Patterson Patterson Patterson Patterson Change 1980 1990 1980-1990 Tract Population 4695 10763 129% %White 68% 69% 1% %Black 0% 1% 1% %Hispanic 51% 49% -2% %Under 18 34% 35% 1% %Over 65 12% 9% -3% %Under 6 11% 13% 2% %Foreign Born 14% 18% 5% Area Population 265,846 370,522 39% Area Foreign Born 26,600 52,844 99% %Area Foreign Born 10% 14% 4% Education (%pop over 25) % 0-8 years 38% 22% -16% % 9-11 years 12% 15% 3% %Completed H.S. 24% 26% 2% %Some College 16% 21% 6% %Bachelors or Graduate Degree 11% 10% -1% Persons over 25 2581 6038 134% H.S. Dropout Rate 27% 14% -13% Labor Market Structure Employed Persons 1731 4192.67 142% %Operators, Nonfarm Laborers and Service 35% 32% -3% %Professional & Technical 9% 11% 2% %Managers & Administrators 10% 8% -2% %Sales Workers 8% 9% 1% %Clerical 11% 14% 3% %Craft Workers 11% 13% 2% %Operators 14% 16% 1% %Nonfarm Laborers 6% 5% -1% %Service Workers 14% 11% -3% %Farm Workers 16% 14% -2% %Males Working less than 26 weeks 36% 36% 0% Males over 16 1561 3749 140% Poverty And Welfare %Persons in Impoverished Families 14% 15% 2% %Whites in Poverty 8% 12% 4% %Blacks in Poverty . 3% %Hispanics in Poverty 20% 25% 6% % Families Receiving Welfare or PA 15% 14% -2% Income Aggregate Income $ 28,844,430 $ 84,927,314 194% Number of Families 18,647 39,986 114% Average Family Income $ 24,507 $ 32,650 33% Aggregate Wage and Salary Income $ 25,088,653 $ 73,339,210 192% Wage & Salary Households 1,143 2,572 125% Average Wage & Salary Income $ 21,950 $ 28,518 30% Aggregate Self-Employed Income $ 1,840,570 $ 7,243,900 294% Self-Employed Households 193 490 154% Average Self-Employed Income $ 9,537 $ 14,773 55% Aggregate Earned Income $ 26,929,223 $ 80,336,649 198% Earned Income Households 1,190 2,634 121% Average Earned Income $ 22,630 $ 30,593 35% Average Welfare Income per Household $ 4,162 $ 4,733 14% Households Grouped by Income Level Income Under $5,000 90 47 -48% Income of $5,000-9,999 89 178 100% Income of $10,000-14,999 235 202 -14% Income of $15,000-24,999 356 383.67 8% Income of $25,000-49,999 273 1036.33 280% Income over $50,000 43 765 1679% Last Update: 5/28/96WT02-B13-99IA088-000637-B004-132http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/carucom/cutle.HTML 128.120.36.171 19970122195345 text/html 12615HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:54:40 GMTLast-Modified: Friday, 24-Nov-95 02:54:25 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 12359 Cutler Cutler Cutler Cutler Change 1980 1990 1980-1990 Tract Population 4256 8258 94% %White 33% 53% 20% %Black 0% 0% 0% %Hispanic 81% 63% -18% %Under 18 43% 34% -9% %Over 65 5% 9% 4% %Under 6 16% 12% -5% %Foreign Born 34% 31% -3% Area Population 245,689 311,921 27% Area Foreign Born 27,678 54,925 98% %Area Foreign Born 11% 18% 6% Education (%pop over 25) % 0-8 years 55% 38% -17% % 9-11 years 10% 15% 5% %Completed H.S. 20% 21% 0% %Some College 9% 12% 3% %Bachelors or Graduate Degree 5% 8% 3% Persons over 25 1875 4490.25 139% H.S. Dropout Rate 21% 24% 3% Labor Market Structure Employed Persons 1345 3070.75 128% %Operators, Nonfarm Laborers and Service 29% 24% -5% %Professional & Technical 3% 8% 6% %Managers & Administrators 5% 7% 2% %Sales Workers 2% 6% 4% %Clerical 8% 9% 1% %Craft Workers 8% 8% 0% %Operators 16% 11% -4% %Nonfarm Laborers 4% 4% 0% %Service Workers 9% 8% -1% %Farm Workers 45% 38% -7% %Males Working less than 26 weeks 33% 39% 7% Males over 16 1331 3122 135% Poverty And Welfare %Persons in Impoverished Families 28% 26% -1% %Whites in Poverty 32% 22% -9% %Blacks in Poverty . . %Hispanics in Poverty 31% 36% 5% % Families Receiving Welfare or PA 22% 16% -6% Income Aggregate Income $ 17,559,727 $ 48,342,443 175% Number of Families 12,942 29,967 132% Average Family Income $ 17,560 $ 25,133 43% Aggregate Wage and Salary Income $ 13,429,339 $ 35,195,096 162% Wage & Salary Households 914 1,749 91% Average Wage & Salary Income $ 14,693 $ 20,126 37% Aggregate Self-Employed Income $ 1,475,425 $ 7,990,484 442% Self-Employed Households 116 594 412% Average Self-Employed Income $ 12,719 $ 13,446 6% Aggregate Earned Income $ 14,904,763 $ 43,185,579 190% Earned Income Households 949 1,884 98% Average Earned Income $ 15,706 $ 22,928 46% Average Welfare Income per Household $ 4,842 $ 3,910 -19% Households Grouped by Income Level Income Under $5,000 77 78.5 2% Income of $5,000-9,999 232 214 -8% Income of $10,000-14,999 211 226 7% Income of $15,000-24,999 251 525.25 109% Income of $25,000-49,999 78 569.25 630% Income over $50,000 20 310.5 1453% Last Update: 5/28/96WT02-B13-100IA088-000637-B004-150http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/carucom/earli.html 128.120.36.171 19970122195403 text/html 12632HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:54:58 GMTLast-Modified: Tuesday, 01-Oct-96 02:23:28 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 12375 Earlimart Earlimart Earlimart Earlimart Change 1980 1990 1980-1990 Tract Population 4547 2971 -35% %White 19% 10% -9% %Black 3% 1% -2% %Hispanic 76% 84% 9% %Under 18 40% 41% 2% %Over 65 10% 6% -4% %Under 6 15% 16% 2% %Foreign Born 38% 48% 10% Area Population 245,689 311,921 27% Area Foreign Born 27,678 54,925 98% %Area Foreign Born 11% 18% 6% Education (%pop over 25) % 0-8 years 69% 63% -6% % 9-11 years 11% 16% 5% %Completed H.S. 13% 10% -3% %Some College 4% 7% 3% %Bachelors or Graduate Degree 2% 1% -1% Persons over 25 2081 1328.5 -36% H.S. Dropout Rate 24% 27% 2% Labor Market Structure Employed Persons 944 854 -10% %Operators, Nonfarm Laborers and Service 17% 22% 5% %Professional & Technical 3% 4% 1% %Managers & Administrators 3% 2% 0% %Sales Workers 7% 5% -3% %Clerical 8% 3% -5% %Craft Workers 8% 5% -3% %Operators 6% 9% 3% %Nonfarm Laborers 3% 3% 0% %Service Workers 8% 10% 2% %Farm Workers 54% 59% 5% %Males Working less than 26 weeks 53% 42% -11% Males over 16 1462 976 -33% Poverty And Welfare %Persons in Impoverished Families 37% 39% 2% %Whites in Poverty 21% 25% 5% %Blacks in Poverty 71% 93% %Hispanics in Poverty 45% 44% -1% % Families Receiving Welfare or PA 27% 25% -2% Income Aggregate Income $ 15,014,163 $ 9,679,813 -36% Number of Families 11,883 19,198 62% Average Family Income $ 15,321 $ 15,389 0% Aggregate Wage and Salary Income $ 11,324,454 $ 8,686,859 -23% Wage & Salary Households 829 590 -29% Average Wage & Salary Income $ 13,660 $ 14,723 8% Aggregate Self-Employed Income $ 1,006,019 $ 16,021 -98% Self-Employed Households 53 26 -52% Average Self-Employed Income $ 18,981 $ 628 -97% Aggregate Earned Income $ 12,330,473 $ 8,702,881 -29% Earned Income Households 855 593 -31% Average Earned Income $ 14,422 $ 14,688 2% Average Welfare Income per Household $ 4,169 $ 4,160 0% Households Grouped by Income Level Income Under $5,000 164 51 -69% Income of $5,000-9,999 188 96.5 -49% Income of $10,000-14,999 257 148 -42% Income of $15,000-24,999 181 199.5 10% Income of $25,000-49,999 50 113 126% Income over $50,000 23 21 -9% Last Update: 5/30/96WT02-B13-101IA088-000637-B004-175http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/carucom/eastp.html 128.120.36.171 19970122195414 text/html 12677HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:55:07 GMTLast-Modified: Tuesday, 01-Oct-96 02:24:07 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 12420 East Porterville East Porterville East Porterville East Porterville Change 1980 1990 1980-1990 Tract Population 7430 4218 -43% %White 78% 60% -17% %Black 1% 1% 0% %Hispanic 29% 36% 7% %Under 18 34% 34% 0% %Over 65 11% 13% 2% %Under 6 11% 12% 1% %Foreign Born 9% 18% 9% Area Population 245,689 311,921 27% Area Foreign Born 27,678 54,925 98% %Area Foreign Born 11% 18% 6% Education (%pop over 25) % 0-8 years 30% 29% -1% % 9-11 years 20% 17% -3% %Completed H.S. 27% 24% -3% %Some College 16% 16% 0% %Bachelors or Graduate Degree 7% 8% 1% Persons over 25 3970 2355.87 -41% H.S. Dropout Rate 25% 23% -2% Labor Market Structure Employed Persons 2691 1438.13 -47% %Operators, Nonfarm Laborers and Service 40% 32% -7% %Professional & Technical 8% 11% 3% %Managers & Administrators 7% 7% 1% %Sales Workers 8% 8% 0% %Clerical 11% 10% -1% %Craft Workers 12% 10% -2% %Operators 13% 13% 0% %Nonfarm Laborers 5% 4% -1% %Service Workers 22% 15% -6% %Farm Workers 15% 21% 6% %Males Working less than 26 weeks 45% 45% 0% Males over 16 2605 1432 -45% Poverty And Welfare %Persons in Impoverished Families 21% 27% 6% %Whites in Poverty 16% 21% 5% %Blacks in Poverty 13% 51% %Hispanics in Poverty 39% 34% -5% % Families Receiving Welfare or PA 22% 24% 2% Income Aggregate Income $ 42,529,715 $ 23,494,897 -45% Number of Families 14,963 26,762 79% Average Family Income $ 21,754 $ 22,206 2% Aggregate Wage and Salary Income $ 29,201,341 $ 17,077,955 -42% Wage & Salary Households 1,805 890 -51% Average Wage & Salary Income $ 16,178 $ 19,194 19% Aggregate Self-Employed Income $ 5,282,342 $ 2,278,637 -57% Self-Employed Households 290 181 -37% Average Self-Employed Income $ 18,215 $ 12,571 -31% Aggregate Earned Income $ 34,483,683 $ 19,356,591 -44% Earned Income Households 1,899 945 -50% Average Earned Income $ 18,159 $ 20,476 13% Average Welfare Income per Household $ 3,664 $ 4,687 28% Households Grouped by Income Level Income Under $5,000 134 51.47 -62% Income of $5,000-9,999 276 115.4 -58% Income of $10,000-14,999 447 166.8 -63% Income of $15,000-24,999 449 212.2 -53% Income of $25,000-49,999 289 381.67 32% Income over $50,000 79 130.53 65% Last Update: 5/30/96WT02-B13-102IA088-000637-B004-192http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/carucom/exete.HTML 128.120.36.171 19970122195430 text/html 12595HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:55:26 GMTLast-Modified: Sunday, 26-Nov-95 02:06:20 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 12339 Exeter Exeter Exeter Exeter Change 1980 1990 1980-1990 Tract Population 6261 7946 27% %White 87% 77% -10% %Black 0% 0% 0% %Hispanic 15% 26% 11% %Under 18 29% 31% 2% %Over 65 17% 15% -2% %Under 6 9% 10% 0% %Foreign Born 5% 8% 3% Area Population 245,689 311,921 27% Area Foreign Born 27,678 54,925 98% %Area Foreign Born 11% 18% 6% Education (%pop over 25) % 0-8 years 28% 18% -10% % 9-11 years 16% 15% -1% %Completed H.S. 33% 29% -4% %Some College 15% 19% 3% %Bachelors or Graduate Degree 7% 11% 4% Persons over 25 3747 4753 27% H.S. Dropout Rate 12% 11% -1% Labor Market Structure Employed Persons 2455 2903 18% %Operators, Nonfarm Laborers and Service 38% 33% -5% %Professional & Technical 10% 14% 4% %Managers & Administrators 5% 7% 2% %Sales Workers 7% 10% 2% %Clerical 14% 15% 1% %Craft Workers 16% 10% -5% %Operators 19% 14% -5% %Nonfarm Laborers 3% 6% 3% %Service Workers 16% 12% -4% %Farm Workers 9% 11% 2% %Males Working less than 26 weeks 39% 43% 4% Males over 16 2186 2696 23% Poverty And Welfare %Persons in Impoverished Families 16% 21% 5% %Whites in Poverty 12% 12% 0% %Blacks in Poverty . 0% %Hispanics in Poverty 29% 51% 23% % Families Receiving Welfare or PA 14% 17% 3% Income Aggregate Income $ 43,583,434 $ 52,287,445 20% Number of Families 19,530 30,132 54% Average Family Income $ 24,848 $ 24,899 0% Aggregate Wage and Salary Income $ 34,970,000 $ 40,799,016 17% Wage & Salary Households 1,554 1,949 25% Average Wage & Salary Income $ 22,503 $ 20,933 -7% Aggregate Self-Employed Income $ 3,852,112 $ 5,517,355 43% Self-Employed Households 274 386 41% Average Self-Employed Income $ 14,059 $ 14,294 2% Aggregate Earned Income $ 38,822,112 $ 46,316,371 19% Earned Income Households 1,638 2,009 23% Average Earned Income $ 23,701 $ 23,054 -3% Average Welfare Income per Household $ 3,020 $ 3,455 14% Households Grouped by Income Level Income Under $5,000 137 152 11% Income of $5,000-9,999 194 198 2% Income of $10,000-14,999 333 207 -38% Income of $15,000-24,999 439 496 13% Income of $25,000-49,999 411 652 59% Income over $50,000 78 395 406% Last Update: 5/30/96WT02-B13-103IA088-000637-B005-10http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/carucom/farme.html 128.120.36.171 19970122195445 text/html 14553HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:55:37 GMTLast-Modified: Thursday, 16-Jan-97 22:28:12 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 14295 Farmersville Farmersville Farmersville Change 1980 1990 1980-1990 Tract Population 10,744 13,504 26% %White 69.3% 66.1% -3% %Black 0.0% 0.1% 0% %Hispanic 36.5% 41.5% 5% %Under 18 36.5% 34.0% -3% %Over 65 10.1% 10.6% 1% %Under 6 12.2% 11.5% -1% %Foreign Born 12.0% 19.7% 8% Area Population 245,689 311,921 27% Area Foreign Born 27,678 54,925 98% %Area Foreign Born 11% 0% -11% Residing in County in 1985 84% 85% 1% Education (%pop over 25) % 0-8 years 36% 29% -7% % 9-11 years 19% 17% -2% %Completed H.S. 29% 22% -6% %Some College 11% 17% 5% %Bachelors or Graduate Degree 5% 10% 6% Persons over 25 5,585 7,655 37% H.S. Dropout Rate 20% 25% 4% Labor Market Structure Employed Persons 3,495 4,942 41% %Operators, Nonfarm Laborers and Service 35.7% 28.8% -7% %Professional & Technical 6.0% 9.9% 4% %Managers & Administrators 6.5% 6.3% 0% %Sales Workers 6.2% 10.2% 4% %Clerical 14.6% 12.9% -2% %Craft Workers 11.0% 9.8% -1% %Operators 14.9% 10.3% -5% %Nonfarm Laborers 5.6% 4.9% -1% %Service Workers 15.3% 13.7% -2% %Farm Workers 19.9% 22.1% 2% %Males Working less than 26 weeks 41.1% 39.8% -1% Males over 16 3,471 4,649 34% Poverty And Welfare %Persons in Impoverished Families 23.5% 25.9% 2% %Whites in Poverty 14.1% 19.6% 6% %Blacks in Poverty . 21.6% %Hispanics in Poverty 39.1% 40.3% 1% % Families Receiving Welfare or PA 26.4% 20.5% -6% Income Aggregate Income $ 46,258,550 $ 101,385,879 91% Number of Families 2,774 3,335 78% Average Family Income $ 16,676 $ 30,397 10% Aggregate Wage and Salary Income $ 31,424,500 $ 73,818,411 87% Wage & Salary Households 2,394 2,934 76% Average Wage & Salary Income $ 13,126 $ 25,158 6% Aggregate Self-Employed Income $ 7,489,775 $ 16,664,900 314% Self-Employed Households 642 886 151% Average Self-Employed Income $ 11,666 $ 18,807 65% Aggregate Earned Income $ 38,914,275 $ 90,483,311 102% Earned Income Households 2,535 3,178 79% Average Earned Income $ 15,351 $ 28,476 12% Average Welfare Income per Household $ 6,801 $ 12,274 18% Households Grouped by Income Level Income Under $5,000 272 154 -44% Income of $5,000-9,999 743 363 -51% Income of $10,000-14,999 662 455 -31% Income of $15,000-24,999 553 759 37% Income of $25,000-49,999 467 1,097 135% Income over $50,000 77 507 559% Last Update: 12/18/96WT02-B13-104IA088-000637-B005-30http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/carucom/ivanh.html 128.120.36.171 19970122195502 text/html 12619HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:55:56 GMTLast-Modified: Tuesday, 01-Oct-96 02:25:17 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 12362 Ivanhoe Ivanhoe Ivanhoe Ivanhoe Change 1980 1990 1980-1990 Tract Population 5451 7973 46% %White 77% 59% -18% %Black 0% 1% 0% %Hispanic 29% 48% 19% %Under 18 33% 36% 4% %Over 65 10% 8% -1% %Under 6 11% 12% 1% %Foreign Born 14% 23% 9% Area Population 245,689 311,921 27% Area Foreign Born 27,678 54,925 98% %Area Foreign Born 11% 18% 6% Education (%pop over 25) % 0-8 years 31% 29% -3% % 9-11 years 19% 16% -4% %Completed H.S. 23% 19% -4% %Some College 18% 17% -1% %Bachelors or Graduate Degree 9% 11% 2% Persons over 25 2987 4324.42 45% H.S. Dropout Rate 25% 21% -4% Labor Market Structure Employed Persons 2096 3116.33 49% %Operators, Nonfarm Laborers and Service 28% 26% -3% %Professional & Technical 8% 12% 3% %Managers & Administrators 5% 8% 4% %Sales Workers 7% 8% 1% %Clerical 12% 12% 0% %Craft Workers 12% 10% -1% %Operators 11% 11% 0% %Nonfarm Laborers 6% 5% -1% %Service Workers 12% 10% -2% %Farm Workers 27% 24% -3% %Males Working less than 26 weeks 32% 35% 3% Males over 16 1908 2665 40% Poverty And Welfare %Persons in Impoverished Families 15% 23% 8% %Whites in Poverty 13% 16% 3% %Blacks in Poverty . 11% %Hispanics in Poverty 24% 34% 9% % Families Receiving Welfare or PA 15% 16% 1% Income Aggregate Income $ 36,035,091 $ 49,333,798 37% Number of Families 18,216 32,382 78% Average Family Income $ 24,852 $ 25,509 3% Aggregate Wage and Salary Income $ 27,315,188 $ 39,478,636 45% Wage & Salary Households 1,364 1,762 29% Average Wage & Salary Income $ 20,026 $ 22,403 12% Aggregate Self-Employed Income $ 4,340,892 $ 7,017,746 62% Self-Employed Households 388 419 8% Average Self-Employed Income $ 11,188 $ 16,769 50% Aggregate Earned Income $ 31,656,080 $ 46,496,382 47% Earned Income Households 1,432 1,877 31% Average Earned Income $ 22,106 $ 24,776 12% Average Welfare Income per Household $ 4,055 $ 4,566 13% Households Grouped by Income Level Income Under $5,000 78 88.92 14% Income of $5,000-9,999 169 186.83 11% Income of $10,000-14,999 304 228.33 -25% Income of $15,000-24,999 437 496.92 14% Income of $25,000-49,999 309 587 90% Income over $50,000 61 346 467% Last Update: 5/30/96WT02-B13-105IA088-000637-B005-52http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/carucom/linds.html 128.120.36.171 19970122195511 text/html 14757HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:56:08 GMTLast-Modified: Thursday, 16-Jan-97 22:28:08 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 14499 Lindsay Lindsay Lindsay Change 1980 1990 1980-1990 Tract Population 8,444 11,221 33% %White 69.1% 50.6% -19% %Black 0.3% 0.0% 0% %Hispanic 43.7% 58.0% 14% %Under 18 33.8% 33.7% 0% %Over 65 12.9% 12.1% -1% %Under 6 11.1% 12.6% 2% %Foreign Born 16.8% 23.5% 7% Area Population 245,689 311,921 27% Area Foreign Born 27,678 54,925 98% %Area Foreign Born 11% 0% -11% Residing in County in 1985 81% 85% 3% Education (%pop over 25) 0% 0% % 0-8 years 32% 28% -4% % 9-11 years 17% 17% 0% %Completed H.S. 28% 25% -2% %Some College 15% 17% 1% %Bachelors or Graduate Degree 7% 7% 0% Persons over 25 4,606 6,191 34% H.S. Dropout Rate 30% 19% -11% Labor Market Structure - - Employed Persons 3,645 4,429 22% %Operators, Nonfarm Laborers and Service 35.9% 32.4% -4% %Professional & Technical 6.3% 8.8% 3% %Managers & Administrators 4.8% 5.7% 1% %Sales Workers 6.3% 9.4% 3% %Clerical 11.6% 12.0% 0% %Craft Workers 12.2% 10.1% -2% %Operators 20.1% 14.8% -5% %Nonfarm Laborers 6.3% 5.9% 0% %Service Workers 9.6% 11.7% 2% %Farm Workers 22.8% 21.6% -1% %Males Working less than 26 weeks 31.2% 37.6% 6% Males over 16 2,833 3,931 39% Poverty And Welfare - - %Persons in Impoverished Families 15.5% 22.3% 7% %Whites in Poverty 11.7% 10.5% -1% %Blacks in Poverty . . %Hispanics in Poverty 24.2% 29.6% 5% % Families Receiving Welfare or PA 18.7% 19.6% 1% Income Aggregate Income $ 46,258,550 $ 86,584,235 91% Number of Families 2,774 2,712 78% Average Family Income $ 16,676 $ 31,932 10% Aggregate Wage and Salary Income $ 31,424,500 $ 69,677,889 87% Wage & Salary Households 2,394 2,528 76% Average Wage & Salary Income $ 13,126 $ 27,568 6% Aggregate Self-Employed Income $ 7,489,775 $ 6,974,693 314% Self-Employed Households 642 541 151% Average Self-Employed Income $ 11,666 $ 12,892 65% Aggregate Earned Income $ 38,914,275 $ 76,652,582 102% Earned Income Households 2,535 2,674 79% Average Earned Income $ 15,351 $ 28,671 12% Average Welfare Income per Household $ 6,801 $ 11,590 18% Households Grouped by Income Level Income Under $5,000 132 105 -20% Income of $5,000-9,999 457 254 -44% Income of $10,000-14,999 441 328 -26% Income of $15,000-24,999 626 723 15% Income of $25,000-49,999 494 990 100% Income over $50,000 79 313 296% Last Update: 12/18/96WT02-B13-106IA088-000637-B005-72http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/carucom/londo.html 128.120.36.171 19970122195542 text/html 12605HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:56:28 GMTLast-Modified: Tuesday, 01-Oct-96 02:25:41 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 12348 London London London London Change 1980 1990 1980-1990 Tract Population 8024 10224 27% %White 71% 54% -17% %Black 0% 0% 0% %Hispanic 37% 63% 26% %Under 18 34% 36% 2% %Over 65 10% 8% -1% %Under 6 12% 11% 0% %Foreign Born 13% 32% 18% Area Population 245,689 311,921 27% Area Foreign Born 27,678 54,925 98% %Area Foreign Born 11% 18% 6% Education (%pop over 25) % 0-8 years 35% 42% 7% % 9-11 years 17% 17% 0% %Completed H.S. 23% 18% -4% %Some College 16% 11% -5% %Bachelors or Graduate Degree 9% 6% -3% Persons over 25 4243 5410 28% H.S. Dropout Rate 29% 30% 0% Labor Market Structure Employed Persons 2845 3691 30% %Operators, Nonfarm Laborers and Service 24% 27% 3% %Professional & Technical 7% 6% -1% %Managers & Administrators 5% 5% 1% %Sales Workers 7% 7% -1% %Clerical 9% 8% -1% %Craft Workers 11% 9% -2% %Operators 10% 11% 0% %Nonfarm Laborers 4% 6% 1% %Service Workers 9% 10% 1% %Farm Workers 37% 39% 2% %Males Working less than 26 weeks 34% 40% 6% Males over 16 2879 3764 31% Poverty And Welfare %Persons in Impoverished Families 18% 32% 14% %Whites in Poverty 12% 24% 13% %Blacks in Poverty 100% 0% %Hispanics in Poverty 36% 42% 6% % Families Receiving Welfare or PA 20% 19% -1% Income Aggregate Income $ 54,264,157 $ 50,853,421 -6% Number of Families 19,264 26,139 36% Average Family Income $ 25,865 $ 22,144 -14% Aggregate Wage and Salary Income $ 36,104,794 $ 39,880,650 10% Wage & Salary Households 1,881 2,187 16% Average Wage & Salary Income $ 19,194 $ 18,239 -5% Aggregate Self-Employed Income $ 13,669,132 $ 7,007,029 -49% Self-Employed Households 690 595 -14% Average Self-Employed Income $ 19,810 $ 11,786 -41% Aggregate Earned Income $ 49,773,926 $ 46,887,679 -6% Earned Income Households 2,129 2,345 10% Average Earned Income $ 23,379 $ 19,999 -14% Average Welfare Income per Household $ 4,950 $ 4,497 -9% Households Grouped by Income Level Income Under $5,000 111 111 0% Income of $5,000-9,999 235 290 23% Income of $10,000-14,999 425 364 -14% Income of $15,000-24,999 522 584 12% Income of $25,000-49,999 450 622 38% Income over $50,000 122 325.5 167% Last Update: 5/30/96WT02-B13-107IA088-000637-B005-104http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/carucom/orosi.html 128.120.36.171 19970122195555 text/html 12616HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:56:50 GMTLast-Modified: Sunday, 26-Nov-95 02:16:32 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 12360 Orosi Orosi Orosi Orosi Change 1980 1990 1980-1990 Tract Population 6302 5228 -17% %White 53% 39% -14% %Black 0% 0% 0% %Hispanic 54% 74% 20% %Under 18 37% 36% 0% %Over 65 10% 8% -2% %Under 6 12% 13% 1% %Foreign Born 25% 39% 14% Area Population 245,689 311,921 27% Area Foreign Born 27,678 54,925 98% %Area Foreign Born 11% 18% 6% Education (%pop over 25) % 0-8 years 44% 46% 2% % 9-11 years 15% 16% 1% %Completed H.S. 22% 20% -2% %Some College 12% 8% -4% %Bachelors or Graduate Degree 7% 6% -1% Persons over 25 3246 2657.75 -18% H.S. Dropout Rate 31% 27% -4% Labor Market Structure Employed Persons 2285 1842.25 -19% %Operators, Nonfarm Laborers and Service 30% 25% -5% %Professional & Technical 5% 7% 2% %Managers & Administrators 4% 6% 2% %Sales Workers 2% 5% 2% %Clerical 7% 7% 0% %Craft Workers 10% 7% -3% %Operators 10% 12% 2% %Nonfarm Laborers 7% 5% -2% %Service Workers 12% 7% -5% %Farm Workers 42% 43% 2% %Males Working less than 26 weeks 43% 43% -1% Males over 16 2247 1919 -15% Poverty And Welfare %Persons in Impoverished Families 23% 32% 9% %Whites in Poverty 21% 27% 6% %Blacks in Poverty . . %Hispanics in Poverty 27% 39% 12% % Families Receiving Welfare or PA 21% 21% -1% Income Aggregate Income $ 34,031,620 $ 24,737,048 -27% Number of Families 15,977 25,699 61% Average Family Income $ 21,350 $ 21,224 -1% Aggregate Wage and Salary Income $ 21,171,080 $ 18,071,576 -15% Wage & Salary Households 1,393 1,047 -25% Average Wage & Salary Income $ 15,198 $ 17,264 14% Aggregate Self-Employed Income $ 7,156,905 $ 3,409,702 -52% Self-Employed Households 395 221 -44% Average Self-Employed Income $ 18,119 $ 15,411 -15% Aggregate Earned Income $ 28,327,985 $ 21,481,278 -24% Earned Income Households 1,461 1,093 -25% Average Earned Income $ 19,389 $ 19,662 1% Average Welfare Income per Household $ 4,173 $ 3,928 -6% Households Grouped by Income Level Income Under $5,000 171 67.5 -61% Income of $5,000-9,999 251 132 -47% Income of $10,000-14,999 302 156.5 -48% Income of $15,000-24,999 441 374.25 -15% Income of $25,000-49,999 177 341.25 93% Income over $50,000 62 94 52% Last Update: 5/30/96WT02-B13-108IA088-000637-B005-123http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/carucom/pixle.html 128.120.36.171 19970122195607 text/html 12621HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:57:00 GMTLast-Modified: Tuesday, 01-Oct-96 02:25:58 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 12364 Pixley Pixley Pixley Pixley Change 1980 1990 1980-1990 Tract Population 4241 7583 79% %White 65% 57% -8% %Black 12% 3% -9% %Hispanic 28% 51% 23% %Under 18 38% 38% 0% %Over 65 10% 9% 0% %Under 6 11% 12% 1% %Foreign Born 12% 26% 15% Area Population 245,689 311,921 27% Area Foreign Born 27,678 54,925 98% %Area Foreign Born 11% 18% 6% Education (%pop over 25) % 0-8 years 44% 40% -4% % 9-11 years 17% 21% 4% %Completed H.S. 25% 20% -5% %Some College 8% 11% 2% %Bachelors or Graduate Degree 6% 5% -1% Persons over 25 2136 3933.53 84% H.S. Dropout Rate 43% 17% -26% Labor Market Structure Employed Persons 1206 2354.63 95% %Operators, Nonfarm Laborers and Service 33% 27% -7% %Professional & Technical 5% 6% 1% %Managers & Administrators 2% 4% 2% %Sales Workers 5% 7% 3% %Clerical 9% 8% -2% %Craft Workers 7% 7% 1% %Operators 15% 12% -3% %Nonfarm Laborers 2% 4% 2% %Service Workers 17% 12% -5% %Farm Workers 39% 41% 1% %Males Working less than 26 weeks 44% 43% -1% Males over 16 1426 2512 76% Poverty And Welfare %Persons in Impoverished Families 19% 29% 10% %Whites in Poverty 14% 21% 7% %Blacks in Poverty 33% 29% %Hispanics in Poverty 28% 40% 12% % Families Receiving Welfare or PA 31% 26% -5% Income Aggregate Income $ 21,209,254 $ 35,392,118 67% Number of Families 16,107 26,497 65% Average Family Income $ 19,711 $ 20,674 5% Aggregate Wage and Salary Income $ 15,078,058 $ 27,554,425 83% Wage & Salary Households 891 1,520 71% Average Wage & Salary Income $ 16,923 $ 18,131 7% Aggregate Self-Employed Income $ 3,491,329 $ 5,152,979 48% Self-Employed Households 171 322 88% Average Self-Employed Income $ 20,417 $ 16,006 -22% Aggregate Earned Income $ 18,569,387 $ 32,707,404 76% Earned Income Households 950 1,613 70% Average Earned Income $ 19,547 $ 20,273 4% Average Welfare Income per Household $ 4,498 $ 3,910 -13% Households Grouped by Income Level Income Under $5,000 97 79.8 -18% Income of $5,000-9,999 154 193.73 26% Income of $10,000-14,999 283 319.63 13% Income of $15,000-24,999 270 461.7 71% Income of $25,000-49,999 131 466 256% Income over $50,000 37 191.03 416% Last Update: 5/30/96WT02-B13-109IA088-000637-B005-144http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/carucom/popla.html 128.120.36.171 19970122195619 text/html 12652HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:57:13 GMTLast-Modified: Tuesday, 01-Oct-96 02:26:20 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 12395 Poplar-Cotton Poplar-Cotton Poplar-Cotton Poplar-Cotton Change 1980 1990 1980-1990 Tract Population 5098 8070 58% %White 81% 54% -27% %Black 0% 1% 1% %Hispanic 19% 46% 27% %Under 18 29% 34% 5% %Over 65 13% 10% -3% %Under 6 9% 12% 2% %Foreign Born 11% 23% 12% Area Population 245,689 311,921 27% Area Foreign Born 27,678 54,925 98% %Area Foreign Born 11% 18% 6% Education (%pop over 25) % 0-8 years 29% 35% 6% % 9-11 years 20% 19% 0% %Completed H.S. 26% 20% -6% %Some College 16% 14% -2% %Bachelors or Graduate Degree 10% 6% -4% Persons over 25 2985 4387.37 47% H.S. Dropout Rate 23% 30% 7% Labor Market Structure Employed Persons 2118 2535.13 20% %Operators, Nonfarm Laborers and Service 37% 31% -6% %Professional & Technical 8% 10% 2% %Managers & Administrators 5% 5% 0% %Sales Workers 8% 8% 0% %Clerical 13% 11% -2% %Craft Workers 10% 10% 0% %Operators 14% 12% -1% %Nonfarm Laborers 4% 4% 0% %Service Workers 19% 14% -5% %Farm Workers 19% 26% 6% %Males Working less than 26 weeks 34% 51% 17% Males over 16 1928 2752 43% Poverty And Welfare %Persons in Impoverished Families 16% 33% 17% %Whites in Poverty 13% 23% 10% %Blacks in Poverty . 44% %Hispanics in Poverty 39% 41% 2% % Families Receiving Welfare or PA 16% 27% 12% Income Aggregate Income $ 32,144,138 $ 37,121,128 15% Number of Families 16,589 24,363 47% Average Family Income $ 22,385 $ 20,059 -10% Aggregate Wage and Salary Income $ 24,212,773 $ 28,197,632 16% Wage & Salary Households 1,323 1,597 21% Average Wage & Salary Income $ 18,301 $ 17,654 -4% Aggregate Self-Employed Income $ 5,301,814 $ 3,338,438 -37% Self-Employed Households 332 266 -20% Average Self-Employed Income $ 15,969 $ 12,538 -21% Aggregate Earned Income $ 29,514,587 $ 31,536,069 7% Earned Income Households 1,466 1,692 15% Average Earned Income $ 20,133 $ 18,640 -7% Average Welfare Income per Household $ 4,478 $ 4,440 -1% Households Grouped by Income Level Income Under $5,000 90 101.47 13% Income of $5,000-9,999 164 267.4 63% Income of $10,000-14,999 240 305.8 27% Income of $15,000-24,999 395 400.2 1% Income of $25,000-49,999 306 592.67 94% Income over $50,000 46 183.03 298% Last Update: 5/30/96WT02-B13-110IA088-000637-B005-167http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/carucom/richg.html 128.120.36.171 19970122195640 text/html 12621HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:57:26 GMTLast-Modified: Sunday, 26-Nov-95 02:21:23 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 12365 Richgrove Richgrove Richgrove Richgrove Change 1980 1990 1980-1990 Tract Population 4296 7611 77% %White 47% 37% -10% %Black 3% 3% 0% %Hispanic 52% 65% 14% %Under 18 35% 40% 6% %Over 65 11% 7% -4% %Under 6 12% 14% 2% %Foreign Born 29% 35% 5% Area Population 245,689 311,921 27% Area Foreign Born 27,678 54,925 98% %Area Foreign Born 11% 18% 6% Education (%pop over 25) % 0-8 years 56% 49% -7% % 9-11 years 16% 21% 5% %Completed H.S. 19% 16% -2% %Some College 8% 8% 0% %Bachelors or Graduate Degree 2% 3% 1% Persons over 25 2166 3671.5 70% H.S. Dropout Rate 40% 19% -21% Labor Market Structure Employed Persons 1413 2202.5 56% %Operators, Nonfarm Laborers and Service 23% 23% 1% %Professional & Technical 2% 5% 3% %Managers & Administrators 4% 2% -2% %Sales Workers 3% 6% 3% %Clerical 7% 5% -2% %Craft Workers 5% 6% 1% %Operators 10% 10% 1% %Nonfarm Laborers 3% 3% 0% %Service Workers 10% 10% 1% %Farm Workers 56% 52% -4% %Males Working less than 26 weeks 33% 43% 10% Males over 16 1643 2472 50% Poverty And Welfare %Persons in Impoverished Families 19% 34% 15% %Whites in Poverty 14% 23% 9% %Blacks in Poverty 28% 37% %Hispanics in Poverty 28% 42% 15% % Families Receiving Welfare or PA 22% 27% 6% Income Aggregate Income $ 19,728,853 $ 29,329,497 49% Number of Families 14,462 22,594 56% Average Family Income $ 20,276 $ 17,835 -12% Aggregate Wage and Salary Income $ 14,171,050 $ 24,239,203 71% Wage & Salary Households 920 1,510 64% Average Wage & Salary Income $ 15,403 $ 16,052 4% Aggregate Self-Employed Income $ 3,029,102 $ 2,668,216 -12% Self-Employed Households 175 198 13% Average Self-Employed Income $ 17,309 $ 13,510 -22% Aggregate Earned Income $ 17,200,152 $ 26,907,419 56% Earned Income Households 980 1,557 59% Average Earned Income $ 17,551 $ 17,287 -2% Average Welfare Income per Household $ 3,111 $ 4,141 33% Households Grouped by Income Level Income Under $5,000 94 100 6% Income of $5,000-9,999 119 227.5 91% Income of $10,000-14,999 256 341.5 33% Income of $15,000-24,999 223 481 116% Income of $25,000-49,999 150 372 148% Income over $50,000 21 122.5 483% Last Update: 5/30/96WT02-B13-111IA088-000637-B005-185http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/carucom/strat.html 128.120.36.171 19970122195656 text/html 12613HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:57:47 GMTLast-Modified: Sunday, 26-Nov-95 04:05:07 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 12357 Strathmore Strathmore Strathmore Strathmore Change 1980 1990 1980-1990 Tract Population 5422 6535 21% %White 75% 66% -9% %Black 0% 0% 0% %Hispanic 25% 37% 12% %Under 18 33% 34% 1% %Over 65 12% 11% -1% %Under 6 10% 11% 1% %Foreign Born 11% 19% 7% Area Population 245,689 311,921 27% Area Foreign Born 27,678 54,925 98% %Area Foreign Born 11% 18% 6% Education (%pop over 25) % 0-8 years 33% 32% -1% % 9-11 years 20% 19% 0% %Completed H.S. 25% 23% -3% %Some College 16% 14% -2% %Bachelors or Graduate Degree 6% 6% 1% Persons over 25 3079 3703 20% H.S. Dropout Rate 14% 11% -3% Labor Market Structure Employed Persons 2032 2321 14% %Operators, Nonfarm Laborers and Service 33% 27% -6% %Professional & Technical 8% 10% 2% %Managers & Administrators 4% 6% 2% %Sales Workers 6% 10% 4% %Clerical 10% 11% 1% %Craft Workers 11% 9% -2% %Operators 18% 13% -5% %Nonfarm Laborers 2% 4% 2% %Service Workers 13% 11% -2% %Farm Workers 28% 26% -1% %Males Working less than 26 weeks 39% 43% 4% Males over 16 1969 2248 14% Poverty And Welfare %Persons in Impoverished Families 15% 24% 9% %Whites in Poverty 12% 21% 9% %Blacks in Poverty . 0% %Hispanics in Poverty 23% 31% 7% % Families Receiving Welfare or PA 16% 24% 8% Income Aggregate Income $ 33,350,576 $ 41,746,634 25% Number of Families 18,026 29,911 66% Average Family Income $ 23,080 $ 25,881 12% Aggregate Wage and Salary Income $ 21,620,637 $ 26,374,739 22% Wage & Salary Households 1,223 1,355 11% Average Wage & Salary Income $ 17,678 $ 19,465 10% Aggregate Self-Employed Income $ 7,670,831 $ 7,746,970 1% Self-Employed Households 421 487 16% Average Self-Employed Income $ 18,220 $ 15,908 -13% Aggregate Earned Income $ 29,291,468 $ 34,121,709 16% Earned Income Households 1,339 1,491 11% Average Earned Income $ 21,876 $ 22,885 5% Average Welfare Income per Household $ 3,633 $ 3,973 9% Households Grouped by Income Level Income Under $5,000 161 48 -70% Income of $5,000-9,999 110 223 103% Income of $10,000-14,999 276 213 -23% Income of $15,000-24,999 479 314 -34% Income of $25,000-49,999 251 493 96% Income over $50,000 55 322 485% Last Update: 5/30/96WT02-B13-112IA088-000637-B005-203http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/carucom/terra.html 128.120.36.171 19970122195718 text/html 12641HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:58:04 GMTLast-Modified: Sunday, 26-Nov-95 04:05:56 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 12385 Terra Bella Terra Bella Terra Bella Terra Bella Change 1980 1990 1980-1990 Tract Population 4363 3882 -11% %White 66% 74% 8% %Black 1% 0% -1% %Hispanic 36% 33% -2% %Under 18 33% 30% -3% %Over 65 4% 13% 9% %Under 6 11% 9% -2% %Foreign Born 18% 19% 1% Area Population 245,689 311,921 27% Area Foreign Born 27,678 54,925 98% %Area Foreign Born 11% 18% 6% Education (%pop over 25) % 0-8 years 35% 24% -11% % 9-11 years 13% 17% 4% %Completed H.S. 30% 24% -6% %Some College 16% 17% 1% %Bachelors or Graduate Degree 7% 13% 6% Persons over 25 2386 2392.75 0% H.S. Dropout Rate 25% 16% -9% Labor Market Structure Employed Persons 1642 1491 -9% %Operators, Nonfarm Laborers and Service 31% 29% -2% %Professional & Technical 8% 12% 4% %Managers & Administrators 6% 8% 3% %Sales Workers 4% 7% 3% %Clerical 12% 10% -2% %Craft Workers 9% 8% -2% %Operators 17% 9% -7% %Nonfarm Laborers 2% 5% 3% %Service Workers 12% 14% 2% %Farm Workers 31% 27% -4% %Males Working less than 26 weeks 39% 45% 5% Males over 16 1628 1468 -10% Poverty And Welfare %Persons in Impoverished Families 15% 19% 5% %Whites in Poverty 12% 13% 1% %Blacks in Poverty 0% 0% %Hispanics in Poverty 22% 31% 9% % Families Receiving Welfare or PA 17% 15% -2% Income Aggregate Income $ 24,443,495 $ 27,128,015 11% Number of Families 18,543 34,535 86% Average Family Income $ 23,549 $ 26,906 14% Aggregate Wage and Salary Income $ 19,604,557 $ 18,917,919 -4% Wage & Salary Households 950 837 -12% Average Wage & Salary Income $ 20,636 $ 22,609 10% Aggregate Self-Employed Income $ 2,922,118 $ 4,797,090 64% Self-Employed Households 244 292 20% Average Self-Employed Income $ 11,976 $ 16,442 37% Aggregate Earned Income $ 22,526,675 $ 23,715,008 5% Earned Income Households 1,001 898 -10% Average Earned Income $ 22,504 $ 26,423 17% Average Welfare Income per Household $ 3,390 $ 4,630 37% Households Grouped by Income Level Income Under $5,000 88 41.25 -53% Income of $5,000-9,999 109 87.5 -20% Income of $10,000-14,999 209 89.5 -57% Income of $15,000-24,999 315 244.25 -22% Income of $25,000-49,999 227 378.25 67% Income over $50,000 44 167.5 281% Last Update: 5/30/96WT02-B13-113IA088-000637-B006-2http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/carucom/tipto.html 128.120.36.171 19970122195800 text/html 12660HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:58:48 GMTLast-Modified: Tuesday, 01-Oct-96 02:26:36 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 12403 Tipton-Woodville Tipton-Woodville Tipton-Woodville Tipton-Woodville Change 1980 1990 1980-1990 Tract Population 4894 1768 -64% %White 69% 60% -9% %Black 0% 1% 1% %Hispanic 40% 58% 18% %Under 18 39% 39% 0% %Over 65 8% 8% 0% %Under 6 15% 12% -2% %Foreign Born 22% 31% 9% Area Population 245,689 311,921 27% Area Foreign Born 27,678 54,925 98% %Area Foreign Born 11% 18% 6% Education (%pop over 25) % 0-8 years 51% 47% -4% % 9-11 years 13% 17% 4% %Completed H.S. 23% 22% 0% %Some College 12% 10% -1% %Bachelors or Graduate Degree 1% 2% 0% Persons over 25 2296 873.33 -62% H.S. Dropout Rate 38% 24% -14% Labor Market Structure Employed Persons 1713 585.33 -66% %Operators, Nonfarm Laborers and Service 29% 28% -2% %Professional & Technical 2% 5% 3% %Managers & Administrators 1% 4% 2% %Sales Workers 4% 8% 4% %Clerical 6% 7% 2% %Craft Workers 4% 8% 4% %Operators 13% 9% -3% %Nonfarm Laborers 3% 6% 3% %Service Workers 14% 13% -1% %Farm Workers 53% 41% -13% %Males Working less than 26 weeks 32% 36% 5% Males over 16 1631 592 -64% Poverty And Welfare %Persons in Impoverished Families 23% 30% 8% %Whites in Poverty 23% 25% 3% %Blacks in Poverty . 29% %Hispanics in Poverty 26% 41% 15% % Families Receiving Welfare or PA 21% 20% -1% Income Aggregate Income $ 23,376,038 $ 8,534,824 -63% Number of Families 15,106 29,585 96% Average Family Income $ 20,362 $ 21,884 7% Aggregate Wage and Salary Income $ 17,596,699 $ 7,044,884 -60% Wage & Salary Households 1,029 353 -66% Average Wage & Salary Income $ 17,101 $ 19,938 17% Aggregate Self-Employed Income $ 3,137,852 $ 1,541,551 -51% Self-Employed Households 230 67 -71% Average Self-Employed Income $ 13,643 $ 22,894 68% Aggregate Earned Income $ 20,734,551 $ 8,586,435 -59% Earned Income Households 1,131 379 -66% Average Earned Income $ 18,333 $ 22,636 23% Average Welfare Income per Household $ 4,046 $ 3,717 -8% Households Grouped by Income Level Income Under $5,000 113 18 -84% Income of $5,000-9,999 190 30.33 -84% Income of $10,000-14,999 355 89.33 -75% Income of $15,000-24,999 228 124 -46% Income of $25,000-49,999 103 89 -14% Income over $50,000 38 39.33 4% Last Update: 5/30/96WT02-B13-114IA088-000637-B006-33http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/carucom/woodl.html 128.120.36.171 19970122195815 text/html 12629HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:59:10 GMTLast-Modified: Tuesday, 01-Oct-96 02:27:17 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 12372 Woodlake Woodlake Woodlake Woodlake Change 1980 1990 1980-1990 Tract Population 5239 5029 -4% %White 53% 62% 9% %Black 0% 0% 0% %Hispanic 57% 51% -7% %Under 18 38% 33% -4% %Over 65 9% 11% 1% %Under 6 13% 10% -3% %Foreign Born 21% 22% 1% Area Population 245,689 311,921 27% Area Foreign Born 27,678 54,925 98% %Area Foreign Born 11% 18% 6% Education (%pop over 25) % 0-8 years 41% 27% -14% % 9-11 years 16% 15% -2% %Completed H.S. 23% 22% -1% %Some College 13% 17% 4% %Bachelors or Graduate Degree 7% 12% 6% Persons over 25 2631 2932.67 11% H.S. Dropout Rate 26% 17% -9% Labor Market Structure Employed Persons 1994 1941.5 -3% %Operators, Nonfarm Laborers and Service 26% 25% -2% %Professional & Technical 8% 11% 3% %Managers & Administrators 3% 9% 6% %Sales Workers 8% 8% 0% %Clerical 12% 13% 1% %Craft Workers 12% 10% -2% %Operators 11% 10% -1% %Nonfarm Laborers 6% 5% -1% %Service Workers 10% 11% 1% %Farm Workers 32% 25% -7% %Males Working less than 26 weeks 37% 40% 3% Males over 16 1694 1801 6% Poverty And Welfare %Persons in Impoverished Families 23% 21% -2% %Whites in Poverty 16% 16% 0% %Blacks in Poverty . 22% %Hispanics in Poverty 29% 31% 2% % Families Receiving Welfare or PA 18% 14% -4% Income Aggregate Income $ 25,739,697 $ 28,537,222 11% Number of Families 14,716 28,901 96% Average Family Income $ 19,441 $ 23,513 21% Aggregate Wage and Salary Income $ 19,293,835 $ 21,217,464 10% Wage & Salary Households 1,178 1,082 -8% Average Wage & Salary Income $ 16,378 $ 19,619 20% Aggregate Self-Employed Income $ 3,262,907 $ 4,411,132 35% Self-Employed Households 240 305 27% Average Self-Employed Income $ 13,595 $ 14,471 6% Aggregate Earned Income $ 22,556,742 $ 25,628,596 14% Earned Income Households 1,263 1,159 -8% Average Earned Income $ 17,860 $ 22,113 24% Average Welfare Income per Household $ 4,282 $ 4,821 13% Households Grouped by Income Level Income Under $5,000 114 45.83 -60% Income of $5,000-9,999 127 121.33 -4% Income of $10,000-14,999 263 170.17 -35% Income of $15,000-24,999 375 311.5 -17% Income of $25,000-49,999 148 361 144% Income over $50,000 46 203.83 343% Last Update: 5/30/96WT02-B13-115IA088-000637-B006-54http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/carucom/elrio.html 128.120.36.171 19970122195827 text/html 12609HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:59:22 GMTLast-Modified: Sunday, 26-Nov-95 04:08:33 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 12353 El Rio El Rio El Rio El Rio Change 1980 1990 1980-1990 Tract Population 8131 10020 23% %White 69% 52% -17% %Black 1% 1% -1% %Hispanic 54% 67% 13% %Under 18 35% 33% -2% %Over 65 9% 8% -1% %Under 6 13% 12% -1% %Foreign Born 23% 28% 5% Area Population 529,097 14,531,529 2646% Area Foreign Born 67,035 3,944,828 5785% %Area Foreign Born 13% 27% 14% Education (%pop over 25) % 0-8 years 31% 29% -2% % 9-11 years 19% 18% -1% %Completed H.S. 30% 28% -2% %Some College 13% 13% 0% %Bachelors or Graduate Degree 6% 7% 1% Persons over 25 4378 5459 25% H.S. Dropout Rate 28% 36% 7% Labor Market Structure Employed Persons 3303 4347 32% %Operators, Nonfarm Laborers and Service 37% 33% -4% %Professional & Technical 6% 7% 1% %Managers & Administrators 6% 4% -2% %Sales Workers 6% 10% 5% %Clerical 16% 16% 0% %Craft Workers 15% 17% 1% %Operators 17% 17% 0% %Nonfarm Laborers 6% 6% 1% %Service Workers 14% 9% -5% %Farm Workers 15% 14% -1% %Males Working less than 26 weeks 33% 33% 0% Males over 16 2837 3666 29% Poverty And Welfare %Persons in Impoverished Families 11% 14% 3% %Whites in Poverty 10% 13% 3% %Blacks in Poverty 0% 19% %Hispanics in Poverty 13% 16% 4% % Families Receiving Welfare or PA 10% 11% 1% Income Aggregate Income $ 51,747,166 $ 61,563,305 19% Number of Families 19,555 33,574 72% Average Family Income $ 25,059 $ 27,545 10% Aggregate Wage and Salary Income $ 44,884,175 $ 57,467,005 28% Wage & Salary Households 2,004 2,351 17% Average Wage & Salary Income $ 22,397 $ 24,444 9% Aggregate Self-Employed Income $ 4,478,671 $ 4,672,122 4% Self-Employed Households 237 398 68% Average Self-Employed Income $ 18,897 $ 11,739 -38% Aggregate Earned Income $ 49,362,846 $ 62,139,128 26% Earned Income Households 2,080 2,419 16% Average Earned Income $ 23,732 $ 25,688 8% Average Welfare Income per Household $ 3,818 $ 5,235 37% Households Grouped by Income Level Income Under $5,000 109 44 -60% Income of $5,000-9,999 162 164 1% Income of $10,000-14,999 393 124 -68% Income of $15,000-24,999 727 464 -36% Income of $25,000-49,999 449 912 103% Income over $50,000 84 527 527% Last Update: 5/30/96WT02-B13-116IA088-000637-B006-70http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/carucom/fillm.html 128.120.36.171 19970122195834 text/html 12652HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:59:32 GMTLast-Modified: Tuesday, 01-Oct-96 02:27:34 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 12395 Fillmore Fillmore Fillmore Fillmore Change 1980 1990 1980-1990 Tract Population 11888 5481 -54% %White 71% 78% 7% %Black 0% 0% 0% %Hispanic 47% 59% 12% %Under 18 34% 31% -2% %Over 65 12% 11% -1% %Under 6 12% 11% -1% %Foreign Born 23% 26% 3% Area Population 529,097 14,531,529 2646% Area Foreign Born 67,035 3,944,828 5785% %Area Foreign Born 13% 27% 14% Education (%pop over 25) % 0-8 years 31% 26% -5% % 9-11 years 13% 17% 4% %Completed H.S. 32% 23% -9% %Some College 14% 16% 2% %Bachelors or Graduate Degree 9% 10% 1% Persons over 25 6509 3156 -52% H.S. Dropout Rate 24% 15% -10% Labor Market Structure Employed Persons 4866 2478.67 -49% %Operators, Nonfarm Laborers and Service 35% 32% -3% %Professional & Technical 9% 9% -1% %Managers & Administrators 7% 7% 0% %Sales Workers 7% 9% 2% %Clerical 9% 13% 3% %Craft Workers 14% 13% 0% %Operators 15% 14% 0% %Nonfarm Laborers 6% 6% 0% %Service Workers 14% 11% -3% %Farm Workers 19% 17% -2% %Males Working less than 26 weeks 36% 34% -2% Males over 16 4231 2059 -51% Poverty And Welfare %Persons in Impoverished Families 14% 12% -2% %Whites in Poverty 9% 10% 2% %Blacks in Poverty 100% 0% %Hispanics in Poverty 24% 17% -8% % Families Receiving Welfare or PA 13% 11% -2% Income Aggregate Income $ 76,761,329 $ 40,124,469 -48% Number of Families 18,997 37,725 99% Average Family Income $ 25,664 $ 30,806 20% Aggregate Wage and Salary Income $ 61,768,865 $ 32,608,601 -47% Wage & Salary Households 2,800 1,216 -57% Average Wage & Salary Income $ 22,060 $ 26,824 22% Aggregate Self-Employed Income $ 6,241,220 $ 4,692,855 -25% Self-Employed Households 487 307 -37% Average Self-Employed Income $ 12,816 $ 15,294 19% Aggregate Earned Income $ 68,010,085 $ 37,301,457 -45% Earned Income Households 2,950 1,292 -56% Average Earned Income $ 23,054 $ 28,864 25% Average Welfare Income per Household $ 3,123 $ 4,351 39% Households Grouped by Income Level Income Under $5,000 191 23.5 -88% Income of $5,000-9,999 285 52.5 -82% Income of $10,000-14,999 445 105 -76% Income of $15,000-24,999 841 241.33 -71% Income of $25,000-49,999 841 517.5 -38% Income over $50,000 133 362.67 173% Last Update: 5/30/96WT02-B13-117IA088-000637-B006-92http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/carucom/piru.html 128.120.36.171 19970122195843 text/html 12632HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:59:38 GMTLast-Modified: Tuesday, 01-Oct-96 02:28:01 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 12375 Piru Piru Piru Piru Change 1980 1990 1980-1990 Tract Population 1554 5481 253% %White 67% 78% 11% %Black 0% 0% 0% %Hispanic 68% 59% -9% %Under 18 35% 31% -3% %Over 65 9% 11% 2% %Under 6 11% 11% 0% %Foreign Born 24% 26% 2% Area Population 529,097 14,531,529 2646% Area Foreign Born 67,035 3,944,828 5785% %Area Foreign Born 13% 27% 14% Education (%pop over 25) % 0-8 years 39% 26% -12% % 9-11 years 18% 17% -1% %Completed H.S. 29% 23% -6% %Some College 10% 16% 6% %Bachelors or Graduate Degree 4% 10% 6% Persons over 25 866 3156 264% H.S. Dropout Rate 10% 15% 5% Labor Market Structure Employed Persons 613 2478.67 304% %Operators, Nonfarm Laborers and Service 44% 32% -12% %Professional & Technical 3% 9% 6% %Managers & Administrators 5% 7% 2% %Sales Workers 6% 9% 3% %Clerical 10% 13% 3% %Craft Workers 10% 13% 3% %Operators 13% 14% 1% %Nonfarm Laborers 7% 6% -1% %Service Workers 24% 11% -12% %Farm Workers 22% 17% -5% %Males Working less than 26 weeks 40% 34% -6% Males over 16 588 2059 250% Poverty And Welfare %Persons in Impoverished Families 11% 12% 1% %Whites in Poverty 8% 10% 2% %Blacks in Poverty . 0% %Hispanics in Poverty 12% 17% 5% % Families Receiving Welfare or PA 8% 11% 3% Income Aggregate Income $ 7,667,197 $ 40,124,469 423% Number of Families 16,845 37,725 124% Average Family Income $ 20,666 $ 30,806 49% Aggregate Wage and Salary Income $ 6,461,208 $ 32,608,601 405% Wage & Salary Households 340 1,216 258% Average Wage & Salary Income $ 19,004 $ 26,824 41% Aggregate Self-Employed Income $ 857,494 $ 4,692,855 447% Self-Employed Households 70 307 338% Average Self-Employed Income $ 12,250 $ 15,294 25% Aggregate Earned Income $ 7,318,701 $ 37,301,457 410% Earned Income Households 358 1,292 261% Average Earned Income $ 20,443 $ 28,864 41% Average Welfare Income per Household $ 2,190 $ 4,351 99% Households Grouped by Income Level Income Under $5,000 49 23.5 -52% Income of $5,000-9,999 24 52.5 119% Income of $10,000-14,999 66 105 59% Income of $15,000-24,999 157 241.33 54% Income of $25,000-49,999 59 517.5 777% Income over $50,000 0 362.67 #DIV/0! Last Update: 5/30/96WT02-B13-118IA088-000637-B006-111http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/carucom/caruclrm.gif.map 128.120.36.171 19970122195857 text/html 213HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: WebSTARMIME-Version: 1.0Content-type: text/html ERROR: Invalid input parameter! Expected an URL like http://hostname/path/imagemap.cgi$mapname?xcoord,ycoordWT02-B13-119IA088-000637-B006-296http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/hspn-census/summary.htm 128.120.36.171 19970122200118 text/html 5886HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 20:02:14 GMTLast-Modified: Tuesday, 21-Jan-97 21:07:07 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 5630 Summary Summary In 1990, California's total population was 29,760,021. TheHispanic total population in 1990 was 7,687,938, or 26% of thestate's total population. In 1980, California's total population was 23,667,902. TheHispanic total population in 1980 was 4,544,331, or 19% of thestate's total population. California's total population increased by 26% from 1980 to1990. The Hispanic population increased by 69% from 1980 to 1990. The Hispanic population as a percentage of California's totalpopulation increased by 35% from 1980 to 1990. California has 58 counties.Of these 58 counties, 57, or 98% increased in percentage Hispanicfrom 1980 to 1990. Of California's 58 counties, 15 counties, or 26%, had populations that were greater than or equal to 25% Hispanic in 1990. 14 of these 15 counties encompass much of Southern California. See Map. Mono county represents the largest change in Hispanic percentageof the population, with an increase of 140% from 1980 to 1990. In 1990, California had 454 cities. Of the ten cities ranked highest in percentage Hispanicin 1990, 40% were in Los Angeles County, and 30% were in FresnoCounty. Parlier City represents the California city highest in percentageHispanic, with 97% of its population of Hispanic background in1990. In 1990, California had 454 cities.These 454 cities had 23,475,269, or 79%, of the state's totalpopulation of 29,760,021. Of the 23,475,269 total population in the 454 cities in 1990,6,346,990, or 27% were Hispanic. The same 454 cities in 1980 had a total population of 18,357,959.Of these 18,357,959, 3,634,593, or 20% were Hispanic. The total population in these 454 cities increased by 28%from 1980 to 1990. The Hispanic population in these same 454 citiesincreased by 75%. The Hispanic population as a percentage of the total populationin these 454 increased by 37% from 1980 to 1990. Of California's 454 cities, 43 cities,or 9%, had populations greater than 100,000 in 1990. These 43cities included 42% of California's total population, and 6% ofCalifornia's Hispanic population, in 1990. The total Hispanic population in these 43 cities increasedfrom 45% in 1980 to 47% of California's total population in 1990.The total population in these 43 cities remained at 42% of California'stotal population. 42 of these 43 cities, or 98%, increased in percentage Hispanicfrom 1980 to 1990. The total Hispanic population in 1980 was 19% of the state'stotal population. In 1990 it was 26% of the state's total population.For cities with populations greater than 100,000, Hispanic populationwas 20% of their total population in 1980, and 29% of their totalpopulation in 1990. Of California's 454 cities, 76 cities,or 17%, had populations greater than or equal to 50,000 and lessthan 100,000 in 1990. These 76 cities included 18% of California'stotal population, and 18% of California's Hispanic population,in 1990. The total Hispanic population in these 76 cities stayed at18% of the total population from 1980 to 1990. The total populationin these 76 cities increased from 17% to 18% of California's totalpopulation. 70 of these 76 cities, or 92%, increased in percentage Hispanicfrom 1980 to 1990. For cities with populations greater than or equal to 50,000and less than 100,000, Hispanic population was 20% of their totalpopulation in 1980, and 26% of their total population in 1990. Of California's 454 cities, 99 cities,or 22%, had populations greater than or equal to 25,000 and lessthan 50,000 in 1990. These 99 cities included 9% of California'stotal population, and 5% of California's Hispanic population,in 1990. The total Hispanic population in these 99 cities increasedfrom 4% to 5% of the total population from 1980 to 1990. The totalpopulation in these 99 cities increased from 4% to 9% of California'stotal population. 93 of these 99 cities, or 94%, increased in percentage Hispanicfrom 1980 to 1990. For cities with populations greater than or equal to 25,000and less than 50,000, Hispanic population was 10% of their totalpopulation in 1980, and 14% of their total population in 1990. Of California's 454 cities, 236 cities,or 52%, had populations less than 25,000 in 1990. These 236 citiesincluded 7% of California's total population, and 8% of California'sHispanic population, in 1990. The total Hispanic population in these 236 cities remainedat 8% of the total population from 1980 to 1990. The total populationin these 236 cities remained at 8% of California's total population. 214 of these 236 cities, or 89%, increased in percentage Hispanicfrom 1980 to 1990. For cities with populations less than 25,000, Hispanic populationwas 21% of their total population in 1980, and 27% of their totalpopulation in 1990. Source: California Dept. of Finance, State Census Data Center Last Updated: 7/2/96 UC Davis Research Assistant Patrick Ramsey Html Authoring: Wayne YoungWT02-B13-120IA088-000637-B007-21http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/hspn-census/cntyhspn.htm 128.120.36.171 19970122200129 text/html 18082HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 20:02:25 GMTLast-Modified: Tuesday, 21-Jan-97 21:07:07 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 17825 Sorted by percent Hispanic 1990 County Total Population 1980 Hispanic:Total 1980 1980 % Hispanic Total Population 1990 Hispanic: Total 1990 1990 % Hispanic Imperial County 92110 51384 56% 109303 71935 66% San Benito County 25005 11430 46% 36697 16800 46% Tulare County 245738 73298 30% 311921 120893 39% Los Angeles County 7477503 2066103 28% 8863164 3351242 38% Fresno County 514621 150790 29% 667490 236634 35% Madera County 63116 16916 27% 88090 30400 35% Kings County 73738 19827 27% 101469 34551 34% Monterey County 290444 75129 26% 355660 119570 34% Colusa County 12791 2493 19% 16275 5424 33% Merced County 134560 34054 25% 178403 58107 33% Kern County 403089 87026 22% 543477 151995 28% San Bernardino County 895016 165863 19% 1418380 378582 27% Santa Barbara County 298694 55356 19% 369608 98199 27% Ventura County 529174 113192 21% 669016 176952 26% Riverside County 663166 124417 19% 1170413 307514 26% San Joaquin County 347342 66565 19% 480628 112673 23% Orange County 1932709 286339 15% 2410556 564828 23% Stanislaus County 265900 39889 15% 370522 80897 22% Santa Clara County 1295071 226611 17% 1497577 314564 21% San Diego County 1861846 275177 15% 2498016 510781 20% Santa Cruz County 188141 27648 15% 229734 46797 20% Glenn County 21350 2532 12% 24798 4958 20% Yolo County 113374 19342 17% 141092 28182 20% San Mateo County 587329 73339 12% 649623 114627 18% Sutter County 52246 6098 12% 64415 10592 16% Napa County 99199 8636 9% 110765 15941 14% Alameda County 1105379 129962 12% 1279182 181805 14% San Francisco County 678974 83373 12% 723959 100717 14% Solano County 235203 24773 11% 340421 45517 13% San Luis Obispo County 155435 14792 10% 217162 28923 13% Sacramento County 783381 74141 9% 1041219 121544 12% Yuba County 49733 4367 9% 58228 6728 12% Contra Costa County 656380 55820 9% 803732 91282 11% Mono County 8577 405 5% 9956 1126 11% Sonoma County 299681 20824 7% 388222 41223 11% Lassen County 21661 1417 7% 27598 2883 10% Tehama County 38888 2127 5% 49625 5124 10% Del Norte County 18217 1018 6% 23460 2414 10% Mendocino County 66738 3688 6% 80345 8248 10% Inyo County 17895 1084 6% 18281 1536 8% Amador County 19314 917 5% 30039 2520 8% Placer County 117247 8211 7% 172796 13871 8% Marin County 222568 9204 4% 230096 17930 8% Tuolumne County 33928 1781 5% 48456 3726 8% Butte County 143851 7542 5% 182120 13606 7% Modoc County 8610 356 4% 9678 701 7% Lake County 36366 1882 5% 50631 3633 7% El Dorado County 85812 3971 5% 125995 8777 7% Alpine County 1097 42 4% 1113 74 7% Siskiyou County 39732 1891 5% 43531 2549 6% Sierra County 3073 196 6% 3318 184 6% Calaveras County 20710 911 4% 31998 1714 5% Mariposa County 11108 504 5% 14302 697 5% Plumas County 17340 636 4% 19739 907 5% Humboldt County 108514 3736 3% 119118 4989 4% Nevada County 51645 1532 3% 78510 3269 4% Shasta County 115715 3455 3% 147036 5652 4% Trinity County 11858 319 3% 13063 431 3%WT02-B13-121IA088-000637-B007-38http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/hspn-census/cntychng.htm 128.120.36.171 19970122200143 text/html 20403HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 20:02:35 GMTLast-Modified: Tuesday, 21-Jan-97 21:07:07 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 20146 Sorted by change in percent Hispanic 1980-90 County Total Population 1980 Hispanic: Total 1980 1980 % Hispanic Total Population 1990 Hispanic: Total 1990 1990 % Hispanic % Change 1980-90 Mono County 8577 405 4.72% 9956 1126 11.31% 140% Tehama County 38888 2127 5.47% 49625 5124 10.33% 89% Marin County 222568 9204 4.14% 230096 17930 7.79% 88% Mendocino County 66738 3688 5.53% 80345 8248 10.27% 86% Del Norte County 18217 1018 5.59% 23460 2414 10.29% 84% Amador County 19314 917 4.75% 30039 2520 8.39% 77% Modoc County 8610 356 4.13% 9678 701 7.24% 75% Alpine County 1097 42 3.83% 1113 74 6.65% 74% Colusa County 12791 2493 19.49% 16275 5424 33.33% 71% Glenn County 21350 2532 11.86% 24798 4958 19.99% 69% Napa County 99199 8636 8.71% 110765 15941 14.39% 65.31% Lassen County 21661 1417 6.54% 27598 2883 10.45% 59.69% Orange County 1932709 286339 14.82% 2410556 564828 23.43% 58.16% Sonoma County 299681 20824 6.95% 388222 41223 10.62% 52.81% El Dorado County 85812 3971 4.63% 125995 8777 6.97% 50.54% Tuolumne County 33928 1781 5.25% 48456 3726 7.69% 46.48% Stanislaus County 265900 39889 15.00% 370522 80897 21.83% 45.54% San Bernardino County 895016 165863 18.53% 1418380 378582 26.69% 44.03% Santa Barbara County 298694 55356 18.53% 369608 98199 26.57% 43.36% Butte County 143851 7542 5.24% 182120 13606 7.47% 42.49% San Mateo County 587329 73339 12.49% 649623 114627 17.65% 41.31% Sutter County 52246 6098 11.67% 64415 10592 16.44% 40.88% Nevada County 51645 1532 2.97% 78510 3269 4.16% 40.37% Riverside County 663166 124417 18.76% 1170413 307514 26.27% 40.05% San Luis Obispo County 155435 14792 9.52% 217162 28923 13.32% 39.95% Inyo County 17895 1084 6.06% 18281 1536 8.40% 38.71% Lake County 36366 1882 5.18% 50631 3633 7.18% 38.65% Santa Cruz County 188141 27648 14.70% 229734 46797 20.37% 38.62% San Diego County 1861846 275177 14.78% 2498016 510781 20.45% 38.35% Los Angeles County 7477503 2066103 27.63% 8863164 3351242 37.81% 36.84% Contra Costa County 656380 55820 8.50% 803732 91282 11.36% 33.55% Yuba County 49733 4367 8.78% 58228 6728 11.55% 31.59% Monterey County 290444 75129 25.87% 355660 119570 33.62% 29.97% Tulare County 245738 73298 29.83% 311921 120893 38.76% 29.94% Kern County 403089 87026 21.59% 543477 151995 27.97% 29.54% Madera County 63116 16916 26.80% 88090 30400 34.51% 28.76% Shasta County 115715 3455 2.99% 147036 5652 3.84% 28.74% Merced County 134560 34054 25.31% 178403 58107 32.57% 28.70% Solano County 235203 24773 10.53% 340421 45517 13.37% 26.95% Kings County 73738 19827 26.89% 101469 34551 34.05% 26.64% Plumas County 17340 636 3.67% 19739 907 4.59% 25.28% Ventura County 529174 113192 21.39% 669016 176952 26.45% 23.65% Sacramento County 783381 74141 9.46% 1041219 121544 11.67% 23.34% Siskiyou County 39732 1891 4.76% 43531 2549 5.86% 23.03% Trinity County 11858 319 2.69% 13063 431 3.30% 22.65% San Joaquin County 347342 66565 19.16% 480628 112673 23.44% 22.33% Calaveras County 20710 911 4.40% 31998 1714 5.36% 21.77% Humboldt County 108514 3736 3.44% 119118 4989 4.19% 21.65% Fresno County 514621 150790 29.30% 667490 236634 35.45% 20.99% Alameda County 1105379 129962 11.76% 1279182 181805 14.21% 20.88% Santa Clara County 1295071 226611 17.50% 1497577 314564 21.00% 20.04% Imperial County 92110 51384 55.79% 109303 71935 65.81% 17.97% Yolo County 113374 19342 17.06% 141092 28182 19.97% 17.08% Placer County 117247 8211 7.00% 172796 13871 8.03% 14.63% San Francisco County 678974 83373 12.28% 723959 100717 13.91% 13.30% Mariposa County 11108 504 4.54% 14302 697 4.87% 7.41% San Benito County 25005 11430 45.71% 36697 16800 45.78% 0.15% Sierra County 3073 196 6.38% 3318 184 5.55% -13.05%WT02-B13-122IA088-000637-B007-62http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/hspn-census/cityhspn.htm 128.120.36.171 19970122200202 text/html 575HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 20:02:58 GMTLast-Modified: Tuesday, 21-Jan-97 21:07:07 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 320 Cities sorted by percent Hispanic in 1990. 1-100 101-200 201-300 301-400 400-454WT02-B13-123IA088-000637-B007-88http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/hspn-census/citychng.htm 128.120.36.171 19970122200236 text/html 590HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 20:03:15 GMTLast-Modified: Tuesday, 21-Jan-97 21:07:07 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 335 1-100 Cities sorted by percent change from 1980 to 1990. 1-100 101-200 201-300 301-400 400-454WT02-B13-124IA088-000637-B007-118http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/hspn-census/city100+.htm 128.120.36.171 19970122200258 text/html 17222HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 20:03:54 GMTLast-Modified: Tuesday, 21-Jan-97 21:07:07 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 16965 California cities sorted by percentage Hispanic: 1990 Cities >= 100,000 people California 23,667,902 4,544,331 19% 29,760,021 7,687,938 26% 35% City Total Population 1980 Hispanic: Total 1980 1980 % Hispanic Total Population 1990 Hispanic: Total 1990 1990 % Hispanic Percentage Change from 1980-90 El Monte city 79,494 48,782 61% 106,209 76,991 72% 18% Santa Ana city 203,713 90,646 44% 293,742 191,383 65% 46% Oxnard city 108,195 48,034 44% 142,216 77,320 54% 22% Pomona city 92,742 28,287 31% 131,723 67,533 51% 68% Salinas city 80,479 30,655 38% 108,777 55,084 51% 33% Ontario city 88,820 24,072 27% 133,179 55,542 42% 54% Los Angeles city 2,966,850 816,076 28% 3,485,398 1,391,411 40% 45% Inglewood city 94,245 18,060 19% 109,602 42,249 39% 101% Chula Vista city 83,927 19,624 23% 135,163 50,376 37% 59% San Bernardino city 117,490 29,858 25% 164,164 56,755 35% 36% Anaheim city 219,311 37,676 17% 266,406 83,755 31% 83% Fresno city 218,202 51,489 24% 354,202 105,787 30% 27% Pasadena city 118,550 21,772 18% 131,591 35,912 27% 49% San Jose city 629,442 140,529 22% 782,248 208,388 27% 19% Riverside city 170,876 27,604 16% 226,505 58,826 26% 61% Stockton city 149,779 33,050 22% 210,943 52,653 25% 13% Hayward city 94,167 19,029 20% 111,498 26,671 24% 18% Long Beach city 361,334 50,700 14% 429,433 101,419 24% 68% Garden Grove city 123,307 16,589 13% 143,050 33,579 23% 74% Escondido city 64,355 9,378 15% 108,635 25,380 23% 60% Moreno Valley city 1,175 196 17% 118,779 27,165 23% 37% Orange city 91,788 11,372 12% 110,658 25,278 23% 84% Oceanside city 76,698 14,118 18% 128,398 28,982 23% 23% Fullerton city 102,034 13,801 14% 114,144 24,304 21% 57% Glendale city 139,060 24,685 18% 180,038 37,731 21% 18% San Diego city 875,538 130,613 15% 1,110,549 229,519 21% 39% Bakersfield city 105,611 15,886 15% 174,820 35,854 21% 36% Rancho Cucamonga city 55,250 9,019 16% 101,409 20,298 20% 23% Modesto city 106,602 11,180 10% 164,730 26,920 16% 56% Sacramento city 275,741 39,161 14% 369,365 60,007 16% 14% San Francisco city 678,974 83,373 12% 723,959 100,717 14% 13% Oakland city 339,337 32,492 10% 372,242 51,711 14% 45% Fremont city 131,945 18,423 14% 173,339 23,091 13% -5% Sunnyvale city 106,618 12,288 12% 117,229 15,444 13% 14% Simi Valley city 77,500 7,219 9% 100,217 12,707 13% 36% Concord city 103,255 7,438 7% 111,348 12,765 11% 59% Huntington Beach city 170,505 13,427 8% 181,519 20,397 11% 43% Vallejo city 80,303 6,823 8% 109,199 11,777 11% 27% Torrance city 129,881 10,839 8% 133,107 13,398 10% 21% Thousand Oaks city 77,072 4,469 6% 104,352 10,019 10% 66% Santa Rosa city 83,320 4,697 6% 113,313 10,727 9% 68% Berkeley city 103,328 5,219 5% 102,724 8,589 8% 66% Irvine city 62,134 3,752 6% 110,330 6,902 6% 4% TOTAL: 10,038,947 2,042,400 20% 12,600,452 3,611,316 29% 41% Number of California Cities with Populations �100,000 Percentage of California's total population: Percentage of California's total Hispanic population: Percentage of California's Cities with Populations �100,000 Percentage of California's total population: Percentage of California's total Hispanic population: 43 42% 45% 9% 42% 47% WT02-B13-125IA088-000637-B007-148http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/hspn-census/city100.htm 128.120.36.171 19970122200310 text/html 27792HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 20:04:03 GMTLast-Modified: Tuesday, 21-Jan-97 21:07:07 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 27535 California cities sorted by percentage Hispanic: 1990 Cities >= 50,000 and < 1,000,000 people California 23,667,902 4,544,331 19% 29,760,021 7,687,938 26% 35% City Total Population 1980 Hispanic: Total 1980 1980 % Hispanic Total Population 1990 Hispanic: Total 1990 1990 % Hispanic Percentage Change from 1980-90 Huntington Park city 46,223 37,328 81% 56,065 51,496 92% 14% Pico Rivera city 53,459 40,705 76% 59,177 49,237 83% 9% South Gate city 66,784 38,969 58% 86,284 71,727 83% 42% Baldwin Park city 50,554 29,363 58% 69,330 49,051 71% 22% Lynwood city 48,548 20,990 43% 61,945 43,565 70% 63% Montebello city 52,929 31,387 59% 59,564 40,263 68% 14% Rosemead city 42,604 24,453 57% 51,638 25,641 50% -13% National City city 48,772 18,708 38% 54,249 26,914 50% 29% Norwalk city 85,286 34,231 40% 94,279 45,118 48% 19% Santa Maria city 39,685 13,281 33% 61,284 28,014 46% 37% Compton city 81,286 17,137 21% 90,454 39,510 44% 107% Whittier city 69,717 16,279 23% 77,671 30,278 39% 67% Chino city 40,165 10,733 27% 59,682 21,588 36% 35% Fontana city 37,111 6,905 19% 87,535 31,597 36% 94% Alhambra city 64,615 24,287 38% 82,106 29,626 36% -4% West Covina city 80,291 16,854 21% 96,086 33,253 35% 65% La Habra city 45,232 10,052 22% 51,266 17,395 34% 53% Downey city 82,602 13,910 17% 91,444 29,569 32% 92% Rialto city 37,474 7,056 19% 72,388 22,787 31% 67% Santa Barbara city 74,414 16,500 22% 85,571 26,920 31% 42% Monterey Park city 54,338 21,079 39% 60,738 19,031 31% -19% Hawthorne city 56,447 11,636 21% 71,349 22,219 31% 51% Corona city 37,791 10,416 28% 76,095 23,101 30% 10% Merced city 36,499 10,291 28% 56,216 16,786 30% 6% Carson city 81,221 18,926 23% 83,995 23,413 28% 20% South San Francisco city 49,393 10,953 22% 54,312 14,731 27% 22% Visalia city 49,729 9,538 19% 75,636 19,005 25% 31% Union City city 39,406 11,008 28% 53,762 13,484 25% -10% Vista city 35,834 6,163 17% 71,872 17,804 25% 44% Buena Park city 64,165 11,386 18% 68,784 16,879 25% 38% Redwood City city 54,951 8,617 16% 66,072 15,935 24% 54% Bellflower city 53,441 7,934 15% 61,815 14,776 24% 61% Burbank city 84,625 13,761 16% 93,643 21,172 23% 39% Daly City city 78,519 15,134 19% 92,311 20,634 22% 16% Palmdale city 12,277 1,147 9% 68,842 15,154 22% 136% Tustin city 32,317 2,826 9% 50,689 10,508 21% 137% Costa Mesa city 82,562 8,475 10% 96,357 19,319 20% 95% Westminster city 71,133 8,542 12% 78,118 14,896 19% 59% Hesperia city 13,540 1,011 7% 50,418 9,573 19% 154% Redlands city 43,619 7,373 17% 60,394 11,450 19% 12% Milpitas city 37,820 6,541 17% 50,686 9,434 19% 8% San Buenaventura (Ventura) cit 74,393 8,970 12% 92,575 16,251 18% 46% Upland city 47,647 5,741 12% 63,374 11,115 18% 46% Diamond Bar city 28,045 3,937 14% 53,672 9,136 17% 21% Lodi city 35,221 3,525 10% 51,874 8,766 17% 69% Clovis city 33,021 4,334 13% 50,323 8,206 16% 24% Mountain View city 58,655 6,713 11% 67,460 10,821 16% 40% Vacaville city 43,367 5,182 12% 71,479 11,366 16% 33% Antioch city 42,683 5,958 14% 62,195 9,719 16% 12% San Mateo city 77,561 7,160 9% 85,486 13,235 15% 68% Encinitas city 10,796 1,340 12% 55,386 8,446 15% 23% Napa city 50,879 4,165 8% 61,842 9,425 15% 86% Santa Clara city 87,746 12,865 15% 93,613 14,260 15% 4% Lancaster city 48,027 3,435 7% 97,291 14,816 15% 113% San Leandro city 63,952 8,323 13% 68,223 10,363 15% 17% Lakewood city 74,654 8,630 12% 73,557 10,763 15% 27% Richmond city 74,676 7,713 10% 87,425 12,690 15% 41% Santa Monica city 88,314 11,485 13% 86,905 12,210 14% 8% El Cajon city 73,892 5,862 8% 88,693 12,387 14% 76% Carlsbad city 35,490 4,790 13% 63,126 8,700 14% 2% Fairfield city 58,099 5,746 10% 77,211 10,208 13% 34% Cerritos city 53,020 7,532 14% 53,240 6,666 13% -12% Camarillo city 37,797 3,803 10% 52,303 6,326 12% 20% Redondo Beach city 57,102 6,542 11% 60,167 6,917 11% 0% Santee city 47,080 3,448 7% 52,902 5,685 11% 47% Livermore city 48,349 3,843 8% 56,741 5,587 10% 24% La Mesa city 50,308 3,177 6% 52,931 5,176 10% 55% Yorba Linda city 28,254 2,319 8% 52,422 4,948 9% 15% Alameda city 63,852 5,342 8% 76,459 6,950 9% 9% Fountain Valley city 55,080 3,738 7% 53,691 4,357 8% 20% Mission Viejo city 50,666 2,839 6% 72,820 5,615 8% 38% Pleasanton city 35,160 2,233 6% 50,553 3,383 7% 5% Palo Alto city 55,225 2,091 4% 55,900 2,792 5% 32% Walnut Creek city 53,643 1,778 3% 60,569 2,869 5% 43% Newport Beach city 62,556 1,701 3% 66,643 2,648 4% 46% Redding city 41,995 1,174 3% 66,462 2,632 4% 42% TOTAL: 4,064,583 809,319 20% 5,225,635 1,358,287 26% 31% Number of California Cities with Populations �50,000 and <100,000: Percentage of California's total population: Percentage of California's total Hispanic population: Percentage of California's Cities with Populations �50,000 and <100,000: Percentage of California's total population: Percentage of California's total Hispanic population: 76 17% 18% 17% 18% 18% WT02-B13-126IA088-000637-B007-174http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/hspn-census/city50.htm 128.120.36.171 19970122200323 text/html 34957HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 20:04:17 GMTLast-Modified: Tuesday, 21-Jan-97 21:07:07 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 34700 California cities sorted by percentage Hispanic: 1990 Cities >= 25,000 and < 50,000 people California 23,667,902 4,544,331 19% 29,760,021 7,687,938 26% 35% City Total Population 1980 Hispanic: Total 1980 1980 % Hispanic Total Population 1990 Hispanic: Total 1990 1990 % Hispanic Percentage Change from 1980-90 Maywood city 21,810 17,546 80% 27,850 25,931 93% 16% Bell Gardens city 34,117 21,932 64% 42,355 37,075 88% 36% Bell city 25,450 16,028 63% 34,365 29,583 86% 37% La Puente city 30,882 19,291 62% 36,955 27,663 75% 20% Indio city 21,611 12,152 56% 36,793 25,068 68% 21% El Centro city 23,996 11,983 50% 31,384 20,482 65% 31% Watsonville city 23,543 11,509 49% 31,099 18,927 61% 24% Paramount city 36,407 16,808 46% 47,669 28,998 61% 32% Santa Paula city 20,552 10,376 50% 25,062 14,753 59% 17% Madera city 21,732 9,033 42% 29,281 15,759 54% 29% Azusa city 29,380 12,437 42% 41,333 22,092 53% 26% Colton city 21,310 11,925 56% 40,213 20,000 50% -11% Gilroy city 21,641 9,760 45% 31,487 14,885 47% 5% Montclair city 22,628 4,541 20% 28,434 10,849 38% 90% Cathedral City city 4,130 1,116 27% 30,085 11,197 37% 38% San Gabriel city 30,072 11,477 38% 37,120 13,471 36% -5% Porterville city 19,707 4,865 25% 29,563 10,299 35% 41% Lawndale city 23,460 6,664 28% 27,331 9,359 34% 21% Tulare city 22,526 6,290 28% 33,249 11,250 34% 21% Stanton city 23,723 4,857 20% 30,491 10,209 33% 64% Hanford city 20,958 5,046 24% 30,897 9,131 30% 23% Monrovia city 30,531 5,595 18% 35,761 10,177 28% 55% Imperial Beach city 22,689 4,831 21% 26,512 7,502 28% 33% San Marcos city 17,479 2,233 13% 38,974 10,702 27% 115% Lompoc city 26,267 4,796 18% 37,649 10,100 27% 47% San Pablo city 19,750 3,356 17% 25,158 6,737 27% 58% Woodland city 30,235 6,850 23% 39,802 10,413 26% 15% La Mirada city 40,986 7,714 19% 40,452 10,459 26% 37% Covina city 33,751 4,285 13% 43,207 11,042 26% 101% Placentia city 35,041 7,121 20% 41,259 10,174 25% 21% West Sacramento city 10,875 1,261 12% 28,898 7,060 24% 111% Tracy city 18,428 4,889 27% 33,558 8,145 24% -9% Pittsburg city 33,034 6,204 19% 47,564 11,288 24% 26% Walnut city 12,478 2,562 21% 29,105 6,836 23% 14% Gardena city 45,165 7,736 17% 49,847 11,506 23% 35% Victorville city 14,220 2,282 16% 40,674 9,353 23% 43% Newark city 32,126 6,619 21% 37,861 8,672 23% 11% Highland city 10,908 1,401 13% 34,439 7,839 23% 77% Ceres city 13,281 1,768 13% 26,314 5,960 23% 70% Moorpark city 4,030 2,152 53% 25,494 5,613 22% -59% San Juan Capistrano city 18,959 2,049 11% 26,183 5,703 22% 102% Turlock city 26,287 3,726 14% 42,198 8,849 21% 48% Culver City city 38,139 6,428 17% 38,793 7,667 20% 17% Temple City city 28,972 3,740 13% 31,100 5,862 19% 46% Palm Springs city 32,271 2,894 9% 40,181 7,504 19% 108% San Bruno city 35,417 5,096 14% 38,961 7,252 19% 29% La Verne city 23,508 3,702 16% 30,897 5,675 18% 17% Yuba City city 18,736 1,773 9% 27,437 4,905 18% 89% Manteca city 24,925 3,369 14% 40,773 7,241 18% 31% Seaside city 36,567 3,646 10% 38,901 6,787 17% 75% San Dimas city 24,014 3,128 13% 32,397 5,612 17% 33% Brea city 27,913 3,234 12% 32,873 5,078 15% 33% Glendora city 38,654 3,479 9% 47,828 7,250 15% 68% Hemet city 22,454 1,624 7% 36,094 5,383 15% 106% Temecula city 1,783 245 14% 27,099 3,939 15% 6% San Rafael city 44,700 2,135 5% 48,404 6,951 14% 201% Dana Point city 10,602 979 9% 31,896 4,425 14% 50% Santa Cruz city 41,483 3,623 9% 49,040 6,662 14% 56% Pacifica city 36,866 4,825 13% 37,670 5,099 14% 3% Cypress city 40,391 4,417 11% 42,655 5,765 14% 24% San Clemente city 27,325 2,296 8% 41,100 5,285 13% 53% Apple Valley town 14,305 802 6% 46,079 5,813 13% 125% Yucaipa city 23,345 1,323 6% 32,824 3,609 11% 94% Folsom city 11,003 652 6% 29,802 3,245 11% 84% Roseville city 24,347 3,009 12% 44,685 4,825 11% -13% Marina city 20,647 2,038 10% 26,436 2,837 11% 9% Arcadia city 45,994 3,164 7% 48,290 5,146 11% 55% Campbell city 27,067 2,255 8% 36,048 3,839 11% 28% Claremont city 30,950 2,281 7% 32,503 3,334 10% 39% Burlingame city 26,173 1,622 6% 26,801 2,731 10% 64% Menlo Park city 26,369 1,529 6% 28,040 2,710 10% 67% San Luis Obispo city 34,252 2,233 7% 41,958 3,951 9% 44% Petaluma city 33,834 2,012 6% 43,184 3,985 9% 55% Rohnert Park city 22,965 1,601 7% 36,326 3,247 9% 28% West Hollywood city 35,703 2,006 6% 36,118 3,153 9% 55% Chico city 26,603 1,476 6% 40,079 3,484 9% 57% Martinez city 22,582 1,734 8% 31,808 2,676 8% 10% Coronado city 16,859 782 5% 26,540 2,191 8% 78% Ridgecrest city 15,929 741 5% 27,725 2,198 8% 70% Monterey city 27,558 1,663 6% 31,954 2,495 8% 29% Laguna Niguel city 12,237 511 4% 44,400 3,451 8% 86% Davis city 36,640 2,051 6% 46,209 3,425 7% 32% Novato city 43,916 2,045 5% 47,585 3,460 7% 56% Poway city 32,263 1,686 5% 43,516 3,023 7% 33% Pleasant Hill city 25,124 1,400 6% 31,585 2,099 7% 19% San Carlos city 24,710 1,367 6% 26,167 1,691 6% 17% San Ramon city 22,356 1,190 5% 35,303 2,064 6% 10% Foster City city 23,287 1,472 6% 28,176 1,627 6% -9% Beverly Hills city 32,367 1,356 4% 31,971 1,725 5% 29% Rancho Palos Verdes city 36,577 1,085 3% 41,659 2,215 5% 79% Manhattan Beach city 31,542 1,365 4% 32,063 1,645 5% 19% Los Gatos town 26,906 1,157 4% 27,357 1,367 5% 16% Seal Beach city 25,975 910 4% 25,098 1,253 5% 43% Cupertino city 34,015 1,477 4% 40,263 1,986 5% 14% Eureka city 24,153 1,003 4% 27,025 1,298 5% 16% Danville city 26,446 832 3% 31,306 1,288 4% 31% Paradise town 22,571 614 3% 25,408 874 3% 26% Saratoga city 29,261 805 3% 28,061 940 3% 22% Los Altos city 25,769 708 3% 26,303 795 3% 10% TOTAL: 2,020,620 195,594 10% 2,709,390 382,488 14% 46% Number of California Cities with Populations �25,000 and <50,000: Percentage of California's total population: Percentage of California's total Hispanic population: Percentage of California's Cities with Populations �25,000 and <50,000: Percentage of California's total population: Percentage of California's total Hispanic population: 99 9% 4% 22% 9% 5% WT02-B13-127IA088-000637-B007-204http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/hspn-census/city25-1.htm 128.120.36.171 19970122200335 text/html 38902HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 20:04:29 GMTLast-Modified: Tuesday, 21-Jan-97 21:07:07 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 38645 California cities sorted by percentage Hispanic: 1990 Cities <= 25,000 people California 23,667,902 4,544,331 19% 29,760,021 7,687,938 26% 35% City Total Population 1980 Hispanic: Total 1980 1980 % Hispanic Total Population 1990 Hispanic: Total 1990 1990 % Hispanic Percentage Change from 1980-90 Parlier city 2,902 2,641 91% 7,938 7,707 97% 7% Huron city 2,768 2,528 91% 4,766 4,597 96% 6% Calexico city 14,412 13,566 94% 18,633 17,806 96% 2% Coachella city 9,129 8,148 89% 16,896 16,107 95% 7% Mendota city 5,038 4,266 85% 6,821 6,405 94% 11% Commerce city 10,509 8,937 85% 12,135 11,006 91% 7% Soledad city 5,928 4,906 83% 7,146 6,394 89% 8% Cudahy city 17,984 12,508 70% 22,817 20,288 89% 28% Orange Cove city 4,026 2,905 72% 5,604 4,820 86% 19% Irwindale city 1,030 897 87% 1,050 899 86% -2% South El Monte city 16,623 12,927 78% 20,850 17,633 85% 9% Guadalupe city 3,629 2,711 75% 5,479 4,546 83% 11% McFarland city 5,151 3,904 76% 7,005 5,809 83% 9% San Fernando city 17,731 12,219 69% 22,580 18,683 83% 20% Gonzales city 2,891 1,968 68% 4,660 3,828 82% 21% Firebaugh city 3,740 2,607 70% 4,429 3,573 81% 16% Vernon city 90 41 46% 152 119 78% 72% Greenfield city 4,181 2,781 67% 7,464 5,763 77% 16% San Joaquin city 1,930 1,161 60% 2,311 1,743 75% 25% Arvin city 6,863 3,973 58% 9,286 6,960 75% 29% Woodlake city 4,343 2,811 65% 5,678 4,238 75% 15% Calipatria city 2,636 1,762 67% 2,690 1,995 74% 11% Livingston city 5,326 3,253 61% 7,317 5,354 73% 20% Sanger city 12,542 8,251 66% 16,839 12,269 73% 11% Westmorland city 1,590 1,051 66% 1,380 997 72% 9% Brawley city 14,946 8,688 58% 18,923 13,076 69% 19% Santa Fe Springs city 14,520 8,745 60% 15,520 10,456 67% 12% King City city 5,495 2,673 49% 7,634 5,091 67% 37% Hawaiian Gardens city 10,548 5,516 52% 13,639 9,078 67% 27% Lindsay city 6,924 3,228 47% 8,338 5,410 65% 39% Wasco city 9,613 4,619 48% 12,412 7,858 63% 32% Holtville city 4,399 2,092 48% 4,820 3,011 62% 31% Delano city 16,491 9,464 57% 22,762 14,214 62% 9% Selma city 10,942 5,413 49% 14,757 9,043 61% 24% Dinuba city 9,907 4,818 49% 12,743 7,693 60% 24% Fillmore city 9,602 4,602 48% 11,992 7,111 59% 24% Fowler city 2,496 1,206 48% 3,208 1,874 58% 21% Farmersville city 5,544 2,310 42% 6,235 3,636 58% 40% Reedley city 11,071 4,988 45% 15,791 9,196 58% 29% Hollister city 11,488 6,305 55% 19,212 10,786 56% 2% Avenal city 4,137 1,863 45% 9,770 5,224 53% 19% Imperial city 3,451 1,229 36% 4,113 2,176 53% 49% Kerman city 4,002 1,494 37% 5,448 2,871 53% 41% Corcoran city 6,454 3,334 52% 13,364 6,919 52% 0% Industry city 664 220 33% 631 319 51% 53% Shafter city 7,010 2,298 33% 8,409 4,179 50% 52% Patterson city 3,908 2,051 52% 8,626 4,156 48% -8% Blythe city 6,805 2,711 40% 8,428 3,909 46% 16% San Juan Bautista city 1,276 587 46% 1,570 714 45% -1% Newman city 2,785 855 31% 4,151 1,784 43% 40% Riverbank city 5,695 2,010 35% 8,547 3,619 42% 20% Williams city 1,655 312 19% 2,297 970 42% 124% Dos Palos city 3,123 779 25% 4,196 1,706 41% 63% Winters city 2,652 976 37% 4,639 1,868 40% 9% Avalon city 2,022 484 24% 2,918 1,170 40% 68% Artesia city 14,301 4,961 35% 15,464 6,194 40% 15% Lathrop city 3,717 1,176 32% 6,841 2,568 38% 19% Live Oak city 3,103 807 26% 4,320 1,606 37% 43% Carpinteria city 10,835 3,330 31% 13,747 5,026 37% 19% East Palo Alto city 18,191 2,568 14% 23,451 8,527 36% 158% Los Banos city 10,341 2,560 25% 14,519 5,218 36% 45% Perris city 6,827 2,008 29% 21,460 7,704 36% 22% Hughson city 2,943 792 27% 3,259 1,161 36% 32% Duarte city 16,766 5,039 30% 20,688 7,160 35% 15% Colma town 395 99 25% 1,103 375 34% 36% San Jacinto city 7,098 2,110 30% 16,210 5,455 34% 13% Colusa city 4,075 798 20% 4,934 1,580 32% 64% Brentwood city 4,434 1,753 40% 7,563 2,405 32% -20% Coalinga city 6,593 1,073 16% 8,212 2,593 32% 94% Kingsburg city 5,115 1,219 24% 7,205 2,265 31% 32% Barstow city 17,690 5,278 30% 21,472 6,726 31% 5% Sand City city 182 30 16% 192 59 31% 86% Port Hueneme city 17,803 4,035 23% 20,319 6,063 30% 32% Tulelake city 783 131 17% 1,010 294 29% 74% Dixon city 7,541 2,001 27% 10,401 2,958 28% 7% Gridley city 3,982 683 17% 4,631 1,219 26% 53% La Quinta city 3,328 516 16% 11,215 2,944 26% 69% Exeter city 5,606 914 16% 7,276 1,893 26% 60% Lake Elsinore city 5,982 1,074 18% 18,285 4,757 26% 45% Lincoln city 4,132 1,208 29% 7,248 1,796 25% -15% Galt city 5,514 1,091 20% 8,889 2,187 25% 24% Calistoga city 3,879 698 18% 4,468 1,098 25% 37% Waterford city 2,683 311 12% 4,771 1,152 24% 108% Beaumont city 6,818 1,344 20% 9,685 2,323 24% 22% Point Arena city 425 17 4% 407 96 24% 490% Morgan Hill city 17,060 4,112 24% 23,928 5,594 23% -3% Banning city 14,020 2,562 18% 20,570 4,776 23% 27% Half Moon Bay city 7,282 775 11% 8,886 1,978 22% 109% Ione city 2,207 231 10% 6,516 1,445 22% 112% Signal Hill city 5,734 693 12% 8,371 1,822 22% 80% Isleton city 914 197 22% 833 181 22% 1% Healdsburg city 7,217 1,034 14% 9,469 2,026 21% 49% Orland city 4,031 351 9% 5,052 1,073 21% 144% Lemoore city 8,832 1,281 15% 13,622 2,886 21% 46% Tehachapi city 4,126 806 20% 5,791 1,226 21% 8% St. Helena city 4,898 793 16% 4,990 1,034 21% 28% Desert Hot Springs city 5,941 514 9% 11,668 2,378 20% 136% Lemon Grove city 20,780 2,909 14% 23,984 4,764 20% 42% Gustine city 3,142 313 10% 3,931 779 20% 99% Grover City city 8,827 1,454 16% 11,656 2,280 20% 19% Norco city 21,126 2,593 12% 23,302 4,556 20% 59% Lomita city 18,807 2,877 15% 19,382 3,756 19% 27% South Lake Tahoe city 20,681 1,508 7% 21,586 4,003 19% 154% Atwater city 17,530 2,179 12% 22,282 4,124 19% 49% Grand Terrace city 8,498 1,053 12% 10,946 1,991 18% 47% El Paso de Robles (Paso Robles 9,163 1,063 12% 18,583 3,367 18% 56% Adelanto city 2,164 195 9% 8,517 1,475 17% 92% Needles city 4,120 742 18% 5,191 887 17% -5% Oakdale city 8,474 1,097 13% 11,961 2,038 17% 32% Suisun City city 11,087 1,255 11% 22,686 3,645 16% 42% Cloverdale city 3,989 262 7% 4,924 791 16% 145% Solvang city 3,091 166 5% 4,741 757 16% 197% Escalon city 3,127 318 10% 4,437 697 16% 54% Biggs city 1,413 121 9% 1,581 244 15% 80% Bonadelle Ranchos-Madera Ranch 3,272 344 11% 5,705 870 15% 45% Corning city 4,745 308 6% 5,870 882 15% 131% continue...WT02-B13-128IA090-000969-B024-81http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/By-Month/MN-Vol-1-94/MN_February_1994.html 128.120.36.171 19970122203844 text/html 28688HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 20:39:38 GMTLast-Modified: Sunday, 16-Apr-95 17:21:36 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 28432MIGRATION NEWS Vol. 1, No. 1 February, 1994 Migration News is a newsletter produced for University of California facultyand students interested in comparative immigration and integration issues.Topics are grouped by region: North America, Europe, Asia, and Other. The purpose of Migration News is to summarize key developments in the precedingmonth; our goal is to offer summaries that can be read in 30 minutes. We willalso offer abstracts of selected papers and articles and information on recentresearch publications. Distribution is by email; if you wish to be added to the mailing list, sendyour email address to---Migration News <migrant@primal.ucdavis.edu> We welcome your contributions: items of interest can be sent by mail, fax, oremail. Those who contribute items can receive copies by mail or fax if emailis unavailable. _______________________________________________________________ _______________________________________________________________ NORTHAMERICA _______________________________________________________________ Immigrationand Internal Migration Promote Balkanization William Frey's analysis of 1990 census data found that especially unskilledUS-born residents moved out of the cities and states to which immigrants movedbetween 1985 and 1990. Balkanization would result if minority immigrantscontinued to move into cities such as Los Angeles and states such asCalifornia, which are increasingly being abandoned by unskilled whites. Detailed analysis by Nancy Bolton of the UCLA-BFP forecasting group indicatesthat such a balkanization process was underway in California in the early1990s. According to Bolton's estimates, California added 66,000 net newresidents between 1990 and 1993 but, during this period, the state gained a net133,000 less-than-high-school-educated residents and 76,000 college-educatedresidents, and lost a net 143,000 high school graduates. Freya Schultz of Santa Barbara county shows that, as labor-intensive strawberryproduction increased in the county, so did the influx ofless-than-high-school-educated migrants. Furthermore, with increasedemployment seasonality, and that many of these unauthorized workers cannotlawfully draw unemployment insurance benefits, AFDC cases have taken on aseasonal pattern, with unemployed workers seeking benefits for their US-bornand citizen children. "Migration Trends Hint at 'Balkanizing' Pattern", Wall Street Journal,January 18, 1994, B1. Nancy Bolton, The Redistribution of California'sPopulation, UCLA-BFP Forecast, June 1993, pp37-45. _______________________________________________________________ U.S.Asylum Granted on Basis of Chinese Sterilization Policy A federal judge ruled that one of the Chinese asylum seekers on the GoldenVenture ship that went aground in New York on June 6, 1993 is eligible forasylum because he and his wife were resisting Chinese sterilization orders.The Clinton Administration has opposed the Bush Administration's policygranting asylum on the basis of opposition to Chinese birth control policies. Pear, Robert, 1994. "Judge Allows Asylum over Birth Policy," New YorkTimes, January 21, A8. __________________________________________________________ EconomicUncertainty Motivates Rethinking Immigration Policy Demetrios Papademetriou, who has replaced Doris Meissner as head of theCarnegie Endowment's Immigration Policy Program, believes that the US "appearsto be on the verge of a fundamental reexamination of its views on immigration"that is "potentially fateful" because the US is in a period of "pervasiveeconomic uncertainty." This uncertainty, in turn, derives from layoffs in"recession-proof" industries such as financial services and defense, especiallyin California. Papademetriou says that anti-immigrant politicians have beenable to exploit the "social tensions" that always accompany immigration, andthat "no politician has felt compelled to actively resist this anti-immigrationtide." According to Papademetriou: "immigrants are successfully absorbed into the USlabor market."...the overall economic contributions of immigration exceed itseconomic liabilities" and "immigration clearly improves the US' ability tocompete "in the global economy. Furthermore, the formation of ethniccommunities is thought to spawn and strengthen international links thatfacilitate the exchange of goods and capital." Papademetriou allows that "thepicture is not uniformly positive," since immigrant workers may act as aneconomic-distorting subsidy in some industries. According to Papademetriou, legal and illegal immigrants have similarexperiences in US labor markets, and the overall impacts of immigrant workerson US workers is small. Papademetriou says that immigration is interwoven withdecline in agriculture, garments, and shoes, so that it is not possible to saywhether immigration contributed to falling wages and conditions in theseindustries, or whether falling wages etc. caused by other factors led Americansto abandon these jobs, creating an opening for immigrants. Papademetriou argues that immigration creates government jobs for US workers(to provide the immigrants with government services), jobs for similarimmigrants in ethnic enclaves, and an overall increase in jobs to provide thehousing and other services immigrants consume. Papademetriou contrasts thegenerally positive conclusions about the effects of immigrants on themacroeconomy with the negative conclusions of case studies, but concludes thathis "synthesis is even more tentative that the body of literature on which itis based." Papademetriou predicts that "an all-out fight centering on the costs andbenefits of immigration" will really be a proxy for larger issues facing theUS. He warns that the fight will be based on inadequate data, although hepredicts that those who emphasize the costs of immigration will win theheadlines. Second, Papademetriou expects the coming fight over immigration toend the US "age of innocence" with immigration, which presumably means the endof an era in which the US simply assumed that immigration was on balance mostlybeneficial to the country. Papademetriou, Demetrios. 1994. "Immigration's Effects on the United States,"Interpreter Releases, Vol. 71, No 1, January 3. _______________________________________________________________ INSIssues New Visa Requirements for Skilled Foreign Workers The Immigration and Naturalization Service is making final a regulation easingnew requirements imposed by the 1990 Immigration Act on employers wishing toobtain temporary employment visas for highly skilled foreign workers. Therule changes a provision in the 1990 IMMACT requiring prospective employers toobtain approved labor condition applications from the Labor Department in whichthey attest that they will pay the temporary workers the prevailing wage. Daily Labor Report, January 11, 1994 _______________________________________________________________ NicaraguansWork in Neighboring Costa Rica Costa Rican border officials permit Nicaraguan farm hands to cross the frontierto overcome seasonal shortages of sugar and coffee harvesters. Some 7,000workers migrate into Costa Rica for the sugar harvest, usually for the monthsof December and January. Unemployment in Nicaragua affects almost 50 percentof the population, versus 5.5 percent in Costa Rica. Migrant workers save about $22 monthly, not much higher than what they couldearn in Nicaragua. Costa Rican officials say those who are hired directly byfarms get better deals and can earn up to $500 monthly. The procedure forhiring migrant workers is monitored by Costa Rica's labor ministry, whichusually transports the workers or supervises their trip to the farms. Thebiggest problems are with workers who seek jobs in the thriving bananaindustry; most work without contracts, and many are poorly treated. Fuentes, Jose Luis. 1994. "Costa Rica: Low Salaries Greet Nicaraguan FarmHands" , Inter Press Service, January 26, 1994. _______________________________________________________________ EUROPE _______________________________________________________________ NewEU Immigration Rights Proposed According to many observers, " Immigration is the largest and most contentiousproblem facing the European Union." The EU is preparing to issue a charter ofrights for the 9 million citizens of non-EU nations who are living legally inan EU nation, such as Turks established in Germany. Under the proposedcharter, these third country nationals could work anywhere in the 12 nation EU,and the EU would take steps to better integrate them with enhanced trainingopportunities and guarantees of equal rights. The proposals are contained in a document from Padraig Flynn, a former IrishJustice Minister and Commissioner for Social Policy and Immigration. Accordingto Flynn, "'immigration to Europe has been a positive development withsubstantial economic and social benefits.'' Flynn's proposals are the firstindication of how the Maastricht treaty may allow the European Union to spreadits influence into areas previously reserved for national governments. The Commissioner's recommendations are based on three themes. First, theEuropean Union should help to create new rights for legally residentimmigrants. Second, immigrants should be encouraged to integrate rather thanto retain their original citizenship. Third, there should be a way for EUnations to burden share in immigration issues. The document also recommendstougher measures against illegal immigrants. "European Union Readies Immigration Policy" Wall Street Journal, January28, 1994, A9. Andrew Marshall. "Rights boost for Europe's immigrants;"Brussels proposes more help for people settling in the EU, but toughermeasures against illegal entrants," The Independent, January 28, 1994;" _______________________________________________________________ Workersfrom CIS Flood Russia; New Controls Announced Hundreds of thousands Ukrainians and Belarusans are migrating to Russia,attracted by a stable currency and jobs local workers shun. The official unemployment rate in Russia is one percent, and most observersbelieve that the true rate is less than 5 percent. However, inadequate housingmarket and government residency regulations keep unemployed or underemployedRussians from moving to labor shortage areas, such as Moscow, leaving vacanciesin some of Russia's least desirable jobs that can be filled by migrant workers. At least 300,000 migrant workers, mostly from Ukraine and Belarus, havecontracts that let them work legally in Russia. The total number of migrantsis estimated to be half a million or more. Concern about foreign workers led Boris Yeltsin in December 1993 to issue twodecrees: "On Measures to Introduce Immigration Control" and "On the Hiring andUse of Foreign Labor in the Russian Federation". The first establishes the Russian Federation Federal Migration Service toregulate the employment of foreign workers. Russian employers who want toemploy foreign workers must to request a work permit and to include theopinion of local authorities, a draft contract that specifies the wages andworking conditions being offered, and assurances that the employment of foreignworkers will not have an "unfavorable impact on the employment conditions forRussian citizens." The second document gives Russian citizens priority to fill vacant jobpositions. Employers wishing to hire foreign workers must pay a fee equivalentto one month's minimum wage for each foreign worker hired. Foreigners whocome to Russia to engage in professional activities and are hired in violationof the Statute on Hiring Foreign Labor in the Russian Federation will besubject to deportation at the employer's expense. If employers hire foreignworkers without the appropriate permits, they can be liable for additionalpenalties not yet specified. Fred Hiatt. "For Some, Russia Still A Workers' Paradise; Ex-Soviets Flock to Moscow," The Washington Post, February 1, 1994.Alecks Portansky, Russia Introduces Control Over Migration And Use Of ForeignLabor, Izvestia, December 18,1994. Former USSR Weekly Economic Report;BBC Summary of World Broadcasts, January 28, 1994. __________________________________________________________ IllegalImmigration to Russia Continues to Grow According to a Regional Representative of the Administration of the U.N. HighCommission, there are over two million migrants from Armenia, Azerbaijan andGeorgia in Russia who will try to get the status of refugees. There are 20,000Afgans, 6,000 Iraqis, 2,000 Somalians, and hundreds of Angolians, Ethiopians,Zairians in Moscow alone. Four transit camps for the refugees have been builtnear Moscow for 1,000 people. The U.N. Administration issued the refugees special identification cards toconfirm their status. A special organization is being formed to register anddefine the status of refugees. Vladimir Tarano "Refugees Pose Burning Problem In Russia," Telegraph Agency ofthe Soviet Union (TASS), January 27, 1994 ___________________________________ IllegalImmigrants Returned to Slovakia Illegal immigrants to the Czech Republic can be returned to Slovakia only ifdocuments can be produced which prove the immigrant entered from Slovakia. Theonly country Slovakia does not have a readmission policy with is Hungary. Source: Czech-Romanian Agreement "No Threat Slovakia' - Foreign Ministry, CTKNational News Wire, January 26, 1994. _______________________________________________________________ GermanLabor Market Deregulation Proposals The German government announced proposals to deregulate the labor market,promote new businesses and stem rising unemployment. Key measures include thelegalization of private employment agencies to end the state monopoly onmatching workers with jobs, special inducements for the long-term unemployed totake seasonal jobs or low-paid work in the community, and moves to promote morepart-time work in both state and private sectors. The government plan also clamps down on employers of illegal foreign workers,especially in construction. Fines will be levied against contractors who allowtheir sub-contractors to employ such workers, and the employers will be barredfrom receiving future public sector contracts. Source: Quentin Peel, "Germany unveils its plan to open up labor market,"Financial Times, January 19, 1994. _______________________________________________________________ HungaryNeeds Authority to Halt Illegal Immigration The Hungarian government said it needed a broader scope of authority to haltillegal migration and conclude the related bilateral agreements. Hungary hasreached agreements with Romania, Austria, Croatia, Slovenia and Ukraine.Agreements with the Czech Republic and Switzerland have been prepared forsigning; agreements with Poland and Slovakia are being negotiated. "Hungary to Conclude Bilateral Accords to Halt Illegal Migration," Hungarian News Agency, January 28, 1994. _______________________________________________________________ EuropeanBirth Dearth and Foreign Workers A "birth dearth" in Europe resulted in the use of guestworkers instead ofallowing wages and markets to adjust to slower workforce growth. Nearly 20percent of the EU population is over 60 By 2010, there will be more EUresidents drawing unemployment that contributing toward them with current earlyretirement trends continue. Social researchers say payroll contributions ofworking immigrants are an important source of funding for the pensions andhealth care of the native-born. Charles Pasqua, French interior minister, who had made statements that Franceshould have "zero migration and promised to start sending planeloads of illegalimmigrants home "until the world got the message'' now says that up to 100,000foreign workers a year will be needed to fill vacant jobs for which Frenchworkers are either unqualified or unwilling to fill. German politicians alsonow acknowledge that non-German contributions to pension and welfare programsare necessary. A spokesman for the Social Democrats reports that the twomillion foreigner workers in Germany contribute 10 percent of the nationaloutput, and pay an even greater proportion of taxes and pension fundcontributions. Source: William Drozdiak, "Europe's 'Birth Dearth' Spawns Reappraisal ofImmigration," The Washington Post, January 19, 1994. "France To SendPlaneloads Of Illegal Immigrants Home," Reuters, January 5, 1994. _______________________________________________________________ PolandReports on Foreign Workers In the first three quarters of 1993, Poland issued 7,889 work permits toforeign workers , according to the Central Statistical Office (GUS). Foreignworkers came to Poland from 104 countries, but one-third were Ukrainians (16.1percent) and Russians (13.1). Other nationalities included Vietnamese (7.6),Americans(4.8) and British workers(3.6 percent). Foreigners are most oftenemployed in construction, trade, the catering business, transportation andcommunications, culture and arts, and non-conventional medicine. Ukrainians,Belarusans, Russians and Chinese are most often employed in construction,Vietnamese dominate in commerce and catering, while U.S. and British citizenswork mainly in education. Non-conventional medicine is a domain of Russiansand Mongols. The largest group of foreign workers fall in the blue-collar category (27.1percent). Managers of companies with mixed and foreign capital received 21.8percent of the permits. Those employed as specialists, experts and advisorswere 15.4 percent of the total. The State Labor Inspectorate (PIP) estimates that about 20 percent of the Polesemployed in the private sector, over 1.2 million people, work illegally,usually by being registered as unemployed and drawing unemployment benefitswhile also working. The PIP estimates that several thousand Belarusans,Lithuanians, Russians and Ukrainians work illegally in Poland. Most often theyfind seasonal jobs in agriculture and construction. Source: Dariusz Styczek, "Foreign Workers: Legal and Otherwise," TheWarsaw Voice , January 9, 1994. _______________________________________________________________ ASIA _______________________________________________________________ MassiveInternal Migration Expected in China Some 10 million migrants are expected to migrate to China's coastal citiesduring the Lunar New Year on February 10, 1994, and governments in Guangdongand Shenzhen have banned the unauthorized recruitment migrant workers by localfirms. Firms employing internal migrant workers without permission arethreatened with legal action. The Chinese labor ministry believes that 20 million internal migrant workersare employed in China's coastal cities, including 10 million in Sichuan.Migration to the coastal cities is motivated by a widening gaps between ruraland urban incomes. Stanley Cheung "Mainland Authorities On Full Alert For Worker Flood",Central News Agency, January 28, 1994 _______________________________________________________________ Riseof Foreign Workers in Malaysia In January, 1994, Malaysia launched a crackdown against the foreigners whoare working illegally in the country. The federal government issued adirective, freezing work permits for foreign workers. In late January, theMalaysian government announced that it was considering caning, or the floggingof the buttocks with a thick cane, to discourage illegal workers from enteringits borders. Employers in the construction and plantation industries have expressed concernthat any wide-ranging moves against foreign workers would lead to seriousproduction shortfalls. On some plantations up to 80 per cent of workers areforeigners, most of them Indonesian or Bangladeshi. Malaysia has gone from a country with double digit unemployment to fullemployment in less than ten years. The unemployment rate for 1993 was 3 percent. Wage increases also rose with productivity. As a result, all majorsectors of the economy are experiencing labor shortages. Foreign workers hadto be recruited by the government to overcome labor shortages. In thebeginning, mostly Indonesians workers were brought in for the plantationsector. This was later extended to cover services and manufacturing. A U.S. Embassy report says that with a population of 19 million, Malaysia has alabor force of seven million, including up to two million foreign workers,still primarily from neighboring Indonesia. According to the report, about onemillion of them are illegal. Government estimates are somewhat lower, onemillion foreign workers with 200,000-250,000 illegal immigrants. Malaysian government officials say that illegal immigrants had committed crimesand had engaged in petty trading and hawking, activities which foreigners werebarred from doing. The Home Minister warned that the one million foreignworkers in Malaysia would pose a social problem if the economy were todecline. He added that though the freezing of worker permits make it difficultto resolve the labor shortage, it was necessary for the country's security. Source: Bill Tarrant, Malaysia Faces Labour, Investment Shortage - U.S. TheReuters Library Report January 23, 1994. Ahirudin Attan. "Malaysia's problem-too many jobs chasing too few workers," The Straits Times, January12, 1994. Source: "The foreign worker time bomb," The Straits TimesJanuary 11, 1994. Kieran Cooke. "Malaysian hard line on foreigners,"Financial Times January 10, 1994. David Chew. " Curbs on foreignworkers necessary: Muhyiddin," The Straits Times, January 22, 1994.Leah Makabenta, Human Rights-Malaysia: Illegal Workers To Be Whipped? InterPress Service, January 26, 1994 _______________________________________________________________ Philippines2000 and Filipino Migrants 'Philippines 2000'', is an ambitious new vision for the future proposed byPhilippine President Fidel Ramos, who believes that most Filipinos workingabroad will return home by the end of the century. Ramos hopes that by thenthe domestic economy will offer enough jobs for the entire population.According to the government's Philippines Overseas Employers' Association,686,461 Filipinos were legally registered as overseas contract workers in 1992.If illegal workers were included, the total would be well over a million, outof the country's population of 62 million. About 134,000 are seamen - 16percent of the total number of seamen in the world. Others work as maids,singers, construction workers and hostesses in bars from Saudi Arabia toAustralia. They send back an estimated pounds 1.4 billion per year to thePhilippines: about 15 per cent of the national budget. Source: Terry McCarthy, "Filipinos abroad look to the day they can returnhome," The Independent, January 27, 1994. _______________________________________________________________ TaiwanRestricts Foreign Workers, Allows Some Vietnamese Taiwan has set strict limits on the categories and numbers of foreignworkers. According the chairman of the Council of Labor Affairs, the countryhas adopted four guidelines for hiring blue-collar workers: 1) Foreignerscannot take jobs which locals are willing to do. Companies have to advertisein three newspapers for three days, and show that response is poor beforetapping overseas labor; 2) Since wages for foreign workers are usually lowerthan those for locals, industries may be able to postpone automation by hiringmore outsiders. Hence, companies must submit improvement plans along withrequests for foreign workers; 3) Entrepreneurs bear the responsibility ofpreventing foreigners from becoming permanent residents. They can stay in thecountry for a year, followed by one-year extension of their work permits.; and4) Foreign workers should not endanger Taiwan's society. Management of theirstay in the country is mandatory. In a related move, Taiwan labor officials will include Vietnam to the list ofSoutheast Asian countries from which workers are allowed to immigrate for twoyears. Taiwan, Vietnam's biggest foreign investor, will adopt an unprecedentedgovernment-to-government labor cooperation agreement to allow 1,000 Vietnamesenationals to work on the island "Strict hiring rules," The Straits Times, January 19, 1994. "Taiwanunder pressure to revise foreign labor regulations." UPI, January 15,1994. _______________________________________________________________ ThailandConsiders Legitimizing Illegal Immigrants The Thai Interior Ministry is gathering information on the estimated 10 millionillegal immigrants in the country and will consider the possibility oflegitimizing them to offset the shortage of unskilled labor. The DirectorGeneral of the Labour Ministry's labor skill development department said thataccording to police estimates there were 10 million foreigners workingillegally in Thailand, mostly from Laos, Myanmar and its minority Karen andShan groups. Most of them work in shrimp and food-freezing factories. "Bangkok may legitimise illegal immigrants to offset worker shortage,"Business Times , January 5, 1994. _______________________________________________________________ Editor: Philip Martin Managing Editor: Cecily Sprouse Department of Agricultural Economics, University of California, Davis, Davis CA95616 USA Telephone: (916) 752-1530 Fax: (916) 752-5614 E-mail: Phil Martin<martin@primal.ucdavis.edu> _______________________________________________________________ WT02-B13-129IA090-000969-B024-95http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/By-Month/MN-Vol-1-94/MN_March_1994.html 128.120.36.171 19970122203856 text/html 55216HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 20:39:50 GMTLast-Modified: Thursday, 13-Apr-95 21:52:49 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 54958MIGRATION NEWS Vol. 1, No. 2 March, 1994 Migration News is a newsletter produced for University of California facultyand students interested in comparative immigration and integration issues.Topics are grouped by region: North America, Europe, Asia, and Other. The purpose of Migration News is to summarize key developments in thepreceding month; our goal is to offer summaries that can be read in 30 minutes.We will also offer abstracts of selected papers and articles and information onrecent research publications. Distribution is by email; if you wish to be added to the mailing list,send your email address to: Migration News <migrant@primal.ucdavis.edu>.Back issues, migration data, and working papers can be accessed via gopher inthe Migration News folder at: dual.ucdavis.edu We welcome your contributions: please fax news items of interest toPhilip Martin at (916) 752-5614, or send them to the email address above.Working papers and monographs to be listed in the RESOURCES section can be sentto Philip Martin, Department of Agricultural Economics, University ofCalifornia, Davis, Davis CA 95616 USA. Those who contribute items may requestMigration News by mail or fax if email is unavailable. ________________________________________ ________________________________________ NorthAmerica ________________________________________ Immigration'sCosts and Benefits The Brookings Institution held a National Issues Forum in Washington, DC onFebruary 16, 1994 at which most speakers agreed that the United States must "dosomething" about illegal immigration. However, there was little agreement onwhat should be done. The impetus for the conference seemed to be Governor Pete Wilson's (R-Ca)assertion that the State of California incurs at least $3.6 billion inunreimbursed costs to provide services to 1.3 million illegal aliens. Thecosts and benefits of immigrants are becoming a much-debated issue inWashington, especially after Governor Chiles (D-Fla) sued the United States forreimbursement, and the governors of Texas, New York and Illinois joined thecall for federal assistance to high immigration states. These five statesincluded 81 percent of the 3.2 million illegal aliens that the INS estimatedwere in the US in 1992. Wilson requested that the federal government either: (1) reimburse Californiafor two-thirds of these costs, or (2) repeal the mandate that Californiaprovide these services. The Governor's representative cast the issue as one inwhich the federal government's failure to enforce immigration laws combinedwith mandates to provide services to illegal immigrants imposes an unfair coston the states and cities in which they concentrate. Illegal immigrant children are eligible for free public education (1982 SupremeCourt decision), emergency Medicaid assistance (50-50 federal-state costsharing), and school lunch and pre-natal services. If the federal governmenteliminated the mandate to provide, e.g. Medicaid, states could see their costsrise, since they would then bear the full cost of the emergency health servicesthat all agreed would in any event be provided. But what is the basis for the demands that the federal government enforceimmigration laws, repeal mandates to provide services to illegal aliens, orreimburse states for their costs of providing such services? It is true thatimmigration is at its highest level in 100 years, and that 45 percent of the 20million foreign-born persons enumerated in the 1990 Census Of Populationarrived since 1980, but some speakers emphasized that research fails to findthat immigrants displace U.S.-born workers or depress their wages, or thatimmigrants are more dependent on welfare than U.S. citizens. Instead, theirargument went, immigrants must be subdivided into categories and, when theyare, refugees have the highest rates of welfare dependency, legal immigrantsaged 15-64 have a lower rate, and illegal aliens have the lowest rate, sincemost are trying to avoid seeking even those few services for which they areeligible. Most speakers returned to basics to emphasize that the United States welcomeslegal immigrants through three major doors: family unification, humanitarian,and needed workers. Several speakers argued that the United States correctlypermits a U.S. citizen with a foreign spouse or dependents to bring them to theUnited States immediately, and that it is also good social policy to permitlegal immigrants to have their immediate families join them. Some speakersquestioned the "minor" family-oriented admissions doors, such as the provisionthrough which the adult sons and daughters of U.S. citizens can enter, and thedoor reserved for the brothers and sisters of U.S. immigrants. There was alsocriticism of the "diversity lottery" that favors immigrants from Europe. Perhaps the most surprising aspect of the discussion was the agreement thatsomething must be done about illegal immigration. There were several paths tothis common action item. For some, fears of job displacement and wagedepression were sufficient reasons for action. For others, fears of culturalupheavals, population growth, or environmental degradation were reasons foraction. For the states and cities, action is justified by the cost ofproviding services, while the INS agreed that widespread lawbreakingrepresented by illegal immigration undermined its reputation. Some of thoseadvocating prompt and drastic action against illegal immigration outlined aseries of national dilemmas - from the underclass to public education - andquestioned whether more immigrants - legal or illegal - help the nation tosolve these problems. Most speakers were pro-immigration, and they made their case for action toreduce illegal immigration on the grounds that, if nothing is done now, therewill be harsher measures later. Some feared what one termed a "jihad" (holywar) against immigrants would go "too far." Several emphasized that"anti-immigrant hysteria" was due to California's economic woes, the inabilityof the INS to effectively enforce immigration laws, and the end of the ColdWar, which undercut support for the foreign-born group most likely to receivepublic assistance for extended periods of time - refugees. These "defenders ofimmigrants" hope to keep open the family, refugee, and economic doors fornewcomers by supporting efforts to close the back door to illegal aliens. Philip Martin, "Immigration's Costs and Benefits: A Conference Report," mimeo,February 23, 1994. ___________________________________________________________ Administration's"Comprehensive Response" to Immigration On February 3, 1994, U.S. Attorney General Janet Reno announced a five-pointplan to curb illegal immigration, speed up the processing of applicants forasylum, and promote the naturalization of eligible immigrants. The proposalfulfills President Clinton's July 1993 promise to deal with immigration when henamed Immigration and Naturalization Service Commissioner Doris Meissner and,if fully implemented, would raise the INS budget almost 25 percent, from $1.6billion in FY93 to $2.1 billion in FY95. 1. AG Reno described the plan to spend $368 million in FY95 to add 1,010 BorderPatrol (BP) agents in El Paso and San Diego as "deterrence through prevention."Almost two-thirds of all INS apprehensions are made in these two sectors, andthe extra funds would enable the BP to add 620 agents to its current 4,100, toadd lights and another fence in San Diego, and to fingerprint all apprehendedaliens. 2. An additional $55.2 million per year would enable the INS to deport anestimated 20,000 criminal aliens each year from California, Texas, Florida, andIllinois. 3. The number of judges hearing requests for asylum would be doubled from 150to 300 with an additional $64.1 million, so that the number of asylumapplicants who could be processed annually would rise from 45,000 to 150,000.Asylum applicants would be expected to pay a $130 fee to apply, and would haveto wait 150 days to get a work permit. With the help of the extra asylumofficers, the 364,000 backlog of asylum cases would eventually be cleared. 4. The INS would devote $23 million to target for enforcement, under the 1986employer sanctions law, "high-violator" industries, such as agriculture,construction, janitorial and similar services, and garments and similarmanufacturing. The INS plans to reduce from 29 to 3 the number of workauthorization documents a worker can present to an employer, and add a magneticstripe to the back of the INS-551 greencard carried by legal immigrants. Inaddition, the telephone system for employers to verify worker documents wouldbe expanded. 5. The "balancing" or generosity feature of the plan is a commitment of $30million annually--half in the form of grants to community groups--to promotethe naturalization of eligible immigrants, those who have been in the UnitedStates at least five years and can pass a rudimentary English and civicstest. Most of these proposals are part of the Crime Bill moving through Congress, andmay not be implemented unless that bill is enacted. Reaction to the Administration's plan was generally positive; both Republicanand Democratic politicians in California praised the plan as a "balanced"effort to deal with reducing illegal immigration and promoting the acceptanceof the newcomers who arrived in the past 10 to 20 years. FAIR and severalCongressmen criticized the proposal as "too little," and for not beefing upborder enforcement in New Mexico and Arizona. Other critics argued that theAdministration's plan should have put more emphasis on employer sanctionsenforcement, that preventive deterrence at the border will merely redirectillegal immigrants around newly-fortified areas, and that the potential forviolence is increased because, with higher coyote fees, migrants will be lesswilling to risk apprehension. Mexico protested that beefing up borderenforcement could "harm relations between neighboring communities" and hinderthe cooperation needed to implement NAFTA. The House Republican Task Force on Immigration, headed by Lamar Smith(R-Texas), on February 10, 1994 unveiled its own plan to reduce illegalimmigration. It would require the INS to construct fences and ditches in areaswhere most illegal aliens are apprehended, add 6,000 more Border Patrol agentsto the current 4,000 by 1998, and phase in over five years a tamper-proofSocial Security card that all newly-hired workers would have to present totheir employers. The Task Force estimated that there are 4.8 million illegalaliens (versus a 3.5 million INS estimate), and that they cost taxpayers a new$7.6 billion annually. Press conference of US Attorney Janet Reno, Washington, DC, February 3, 1994.Carolyn Lockhead, "1,010 More Agents for Border Patrols," San FranciscoChronicle, February 4, 1994, p. A1. Ronald J Ostrow and Patrick McDonnell, "2Senators Assail Immigration Initiative," The Los Angeles Times, February 4,1994, p. 3. "Reno, Meissner Announce Comprehensive Immigration Initiative,"Interpreter Releases, February 7, 1994, Vol 71, No. 6, p. 1. ___________________________________________________________ OperationHold the Line in Texas Frank Bean of the University of Texas-Austin is completing a study of theeffectiveness of Operation Blockade (today known as Operation Hold the Line) onthe US-Mexican border in El Paso. The Commission on Immigration Reform,chaired by Barbara Jordan, will review Bean's study at a meeting March 18-19 inEl Paso. According to Bean, there were 4 distinct types of illegal border crossers, andthe two that caused the most problems in El Paso were stopped, explaining thepopularity of the operation. Long-distance migrants headed to interior USlocations and daily commuters were not deterred by the massing of agents on theborder--for both groups, crossing the border became less convenient and moreexpensive, but was not stopped. However, Mexican teens who partied in El Paso,and committed crimes there, as well as sidewalk vendors, were deterred, to therelief of the people of El Paso. Frank Bean, remarks in Santa Fe, February 12, 1994 ______________________________________________________________ LosAngeles Earthquake and Illegal Immigrants Federal assistance for rebuilding Los Angeles after the January 17, 1994earthquake was held up for several days by wrangling in Congress over theeligibility of illegal aliens for non-emergency assistance funds. As enactedon February 11, 1994, the $8.6 billion appropriation permits FEMA to provideemergency shelter, food, and medical assistance without inquiring about anindividual's legal status, but it requires federal agencies to take"reasonable" steps to ascertain the legal status of anyone seeking longer-termaid (lasting more than 90 days) such as 18-month HUD housing grants, abouttheir legal status. Democrat Esteba Torres (D-Ca) sponsored the amendment toprevent an even tougher ban on federal assistance from being passed. Paul Feldman, "Proposed Quake Aid Limits Seen as Mostly Symbolic," The LosAngeles Times, February 4, 1994., p. 1. James Bornemeier and Alan C. Miller,"Congressman Savors Rare Win on Immigration," The Los Angles Times, February 3,1994, p.1. Miguel Bustillo and Mark Lacey, "US Plan to Cut Aid to IllegalImmigrants Jolts Many," The Los Angeles Times, February 2, 1994, p. 14 ___________________________________________________________ GovernorsAsk for Federal Reimbursement of Immigrant Costs; Budget Director Says Don'tCount on It With governors from California (Republican), Florida (Democrat), Illinois (R),New York (D), and Texas (D) suing or threatening to sue the federal governmentto recover their estimated costs of providing services to illegal immigrants,there is now bipartisan pressure on the federal government to deal with theissue. The two Republican and three Democratic governors are turning what hadbeen seen as an individual crusade by California's Governor Wilson(R) to shiftthe blame for the state's problems to Washington into a more serious issue thatcan no longer be ignored. As a result of the pressure, the ClintonAdministration announced on February 1 that it is forming a bipartisan "workinggroup" to push for federal legislation to help alleviate the costs associatedwith illegal immigration. The focus will be on education, emergency health careand the incarceration of illegal immigrants. But White House Budget Director Leon Panetta, a former Congressman fromCalifornia, warned a group of California lawmakers in Washington, DC to lobbyfor increase federal funding on February 22, 1994 that they should not expectany more funds to help compensate for illegal immigration. Studies of the public finance impacts of legal and illegal immigrants agree ononly a few points, including: 1. The taxes paid by especially unskilled and illegal immigrants accrueprimarily to the federal government and its Social Security trust funds. 2. At the state and local levels, taxes-paid calculations depend heavily onassumptions about the number, earnings, and U.S. expenditures of illegalimmigrants. Costs are very sensitive to assumptions about illegal aliens'receipt of work-related and public benefits, and whether the cost of providing(required) services such as schooling for illegal alien children or AFDC totheir U.S.-born and citizen babies should be chargeable to illegal aliensgenerally. A new study by Jeffrey Passel, director of immigration research at the UrbanInstitute in Washington, DC says that California's immigrants contribute $12billion more each year in taxes and other payments, than they cost inschooling, health care and other services. Passel contradicts a study by DonaldHuddle of Rice University, that immigrants take thousands of jobs from USworkers and cost California more than $18 billion annually. Nationally, Passelconcludes that immigrants contribute $28.7 billion more in taxes than they usein services. Huddle finds that immigrants cost about $42.5 billion annually.Both studies did not focus on illegal immigrants, but on all foreigners livingin the country since 1970. James Bornemeier, "Bipartisan Panel on Immigration Formed," The Los AngelesTimes, February 1, 1994, p. 18. Ronald Brownstein, "Wilson Finds Allies onIllegal Immigrant Funds," The Los Angeles Times, January 31, 1994, p. 3."Immigration," The California Journal Weekly, January 24, 1994. Marc Sandalow,"California Can't Expect U.S. to Pay More, Panetta Warns, The San FranciscoChronicle, February 23, 1994. Patrick McDonnell, "Immigrants Study CitesFiscal Gain," The Los Angeles Times, February 23, 1994, p. 4. Jim Specht,"Panetta Says Feds Not Apt to Pay Immigration Costs," Gannett News Service,February 22 1994. ___________________________________________________________ USLabor Department Scrutinizing Temporary Foreign Workers The Immigration Act of 1990 (IMMACT) revised the rules under which temporaryforeign workers can be admitted to the US, and one result is an increasednumber of US employers applying for temporary foreign programmers and othercomputer professionals. US employers wishing to hire foreign workers must complete a Labor ConditionApplication (LCA) that asserts that the US employer has tried to recruit USworkers at the prevailing wage for the area or the wage that is paid to similarworkers elsewhere. The US Department of Labor receives few complaints aboutthese LCAs: there were only 7 complaints filed about the 100,000 LCAs filedbetween October, 1991 and May, 1993. Complaints skyrocketed during the summerof 1993, and the TV show 60 Minutes charged that "body shops" were engaged inmassive immigration fraud to obtain low-wage computer programmers. Three daysafter the 60 Minutes program, the DOL proposed regulations that would allow itto initiate an investigation even if no complaint had been filed. Many US employers do not adhere to current regulations, which require that aseparate LCA that explains how the prevailing and actual wage were determinedfor each foreign worker, that exclude the value of housing or other benefitsfrom the calculation of wages, and that explain any apparent discrepancies inpay, such as occur when two programmers have the same job description butdifferent rates of pay. US employers might make their LCAs available to"interested parties" upon request. Carl Shusterman, "Uncle Sam Is Watching -- Companies that use foreign ISworkers must start playing by the rules," Information Week, February 7, 1994, p68. ___________________________________________________________ DevaluationsIncrease Mexico-to-US Migration The threat of increased unwanted migration from Mexico was used to argue forand against NAFTA during the Fall 1993 US debate over its ratification. Theconsensus among migration researchers was that Mexico-to-US migration wouldfirst increase as a result of the continued demand-pull of US jobs; increasedsupply-push in rural Mexico, as corn prices were lowered over 15 years by 50percent; and the absence of measures to break the networks that had beenperhaps unexpectedly been strengthened by US immigration reforms in 1986 and1990. Most migration researchers nonetheless supported NAFTA as the bestlong-term strategy to reduce unwanted Mexican migration. At a session held February 22, 1994 during the annual meetings of the AmericanAssociation for the Advancement of Science in San Francisco, J. Edward Taylor,a University of California, Davis professor of agricultural economics,presented evidence that a 10 percent devaluation of the peso has an effect onincreasing emigration that is six times larger than a 10 percent decrease inthe price of corn. Taylor constructed a CGE model of a village economy with1989 survey data, and showed that, since half of the villagers are subsistencecorn farmers, they are not hurt, and in some cases helped, by lower cornprices. In his model, a drop in the price of corn from $4 to $3.60 perbushel would increase migration by only 2.6 percent, or from 100 to 103migrants in this village of 1000. A 10 percent devaluation of the peso, on theother hand, would lead in Taylor's simulation to a 17 percent increase inemigration, from 100 to 117 migrants. Taylor's model suggests that rural villagers connected to overseas destinationsby networks know about and respond to exchange rate changes. Such a migrationresponse to a devaluation occurred in Nigeria early in 1994 (See DevaluationPrompts Migration to Nigeria). Mexico's economy grew just 0.4 percent in 1993, well below the 2.6 percentgrowth of 1992 and the three percent expected in 1994. Both the auto and oilsectors--both important foreign-exchange earners--contracted in 1993, puttinglimits on the social spending the government was expected to undertake in the1994 election year. Mexico may raise money by selling off its remaining stakein Mexican banks, and perhaps by beginning to sell of parts of PEMEX. Tightmonetary and fiscal polices pursued when the fate of NAFTA was in doubt havebrought interest rates on Mexican treasury bills to below 10 percent for thefirst time in 15 years. Agricultural production rose by 1.8 percent in 1993, compared to a drop of 1.5percent in 1992. However, farmers throughout the country are linking theirdemands for government assistance to the uprising in Chiapas, and thegovernment is expected to double its spending on agriculture in 1994. The Chiapas uprising seems to have awakened Mexicans to the plight of thoseleft behind in the rush to restructure Mexico's economy. Bishop Ruiz ofChiapas says that Mexico's wealthy must be prepared to redistribute some oftheir wealth and thus avoid misery and violence. Source: Philip Martin. 1993. Trade and Migration: NAFTA and Agriculture.Washington: Institute for International Economics; J. Edward Taylor. 1994."Mexico-to-US Migration in the Context of Economic Globalization: A VillageCGE Perspective," mimeo; Dianne Solis, "Mexico faces Slow Growth of Economy,"Wall Street Journal, February 22, 1994, p. A16. Anthony DePalma, ADisappointing Year for Mexican Economy," New York Times, February 22, 1994, p.C2. ___________________________________________________________ Multiculturalismunder Fire in Canada Canada's 1988 Multiculturalism Act was attacked in the House of Commons afterthe government issued its fifth annual report on activities supported under theact. In 1993-94, the Multiculturalism Department made grants totaling C$ 25.5million, half of which is spent on programs that reach all Canadians,one-fourth of which is spent to combat racism (including the annual March 21anti-racism day), and one-fourth is spent to support ethnic artists and ethnicstudies. Multiculturalism was the policy that emerged from a 1971 RoyalCommission on Bilingualism and Biculturalism. Several Reform MP's demanded that the Multiculturalism Department be abolished.The grants it currently makes to ethnic groups, they argue, tend to "ghettoizeethnic minorities," and promote group differences rather than pride in beingCanadian. During the Fall 1993 campaign, Reform Party leader Preston Manningcalled for cutting immigration from 250,000 to 150,000 annually, and end tofederal spending on multicultural activities. Bloc Quebecois MPs opposedmulticulturalisms because, they asserted, the government's policy ignoresQuebec's distinctiveness. The government responded that diversity does not have to lead to division, thatnewcomers have a right to live in ethnic enclaves, and that multiculturalismstrengthens Canada's economy by forging new international trade links. Multiculturalism is an especially contentious issue in Toronto, whose almost 4million residents are 60 percent non-English or French (31 percent of Canada's27.3 million people in 1991 had neither English or French roots). Canada's 4.3million foreign-born residents, 16 percent of the population, are concentratedin Toronto, Vancouver and Montreal. "MPs attack multiculturalism" Toronto Star, February 8, 1994; Toronto's EthnicTangle, Chicago Tribune, February 10, 1994. Chris Wood, "Immigration raisesfundamental questions of identity and values," Maclean's, February 7, 1991, p.21. ___________________________________________________________ AristideThreatens US With Haitian Boat People Haitian President Jean-Bertrand Aristide, frustrated with failed efforts topersuade the military rulers who overthrew him on September 30, 1991,threatened to call on his supporters to set out in small boats for the USunless the US government redoubles its efforts to return Aristide to power inPort-au-Prince. The US is frustrated with Aristide, accusing him ofintransigence rather than the compromise the US government believes isnecessary to persuade the military rulers in charge of Haiti's government torelinquish power. Norman Kempster, "Aristide's New Plan: Pester US," Los Angeles Times, February19, 1994. ___________________________________________________________ ImmigrantChildren in US Schools A study of 5,200 immigrant school children in San Diego, Fort Lauderdale, andMiami found that the immigrant children performed better in US schools becausethey spend three times more hours on homework and have families that stress theimportance of education. Michigan State University Sociology Professor RubenRumbat and Alejandro Portes studied 8th and 9th grade children with at leastone immigrant parent who were born in the US or had been here for at least 5years, and found that the "immigrant children" spent an average three hours onhomework per day, versus one hour for children with two US citizen parents. The median gradepoint of all students in San Diego was 2.11; that of Vietnameseand Asian immigrant children was 2.9, while Mexican immigrant children had amedian gradepoint of 2.0. More than 1 million of California's 5 million schoolchildren do not speak English at home; these data suggest that parental supportand expectations can overcome language barriers to assure US educationalsuccess. In a related story, a California legislator released videotape of children wholive in Mexico and cross the border daily to attend US schools. As a result,20 percent of the 2200 school children in the Mountain Empire School Districtsoutheast of San Diego are expected to be dismissed because their parents usedfalse US addresses to enroll them. Children living in Mexico may attend USschools by paying an annual tuition of $3,200. Source: Lisa Lapin, "Study: Immigrants' Kids Learn Better," The Sacramento Bee,February 23, 1994, p.1. Jon Van, "Immigrant Children Get Better Grades, StudyFinds," The Chicago Tribune, February 23, 1994, p. 6. __________________________________________ EUROPE __________________________________________ EUCommission Approves Communication on Immigration and Asylum The European Commission adopted Immigration Commissioner Padraig Flynn'ssuggestions on how to develop a coordinated response to the immigration andasylum issues facing the European Union. The communication asserts that theimmigration and asylum policies must be integrated into the EU's externalpolicies. Action would occur at a number of levels including trade, developmentand cooperation policies, humanitarian assistance and human rights. The nextphase of the commission will be to use its power to translate the ideas intoaction. The European Commission also approved a call for all European Union membercountries to adopt a common definition of "asylum seeker." Flynn noted thatall EU countries subscribe to the Geneva Convention, but some interpret itdifferently, so that some consider asylum seekers from the former Yugoslavia tobe refugees, while others put them in a temporary displace persons category. There were 550,000 asylum applications in Europe in 1993, down from 679,900 in1992 because of a 25 percent drop in applications in Germany, and a 50 percentdrop in applications in France and the UK. A common asylum policy isconsidered necessary because of spillover effects. When Germany tightened itsasylum policies in mid-1993, both Belgium and the Netherlands saw asylumapplications rise. Germany has since August 1993 been receiving about 15,000 asylum applicantsmonthly. About 40 percent are from the former Yugoslavia, and 10 percent arefrom Turkey; the largest drops are in applications from Romania and Bulgaria.If the EU adopts a tighter common policy, some fear that Eastern Europeannations such as Poland and Czechoslovakia will see a rise in asylumapplications. Flynn also wants the EU countries to discuss a common immigration policy.Immigration into the EU is officially stopped, but some countries permit familyunification, the return of citizens abroad, and other types of immigrants toenter. The EU is working on a common visa application form for nationals ofthose countries that will need a visa to enter the EU. Britain is expected to strongly object to any plans to give Europe's 10 millionimmigrants full Community citizenship. Home Secretary Michael Howard and PrimeMinster John Majors are expected to make it clear that, although Britain willcooperate with member states on immigration and asylum issues, it will not givethird country nationals settled in France and Germany equal status withEuropean nationals in Britain. Source: Information Memo," Commission Adopts A Communication on Immigration andAsylum. Commission of the European Communities, February 23, 1994."Commission To Call For Common Definition Of Asylum Seekers," The ReutersEuropean Community Report, February 14, 1994 Boris Johnson, "Europe facessplit over immigrant workers," The Daily Telegraph, February 16, 1994. Reuters,"EU News in the European Press" January 28, 1994. "Commission AdoptsCommunication on Immigration and Asylum.," Reuters, February 23, 1994. GeoffeMeade, "Row Threatens Over 'Full rights for Euro-immigrants," PressAssociation, February 23, 1994. EFMS, Bundesamt für die Anerkennungausländischer Flüchtlinge. ___________________________________________________________ Germanyto Return Croats Germany in September 1993 informed the 60,000 to 100,000 Croats in the countrythat they would have to leave the country by April 30, 1994 or face deportationproceedings. After sharp criticism, the German government on February 9, 1994extended until June 30, 1995 the residence rights of Croats who cannot returnto their homes because their homes are in Serbian controlled areas. However,those from "peaceful areas" will have to leave Germany between May 1 andOctober 31, 1994. The Federal Government's Commissioner for Foreigners, CorneliaSchmalz-Jacobsen, expressed satisfaction that the Croats were divided into twogroups. She urged the federal government to reimburse individual states forthe number of refugees within them. The decision was criticized by those whoargued that conscientious objectors should not be returned to Croatia, and bythose who urged that all Balkan refugees should be allowed to stay in Germanyuntil the war there is over. Germany is reportedly pushing for the return of the Croats because of a housingshortage and the financial costs of caring for them; not to appease ananti-immigrant public in an election year in which there is high unemployment.There were four million unemployed in January 1994, a rate of almost ninepercent in the former West Germany and 17 percent in the former East Germany.Germany is host to 370,000 people from the former Yugoslavia, and spent DM 5billion($3 billion) caring for asylum seekers and other immigrants in 1993. Germany Extends Residence Rights of Croatian Refugees, The German Tribune,February 11, 1994, p1. Gillian Tett and Judy Dempsey, "Refugees find doorsbolted: Financial constraints are forcing Europe to tighten procedures againstasylum seekers, Financial Times, February 10, 1994, p2. Frankfurter AllgemeineZeitung, February 11, 1994, no.35; Süddeutsche Zeitung, February 11, 1994,no.34., Fränkischer Tag, February 11, 1994, no. 34. ___________________________________________________________ KohlPostpones Revisions of Citizenship Laws Chancellor Helmut Kohl postponed any reform of the citizenship laws until afterthe October 1994 elections. A draft law by the Social Democrats would offerdual citizenship, a key issue for Germany's 1.8 million Turks . Currently,German law gives citizenship only to those born to German parents, so thatchildren born in Germany of Turkish parents do not have the right of automaticcitizenship. According to some polls, many Turks would become naturalizedGermans if they did not have to give up Turkish citizenship, and the rights itprovides Turkish citizens to own or inherit property in Turkey. "Germany Puts Off Citizenship Law Reform," Reuters, February 8, 1994. ___________________________________________________________ GreeceDeploys Police to Stop Illegal Entry Concerned about the rise in illegal immigration from Albania, the GreekMinister of Public Order announced on February 21 that a police force of 400specially trained men would use jeeps and electric devices to deterr illegalentrants. The new unit will be deployed mainly to Thesprotia, Ioanniana,Kastoria and Florina to prevent the entry of refugees from the formerYugoslavia and Skopje. "Public Order Minister announces formation of special border police," BBC,February 23, 1994. "EP Debates Improvement of EU-Albania Relations," Reuters,February 9, 1994. ___________________________________________________________ Russiahas 400,000 Foreign Workers Vladimir Volokh, the deputy chairman of the Russian Federation FederalMigration Service, estimated that there are 400,000 foreign workers, including100,000 from outside the former USSR, working in Russia. Russian workers areto be given priority to fill vacant jobs. "Some 400,000 foreigners are working in Russia," Nezavisimaya Gazeta (Moscow),February 9, p.2. ______________________________________ ASIA ______________________________________ TechnicalJobs Increase for Foreigners in Japan In 1992, about 8,682 foreigners were hired in Japan to fill technical orcultural jobs, about 2.6 times the 3,336 admited in 1988, according to theJustice Ministry. About 38 percent were from the United States; 18 percentfrom China, and 9 percent from Britain. Most of the foreigners work aslanguage instructors in schools. Source: "More Foreigners Find Technical Jobs in Japan," Jiji Press TickerService, February 21, 1994. "Japanese Labor Market attracts more foreignexperts", Japan Economic Newswire, February 20, 1994. "Going East," The DailyTelegraph, February 21, 1994, p.21. ___________________________________________________________ TaiwanRevises Guestworker Program Taiwan's Council of Labor Affairs announced that foreign workers would beallowed to remain three rather than the current two years, and to switchemployers in Taiwan. Employers will now be required to advertise the fact thatthey have vacant jobs before being allowed to employ foreign workers, and theycan be punished for falsely asserting that they cannot find local workers tofill vacant jobs. To minimize settlement, Taiwanese employers will have to withhold part of theforeign workers wages, which will be returned to workers in their homecountry. Central News Agency. February 1, 1994. ___________________________________________________________ FalseDocument Seller Arrested in Singapore Singapore, where foreigners are about 10 percent of the workforce, operateswhat is often considered the world's most efficient guestworker program. Thereare few illegal alien workers and little settlement. However, in mid-February,police arrested a Singaporean who was selling forged work permits for $200 to$400 each to workers from India and Nepal, along with shipyard safety passesthat certified that the worker had completed the required safety courses toseek employment there. In this manner, tourists could unlawfully go to work.Singaporean police arrested 400 illegal immigrants in 1993. Fake work permits: Man arrested, The Straits Times, February 18, 1994, p27. ___________________________________________________________ PhilippinesProposes Labor Agreement Filipino National Security Adviser Jose Almonte proposed that labor migrationbe formally included in the agenda of the Asian Free Trade Area(AFTA) to helpresolve problems associated with illegal workers in Brunei, Singapore andMalaysia. Almonte proposed that region-wide ground rules be established todeal with migrant workers in the region, and that Japan, South Korea andTaiwan be persuaded to join the regional labor agreement. As the largest labor exporter in the region, the Philippines has a specialinterest in the problems of migrant workers. Despite its call for a regionallabor agreement, the Philippines recently began bilateral negotiations withMalaysia to deal with the estimated 190,000 Filipinos in Sabah. Malaysiarecognizes 80,000 Filipinos as refugees, and is negotiating a bilateralagreement with the Philippines over the fate of unauthorized Filipino migrantsin Malaysia. Filipino migrants still go predominantly to the Middle East: in 1993, 543,410workers were deployed abroad, and an additional 145, 758 seafarers. However,Filipinos are increasingly migrating to other East Asian nations. For example,in 1993, almost as many Filipino migrants were deployed to Taiwan (13,189) asto Saudi Arabia (13,259), representing a dramatic change from 1992. Over80,000 Filipino migrants were sent legally to East Asia in the first half of1993, including 34,000 to Hong Kong and 20,921 to Japan; an estimated 22,000Filipinos are working in Taiwan. Jorge Tigno of the Manila-based Institute for Strategic and Development Studiesestimates that there are 300,000 unauthorized Filipinos working in neighboringEast Asian nations, so that illegal Filipino migrant workers in East Asiaoutnumber legal migrant workers. Dario B. Agnote, "Ramos' adviser proposes regional labor agreement," JapanEconomic Newswire, February 14, 1994. ___________________________________________________________ SouthKorea Compensates Injured Foreign Workers South Korea's Labor Ministry announced that illegal foreign workers injuredwhile working will receive the same workers' compensation benefits as SouthKorean workers. Foreign workers who are exploited or injured are invited tocontact the South Korea's Labor Ministry. South Korea has been accused of ignoring the conditions of the estimated 50,000illegal foreign workers employed in the so-called 3-D jobs--difficult, dirty,and dangerous. In December, the ministry said it would admit 20,000 moreforeign workers to fill unskilled jobs. They would be permitted to stay for upto two years. "South Korea to protect illegal foreign workers," The Xinhua General OverseasNews Service, February 7, 1994. "S. Korea to treat foreign illegals equally,"Reuters, February 7, 1994. ___________________________________________________________ Vietnam:A Changing Picture for Emigrants Last year, fewer than 100 boat people were reported leaving Vietnam, and 58,000Vietnamese have since 1989 left refugee camps to return to Vietnam. A steeringcommittee for the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees has declaredthat Vietnamese who flee their country will not longer receive automaticconsideration as political refugees, and they would henceforth be treated asany other asylum-seekers. This means that the country in which Vietnamesemigrants land can send them home immediately. About 600,000 "boat people" remain in refugee camps in Asia. Most areconsidered economic refugees and will be returned to Vietnam. The exception are those in the Orderly Departure Program, begun in the 1982 .This is a program for Amerasians and former South Vietnamese officers andofficials and their families who were held as political prisoners. About3,500 people in the Amerasian program will enter the US by the end of theSummer 1994, and another 100,000 former political prisoners and their familiesare expected over the next two years. Once all the Amerasians and political prisoners are dealth with, Vietnamesewill comne to the United States as immigrants, not as refugees. The United States and its consulate in Hong Kong have been charged in a classaction suit filed on behalf of 250 Vietnamese boat people who are trying tojoin their families in the US. The US consulate in Hong Kong stopped processingvisas last fall that allow Vietnamese boat people to reunite with theirfamilies; instead, the Vietnamese had to return to Vietnam and apply forimmigrant visas there. The suit was filed in a Washington, DC court by LegalAssistance for Vietnamese Asylum Seekers, a Virginia-based group. With the normalizing of relations between the United States and Vietnam, therehas been an increased number of Vietnamese abroad returning to Vietnam tovisit; the United Nations estimates that nearly 100,000 Vietnamese return tovisit every year, includiing 20,000 who are expected to return for the lunarnew year this month. Cambodia has recently seen an influx of Vietnamese to its country, and a seniorparliamentarian there has called for a halt. The Vietnamese Foreign Ministersaid that there are fewer than 100,000 Vietnamese nationals living in Cambodia.The Khmer Rouge claim that there are four million Vietnamese in Cambodia, andthat immigration is part of Vietnam's strategy to colonize its neighbor. Theissue is sensitive because Vietnam occupied Cambodia for a decade afterinvading in 1978 to depose the Khmer Rouge. Henry Kamm, "Vietnam's Exodus is Declared Over," The New York Times, February16, 1994, p. 7. Simon Beck, "US faces court challenge from Viet migrants,"South China Morning Post, February 17, 1994, p. 3. "Parliamentarian soundsalarm over Vietnamese immigration," Agence France Presse , February 21, 1994.Seth Mydans, "End of embargo shifts Vietnam refugee tide," Dallas Morning News,February 20, 1994., p. A1. __________________________________________ OTHER __________________________________________ DevaluationPrompts Migration to Nigeria In January 1994, France devalued the CFA franc used in 14 West Africancountries from Senegal to Gabon. Strikes and unrest erupted in many cities inresponse to the sharp prices increases that followed the devaluation from 50CFA francs to 1 French franc to 100 to 1. France acted as the cost ofsupporting the overvalued CFA reached $2 to $3 billion annually. The value of Nigeria's currency, the naira, rose by 54 percent against the CFAfranc. Immigrants poured into the northern Nigerian state of Adamawa; the mento work in construction and as security guards, and the women as hairdressers.Nigeria's currency is pegged at 22 naira to the US dollar. Agence France-Presse, February 6, 1994. Kenneth Noble, "French Currency MoveProvokes Unrest in Africa," New York Times, February 23, 1994, p. A1. ___________________________________________________________ SaudiisationExpected to Reduce Foreign Worker Employment Saudi Arabia's Fifth National Development Plan (1990-1995) had as a goal thesubstitution of Saudi men and women for foreign workers throughout the economy.The plan projected that 433,900 Saudis would enter the labor force, and thatthere would be 213,500 new jobs created for them. The remaining 220,400 Saudiswere expected to replace foreign workers. A review of the effectiveness of Saudiisation found that public companies suchas Sabic and Saudi Aramco have most successfully integrated Saudis into theirranks. Private Saudi companies reportedly do not have management structuresthat foster the integration of young Saudis into their firms, and some hireonly "token" Saudis to avoid compliance problems with the Saudiisation mandate.However, some managers believe that Saudis are less qualified and demand higherwages than foreign workers, making it hard to promote voluntary efforts to hiremore Saudis so long as foreign workers are readily available. Saudi Arabia is stepping up efforts to prevent labor recruiters from obtainingwork visas for workers for whom there are no jobs. According to Saudiofficials, some labor recruiters obtain work visas for foreign workers whoarrive only to find there are no jobs for them. These workers then turn to thedaily labor market, or become illegal peddlers. The Saudis consider suchover-recruitment activities a security threat; foreign workers with such "freevisas" are subject to fine and imprisonment, and their Saudi sponsors must bearthe cost of their deportation. Joe Avancena, "Trends & Updates: Saudiisation," Moneyclips, February 14,1994; '"Free visa' expatriates face severe penalties in Saudi Arabia," SaudiGazette, February 11, 1994. ___________________________________________________________ Israel:Replace Arab Workers with Foreign Workers? Israeli agriculture Minister Ya'acov Tsur recommended that Arab farmworkers inthe West bank be replaced by 1,000 foreign workers, since it has provedimpossible to attract Jewish workers into the citrus growers. There are anestimated 20,000 Arab farmworkers employed in the Israeli citrus, flower andvegetable sectors, and the substitution of foreign for Arab workers came inresponse to the murder of a citrus grower by Arab workers. "Tsur: Replace Arab workers with foreigners," The Jerusalem Post, February13, 1994, p2. ___________________________________________________________ RESOURCES Arditis, Solon. 1994. The Politics of East-West Migration. Available in July1994 from Macmillan, Houndsmills, Basingstoke, Hants, RG21 2XS Fax44-256-28339 Cornelius argues that there is a structural dependence on migrant workers inthe US and Japan, as evidenced by the "need" for foreign workers in particularindustries and firms despite recession. However, in recession, particulargroups of migrants become convenient scapegoats for unemployment and strainedpublic finances--Iranians in Japan, and Mexicans in the US. Cornelius reviews how the debate over immigration's costs and benefits has beentransformed in California into the perception that immigrants generate allcosts and no benefits. However, he observes that there are significantbenefits to particular firms that often extend to the areas in which thosefirms are located; he recounts how an illegal alien interviewed by the policein Japan discovered that the police knew exactly where he and his friendslived, suggesting that the police tolerated their presence because they knewabout the local benefits of migrant workers. The hypocrisy betweentough-sounding state and national demands to reassert control over borderswhile permitting side and backdoor migration that is economically useful iscriticized. During the late 1970s, Cornelius was noted for his belief that most Mexicanmigrant workers in the US were sojourners, not settlers. He has changed hismind. The structural need for migrant labor means that, in his opinion,foreign labor is inevitable, and government leaders should teach the publicthat society must " accept as inevitable, a significant incidence of permanentsettlement among the foreigners whom it admits, through whatever channels." (p.14) Dummett, Ann and Jan Niessen, 1993. Immigration and Citizenship in theEuropean Union. Available from the Churches Commission for Migrants in Europe,174 rue Joseph II, B-1040 Brussels, Fax 32-2-231-1413. CCME Briefing Paper No.14. A six-chapter briefing paper that updates the February, 1992 CCME BriefingPaper No. 7 (European migration policies for the nineties after the MaastrichtSummit). The paper describes the Maastricht Treaty's implications forimmigration, citizenship and community relations. Goonerate, Wilbert, Philip Martin and Hidehiko Sazanami (Eds), 1994. RegionalDevelopment Impacts of Labour Migration in Asia. United Nations Centre forRegional Development, Japan. UNCRD Research Report Series No. 2. Availablefrom the United Nations Centre for Regional Development, Nagono 1-47-1,Nakamura-Ku, Nagoya 450, Japan. Fax: (+ 81-52) 561-9377. Includes 18 papers presented at a November 1990 conference. Three papers covermigration within and from the region, there are papers on each of the majorlabor importing countries, including five papers on Japan, and five papers onemigration countries. There are also introductory and concluding essays thatfocus on the effects of labor migration on the economic development of Asia. Eisenstadt, Todd A., and Cathryn L Thorup. 1994. Caring Capacity versusCarrying Capacity: Community Responses to Mexican Immigration in San Diego'sNorth County. Available from the Center for U.S.-Mexican Studies-0510,University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093-0510. Monograph 39.101 pages. This report draws from over 100 interviews conducted between October 1992 andMay 1993 to explore the effects of and reactions to recent immigrants innorthern San Diego county. Up to 75 percent of the "migrant workers and daylaborers" in this area are unauthorized recent newcomers from Mexico. Thereport's six chapters review the reality and polices that affect thesemigrants' housing, employment, education, criminal justice, and health care.The authors argue that "unskilled workers will continue to enter San Diegocounty by whatever means necessary as long as there is a demand for theirlabor"(p 88), and that research must dispel myths about high costs and fewbenefits from such migration. Werner, Heinz. 1994. "Integration of Foreign Workers into the LabourMarket--France, Germany, the Netherlands and Sweden." Available from Migrationand Population Branch, International Labour Office, CH-1211 Geneva. WorkingPaper 74. This 75 page working paper examines how well-integrated foreign workers andethnic groups are into the labor markets of France, the Netherlands, Sweden andGermany. It also evaluates the effectiveness of government policies to promoteintegration. Werner concludes that "a general convergence of labour marketconditions between foreigners/ethnic groups and national workers cannot beexpected in the near future."(p 47) Winkler, Beatte (Ed). 1993. Zukunftsangst Einwanderungsland(Future Fear:Immigration Country) Available from B Winkler, Lengsdorfer Hauptstr 80,D-53127 Bonn. pp122. This book includes five chapters, covering German migration history (Bade), thecurrent situation of foreigners in Germany (Winkler), future pressures tomigrate to Germany (Reichow), integration problems (Winkler), and the outlineof an integrated migration, integration, and minority policy. _________________________________________________________ Editor: Philip Martin Managing Editor: Cecily Sprouse Department of Agricultural Economics, University of California, Davis, Davis CA95616 USA Telephone: (916) 752-1530 Fax: (916) 752-5614 E-mail: Migration News <migrant@primal.ucdavis.edu> Contributors: Graziano Battistella, Scalabrini Migration Center, PO Box 10541,Broadway Centrum, 1113 Queson City, Philippines. Wolfgang Bosswick, European Forum for Migration Studies, University of Bamberg,Katharinenstrasse 1, D-96052 Bamberg, Germany. WT02-B13-130IA090-000969-B024-112http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/By-Month/MN-Vol-1-94/MN_April_1994.html 128.120.36.171 19970122203906 text/html 48836HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 20:40:03 GMTLast-Modified: Thursday, 13-Apr-95 22:00:56 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 48578MIGRATION NEWS Vol. 1, No.3 April, 1994 Migration News is a newsletter produced for University of Californiafaculty and students interested in comparative immigration and integrationissues. Topics are grouped by region: North America, Europe, Asia, andOther. The purpose of Migration News is to summarize key developments in thepreceding month; our goal is to offer summaries that can be read in 30 minutes.We will also offer abstracts of selected papers and articles and information onrecent research publications. Distribution is by email; if you wish to be added to the mailing list,send your email address to: Migration News <migrant@primal.ucdavis.edu>.Back issues, migration data, and working papers can be accessed via gopher inthe Migration News folder at: dual.ucdavis.edu We welcome your contributions: please fax news items of interest toPhilip Martin at (916) 752-5614, or send them to the email address above.Working papers and other materials to be listed in the RESOURCES section can besent to Philip Martin, Department of Agricultural Economics, University ofCalifornia, Davis, Davis CA 95616 USA. Those who contribute items may requestMigration News by mail or fax if email is unavailable. ------------------------------------------------------------ ------------------------------------------------------------ NORTHAMERICA ------------------------------------------------------------ ImmigrationReform Bills Flood Congress Senator Alan Simpson (R-Wyoming) introduced legislation to reduce illegalimmigration into the United States. Key components of Simpson's reform packageinclude a counterfeit-resistant work identification card, further revisions tothe US system for considering requests for political asylum , and establishinga fee on persons who cross the US-Mexican border, with the moneys collected tobeef-up border enforcement. The maximum penalty for smuggling illegal aliensinto the US would be raised to imprisonment for 10 years, and the deathpenalty could be invoked if an immigrate dies as a result of coyote'sactions. Simpson's bill would also reduce the annual number of legal immigrants expectedfrom 675,000 to 500,000 for five years. Simpson, one of the architects of 1986immigration reforms, argues that because IRCA did not reduce illegalimmigration, the United States should now restrict legal immigration.Simpson's bill would reduce the number of political refugees the US anticipatesresettling from 80,000 to 12,000 annually, unless Congress declares anemergency. Meanwhile, the House Republican Task Force on Illegal Immigration has proposeda $2 billion program that would lead to a tamper-proof Social Security card, a$1.50 per person border crossing fee, and the elimination of all federal aidfor illegal immigrants. A coalition of nine California Democrats proposed its own package ofimmigration reform legislation. This proposal includes: increasing the BorderPatrol from 3,500 to 6,000 and upgrading its equipment and training; requiringfederal reimbursement of state and local costs of imprisoning undocumentedimmigrants convicted of crimes; tougher federal rules to protect US citizensand legal immigrants from workplace discrimination; establishing a federalreview board to investigate civil rights abuses by federal agents; addingresources to eliminate the backlog of aliens waiting to become naturalized UScitizens; and adding English and civics instruction classes for those seekingto apply for U.S. citizenship. FAIR, the Federation for American ImmigrationReform, has denounced this proposal, charging that it will increase governmentbureaucracy and tie the hands of the government in enforcement. Finally, California Governor Pete Wilson (R) in a March 16, 1994 speech to theHeritage Foundation in Washington, DC repeated his demand that the federalgovernment to reimburse states for the costs they incur to provide educationand medical services, as well as to incarcerate illegal immigrants. Wilsonargues that ''The Constitution of the United States is clear -- the regulationof immigration, legal and illegal, is exclusively a federal responsibility.And it's simply not fair for the federal government to force a state to bearthe costs of educating someone or providing emergency health care to someonewho is in the country because of federal failure to control the border.'' (p.A4) In California, signatures are being collected to put two immigration controlinitiatives on the November ballot. The first initiative, sponsored by twoformer Immigration and Naturalization Service officials, would prevent the USnon-citizen children of illegal immigrants from attending without charge publicschools and receiving taxpayer-funded health and welfare services; it has beenendorsed by the Republican Party. This initiative also calls for stifferpenalties for false ID cards and increased cooperation between governmentagencies to enforce immigration laws. Nancy Mathis, The Houston Chronicle, "Immigration plan calls for ID cards,border fees, March 3, 1994. Michael Ross, "Simpson Seeks 5-Year Cut in LegalImmigration," Los Angeles Times, March 3, 1994. Frank Trejo, "Changes Urged inImmigrant Law" Dallas Morning News, March 3, 1994. David LaGesse, "Immigrantslimits sought to give U.S. breath", Dallas Morning News, March 3, 1994. SimonBeck, "Senate Takes first step in war on illegal immigration," South ChinaMorning Post, March 3, 1994. Marc Sandalow, "Wilson Pleads for ImmigrationFunds," The San Francisco Chronicle, March 18, 1994. P. A4. Maria Puente,"States bemoan costs of illegal immigration," USA Today, March 18, 1994, p. 7A.Ed Mendel, "Immigrant Initiatives get mixed responses: One bid to cut off aidprogresses; other lags," San Diego Union-Tribune, March 17, 1994, p. A3.Derrick DePledge, "Wilson Urges Feds to Cover the Costs of IllegalImmigration," States News Service, March 17. "California Democrats OfferImmigration Bills," Daily Labor Report, March 14, 1994. "Welcome Teamwork onImmigration," Los Angeles Times, March 16, 1994, p. B6. "FAIR: CaliforniaDemocrats Offer Hollow Immigration Legislation," PR Newswire, March 16, 1994. ------------------------------------------------------------ ImmigrationContributes to Inequality President Clinton's first Economic Report of the President asserted thatgrowing income inequality in the US is "a threat to the social fabric."Included in the list of factors responsible for growing economic disparitiesare new technologies, diminished union strength, a falling real minimum wage,and immigration. Because "immigration has increased the relative supply ofless educated labor...[it]appears to have contributed to the increasinginequality of income, but the effect has been small."(p120) Economic Report of the President: 1994 ------------------------------------------------------------ EliminatingSSI for Immigrants A White House Task Force is considering a proposal that would deny SupplementalSecurity Income benefits to elderly legal immigrants unless they become UScitizens. Illegal immigrants are not eligible for SSI benefits. The SSIprogram is a major source of support for needy elderly legal immigrants, sincemany do not qualify for Social Security benefits because they did not work inthe United States. The number of immigrants receiving SSI has increased from 128,000 in 1982 to601,000 in 1993. About 150,000 new applications for SSI are received fromlegal aliens each year. Two-thirds of the immigrant SSI recipients areelderly, reflecting the tendency of some immigrants who have become US citizensto bring their parents into the country, and then have their parents apply forSSI. The number of parents who immigrate to join their children in the US hasincreased from 40,000 in 1985 to 65,000 in 1993. By not permitting immigrantsto obtain SSI, AFDC and Food Stamp benefits until they become UScitizens--meaning they must wait at least 5 years--the Task Force estimatessavings of over $1.2 billion per year. Ronald Brownstein, "Welfare Proposal Threatens Aid to Older Immigrants, " LosAngeles Times, March 17, 1994, pA1. Melita Marie Garza, "U.S. May Trim Aid toLegal Immigrants," Chicago Tribune, March 19, 1994, p. 1. ------------------------------------------------------------ LAQuake Aid for Legal Immigrants Applicants for housing assistance in the wake of the January 1994 SouthernCalifornia earthquake will be spot checked by immigration officials to ensurethat illegal immigrants do not receive aid, in the first ever denial ofhumanitarian aid on the basis of immigration status. Initially the FederalEmergency Management Agency wanted to rely solely on the honor system todetermine immigration status, but Congress insisted that applicants make aformal declaration of their immigration status and show identity documents.False statements carry penalties of imprisonment and fines. However, the US House of Representatives defeated a measure by Rep. DanaRohrabacher (R-Huntington Beach) that would have denied tuition-free federalelementary and secondary education to illegal immigrant children. The Houserejected Rohrabacher's proposal that would have required public schools toreport the immigration status of students and their parents. Roberto Suro, "Illegal Immigrants Targeted; FEMA to Screen L.A. Quake AidApplications," Washington Post, March 22, 1994, p. A1. Alan Miller, "INS toRandomly Check Quake Aid Applicants, The Los Angeles Times, March 19, 1994, p.A1. Dina ElBoghdady, "House Defeats Rohrabacher Proposal to Cut Funding toIllegals," State News Service, March 22, 1994. ------------------------------------------------------------ CanadaRevises Nanny Immigration On March 16, 1994, Canada reduced the requirements for immigrant nannies.April 1992 rules required nannies to prove that they had completed at least asix month training course before being admitted as nannies; the March 16, 1994revision lowers the requirement to a 12th grade education and 12 monthsexperience as a maid. After two years of work as a domestic, a foreign workermay apply for permanent or landed immigrant status. Before the training requirement in 1991, some 7,835 domestic workers--mostlyFilipinos--were admitted. In 1993, the number of Filipinos admitted droppedfrom 5,323 to 779. Since most domestics apply for immigrant status afterserving what some describe as a two year "jail term," the government feltobliged to toughen the rules when it realized that there were over 1,200unemployed domestics--mostly immigrants--in Toronto alone. Vivian Smith, "Needed: Nannies" Toronto Globe and Mail, March 20, 1994, ------------------------------------------------------------ OperationHold the Line Stricter border enforcement in California and Texas seems to have pushedillegal immigrants from Mexico to attempt entries through Arizona. The BorderPatrol reported that arrests in the Tucson area have increased 40 percent sincelast year. San Diego and El Paso still account for more than 70 percent ofillegal crossings. Roberto Sanchez, "Arizona border swamped as illegals seek easy entry," ThePhoenix Gazette, March 18, 1994. ------------------------------------------------------------ ImmigrationCosts in Texas and Florida Rice University economist Donald Huddle estimates that legal and illegalimmigration cost the state of Texas more that $4.68 billion in 1992, i.e.,state and local governments incurred $4.68 billion more in costs than 1.9million immigrants who arrived in the state since 1970 paid in taxes to stateand local governments. According to Huddle, illegal immigrants cost Texas,$1.02 billion, legal immigrants $3.66 billion. Urban Institute demographer Jeff Passel re-examined Huddle's estimates andfound that, because Huddle does not include the taxes that accrue togovernments immigrants indirectly create job for Americans, and ignores thetaxes paid as immigrants purchase food and housing, he underestimates their taxcontributions. The Urban Institute has received a White House grant toestimate state costs associated with illegal immigration. In Florida, the Governor's Office and the Florida Advisory Council onIntergovernmental Relations prepared a report, "The Unfair Burden,Immigration's Impact on Florida." It estimates that the state's 340,000illegal immigrants cost the government $884 million a year for education,housing and justice costs. Debra Beachy, "Study estimates immigrants cost Texas $4.68 billion in 1992," March 3, 1994, The Houston Chronicle. Reena Shah Stamets, "The debate overillegal immigrants," St. Petersburg Times, March 18, 1994, p. 1A. Magaret L.Usdansky, "Analysts argue over cost vs. contribution," USA Today, March 18,1994, p. 7A. "Florida Says Illegal Immigrants Cost $884 Million in Services,"The New York Times, March 14, 1994, p. B7. "Immigrants Cause Unfair Burden,Governor Says," The Times-Picayune, March 14, 1994. p. A4. David LaGesse,"States' Spending on Immigrants Under Study," Dallas Morning News, March 21,1994, p. 4A. ------------------------------------------------------------ ChineseSmuggled to U.S. Via Thailand The Immigration and Naturalization Service reported that a major Chinese triadis smuggling thousands of illegal aliens into the U.S. via Thailand. The triadprovides Chinese immigrants with fake travel documents and housing in Thailandbefore they are brought to the U.S. by air or sea. The U.S. governmentestimates that as many as 80,000 Chinese immigrants passed through Bangkok ontheir way to the U.S. last year. Chinese who want to immigrate to the U.S. payup to $30,000 in cash or credit. John Hail, "New York-based gang smuggling thousands of Chinese to U.S.," UnitedPress International, March 15, 1994. ------------------------------------------------------------ Immigrationto Wisconsin The effects of the immigration of Southeastern Asian refugees to Wausau,Wisconsin is discussed in an article in the April 1994 Atlantic Monthly. Thecommunity welcomed refugees in the 1970s, but now blames them for many of thesocial ills that plague the city, including such as school busing and gangviolence. The fact that the refugees are poor and minority has aggravated tensions.Seventy percent of them, primarily members of the Hmong mountain hill tribes,are still receiving public assistance, and their children are almost a quarterof the elementary schoolchildren. The refugees were brought to Wausau by area churches in the 1970s. The firstrefugees settled, and then invited their extended family members to join themin Wisconsin. Roy Beck, "The Ordeal of Immigration in Wausau," The Atlantic Monthly, April1994, pp 84-97. ------------------------------------------------------------ TemporaryForeign Workers An appellate court ruling will make it easier for employers to hire an alien ifno Americans are qualified or available for the job. The court eliminated a USDepartment of Labor rule that required employers to repeat the applicationprocedure if one foreign worker is replaced by another. In New England, the US Department of Labor warned apple growers that the joborder they planned to file to search for American workers before being givenpermission to recruit H-2A foreign workers for the 1994 harvest may violate UScivil rights laws because they state that the growers prefer " male workersaged 22-40" who are "free from physical impairments ...which would make theindividual unable to meet quality or quantity standards." In addition, the joborder states that workers willing to work six days per week are preferred, aswell as those that have experience working on "mainland" US farms and withoutrelatives in New England. The New England Apple Council Inc. in 1993 recruited 400 US workers, and 2,000H-2A foreign workers to pick apples. The Farmworker Justice Fund Inc. attackedthe Council's job description, calling it "blatantly illegal " because, interalia, the growers provided no evidence that hearing-impaired workers are unableto pick apples, or that workers under 22 or over 40 should be discouraged fromapplying. In New York, an apple grower paid $10,000 to 10 US citizen workers to settle acomplaint brought under IRCA in which the workers charged that they were firedto make room for H-2A workers. "Appeals Court Voids U.S. Alien Work Rule," Chicago Tribune, March 20, 1994, p.24. Daily Labor report, March 25, 1994. Brian McGrory, 'Profile' of applegrowers condemned, Boston Globe, March 24, 1994, p32. UPI, March 16, 1994 ------------------------------------------------------------ EUROPE ------------------------------------------------------------ HungerStrike by Asylum Seekers in UK A hunger strike by about one-half of the 200 asylum seekers at the CampsfieldHouse detention center near Oxford, England has focused attention on Britain'sasylum system. Campsfield was opened in November, 1993 to avoid sendingdetainees to regular prisons. More than 700 asylum seekers are being detainedin the UK. A report released on March 21 by the government's chief inspector of prisonsseverely criticized the jailing of asylum seekers and immigrants. Most asylumseekers are detained for at least six months. There have also been complaints about detention centers in France and Spain.In France, the Interior Ministry plans to buy a building capable of holding 200aliens awaiting deportation. In Spain, judges in Malaga condemned as unfit thedetention centers used to hold aliens for up to 40 days there. Jason Bennetto, "Prison's health facilities 'unfit for patients': Inmates'destressed and despondent,'" The Independent, March 22, 1994, p. 4. EdwardMortimer, "Avoidably detained," Financial Times, March 23, 1994, Le Monde,February, 8, 1994, El Pais, February 2, 1994. ------------------------------------------------------------ Councilof Ministers Discussion The Council of EU Ministers of Justice and Home Affairs in Brussels has resumeddiscussions of immigration and asylum issues. Talks had been halted by Spainafter Belgium had agreed to consider a request by two Basque separatists forpolitical asylum, raising the issue of whether a national of one European Unionstate can ask for political asylum in another. The EU Commission on February 23, 1994 issued a communiqué that included32 ideas for dealing with immigration and integration issues. These range frombetter data to combating illegal aliens employment to stemming racism andxenophobia. In Spain, asylum procedures have been changed. If the UNHCR objects to adecision of the Interior Ministry, the asylum applicant's claim must bereferred to a court before tha lien is expelled. "Justice Council: Madrid Agrees to Discuss Asylum and Immigration," EuropeanReport, March 23, 1994; Suddeustche Zeitung, March 4, 1994 ------------------------------------------------------------ GermanyPostpones Return of Yugoslavs The German government postponed from March to September its planned return ofBonians. There are more than 200,000 nationals of the former Yugoslav ia inthe country, but the German Ministeries of Interior and the Federal States,which jointly determine when to deport aliesn, have agreed on thepostponement. The first deportations of 60,000 rejected asylum seekers from Serbia,Montenegro and Kosovo were also postponed due to a breakdown in negotiationswith Romania. In March, 640 such persons were to be flown to Romania and thenbussed to Serbia. The High Administrative Court in Schleswig, Germany ruled that Albanians fromKosovo are entitled to asylum in Germany due to "collective persecution by theSerbs." Ninety percent of the people in Kosovo are Albanian, although all arelegally Serbian citizens. The administrative courts of the States of NorthRhine-Westphalia and Baden-Württemberg are denying asylum to Albaniansfrom Kosovo, ruling that they are not being persecuted for ethnic reasons. Thisexample demonstrates that, in Germany, individual states have control over therules governing who is granted asylum. In a related development, Switzerland will on July 1, 1994 introduce newlegislation that allows the imprisonment of aliens for up to 9 months if theyfile fraudlent aslum applications, are unwilling to identify themselves, orleave the areas to which they have been restricted. Under this legislation,the Swiss police can obtain search warrants to enter homes in search offoreigners. Michael Kallenbach, "Germans Call Halt to Mass Expulsion," Sunday Times, March13, 1994. Suddeustche Zeitung, March 10, March 16, and April 3, 1994, PS March10, 1994. ------------------------------------------------------------ Sweden: Tighter Restictions on Africans? The Swedish State Board of Immigration asked the government to tighten visarequirements on visitors from four African nations--Uganda, Gambia, Togo andthe Ivory Coast. The call for tightening visa requirements came in response tothe increasing number of African visitors who overstay their tourist visas andremain in Sweden illegally. Swedish government figures show that in the first month of 1994, 76 people fromthe four African nations, most from Togo, requested political asylum in Sweden.In 1993, over 800 African nationals requested political asylum-- half fromUganda. Norway, Finland and Denmark are also considering visa requirements forAfrican tourists--Finland and Denmark have introduced visa requirements forcitizens of Gambia and Togo. Greg McIvor, "North-South: Calls for Swedish Visa Clampdown on Africanvisitors," InterPress Service, March 3, 1994 ------------------------------------------------------------ ASIA ------------------------------------------------------------ Japanand Foreign Worker Pensions Japanese law requires employers and employees to each contribute 7.25 percentof their salary to the pension system. In October 1995, the contributions ofeach party are scheduled to rise to 8.25 percent. Under a proposed change incurrent practices, non-Japanese workers who contribute to the pension fund forat least six months would be entitled to a lump-sum reimbursement of their own(but not the employer's) contribution. Some 82,000 foreigners are expected toqualify for maximum refunds of $725 per month. In mid-March, 60 immigrant workers South Korea, Bangladesh and Pakistan appealed to officials at the Japanese Labor Ministry to take steps tohelp foreign workers whose employers do not pay them to get their back wages. There are 22,000 hired workers, and 379,000 farm operators and family workersin Japan. As farmers age, many are turning to hired workers, including foreignworkers. In one study, 3 of 4 cut flower growers complained of laborshortages, but all 4 expressed uncertainty about hiring foreign workers. The Nikkei Weekly, March 14, 1994, UPI, March 14, 1994; Shigeki Yokoyama,"Personnel Management in Farming: A Case of Floriculture in Japan," mimeo,July 1993. ------------------------------------------------------------ Taiwan: New Limits on Foreign Workers Taiwan's Council of Labour Affairs [COLA] announced that after March 16, 1994,no more than 65 percent of the workers on major construction projects in thecountry may be foreign workers. Taiwan also signaled that it can be tough onforeign workers who go on strike: it deported two Thai workers who led astrike by 500 Thais that began at the end of February despite protests by humanand workers' rights groups. Some 5,830 foreign workers--95 percent Thais--were admitted to Taiwan in 1993,up from 2300 in 1992. There are 75,700 legal foreign workers in Taiwan, and anestimated 55,000 illegal workers. On March 30, Taiwan announced plans to import 1000 workers from Vietnam "toprevent us from becoming hostage to a source country which refuses to abide byour regulations," a reference to Thailand. Thailand and Taiwan have beenfeuding over health examinations and agency fees. Foreign workers are now allowed to remain in Taiwan for up to 3 years, up fromthe previous 2 year limit. Private and public employers have receivedauthorization to bring 160,000 foreign workers to Taiwan. Central News Agency, Taipei, March 3 and 23, 1994; Reuters, March 31, 1994 ------------------------------------------------------------ Rural-UrbanMigration in China The Chinese agriculture minister reported that in 1993 the average rural incomewas 921 yuan ($77) versus 2337 yuan ($195) in urban areas. Urban incomes roseby 10.2 percent in 1993, versus 3.2 percent in rural areas. One result is that 50 million peasants migrated to urban areas in 1993, with 20million migrating to the booming southeastern provinces. There are now 430million peasants, including 112 million who work in rural factories. As menmigrate from rural areas, women are left to do the farmwork--145 million womenare now 70 percent of China's farm workforce, and they are expected to be overthree-fourths of the 240 million farm workforce in 2000. Many rural women areless mobile than men, and they are paid on average 22 percent less than ruralmen. Hong Kong Sunday Morning Post, March 13, 1993, p8. ------------------------------------------------------------ HongKong and the Migration Transition Cornell Economist Gary Fields in 1993 wrote an influential paper which arguedthat both the rate and the distribution of economic growth influence acountry's migration transition from labor exporter to importer. Asian nationsthat attracted foreign investment to build factories from which labor-intensivegoods could be exported, he argued, initially created jobs at then prevailinglow wages, but soon reached full employment, which permitted manufacturingwages to rise. In the virtuous circle that characterized Asian NIE development, thesemanufacturing wage gains were shared with rural workers. Manufacturing wagesin Taiwan, for example, were only 20 percent higher than agricultural wages inthe 1970s, versus 100 percent higher in Mexico. Field's analysis suggests that the migration transition can be speeded up withurban-led economic, job, and wage growth that is broadly shared throughout adeveloping society. Integrated and flexible labor markets are, in his view, asimportant as growth and job creation per se in affecting migration. Ron Skeldon, a University of Hong Kong geographer, showed that HongKong's experience is almost exactly the opposite of what would have beenexpected on the basis of Field's analysis. Hong Kong experienced significantimmigration despite unemployment in the 1950s. In 1960, for example, thenumber of street peddlers or hawkers--one measure of unemployment--was 50,000,or equivalent to one-fourth of the manufacturing workforce. During the 1970s, despite jobs and higher wages in Hong Kong, emigration rose,peaking at over 25,000 in 1973, largely because Canada did not start torestrict access until 1977. However, emigration reached its highest everlevels in 1990, when over 62,000 largely professional residents left. At thesame time, real wages were rising in Hong Kong, and employers there complainedof labor shortages across the skill spectrum from maids to construction workersto accountants. Skeldon concluded that the Hong Kong migration transition demonstrates thateconomic factors such as jobs and wages are just one reason for migration.Indeed, he notes that many of today's emigrants may actually be binationalcommuters. Some have an immigrant status in Canada, but spend much of theirworking time in Hong Kong that they are referred to as "astronauts" because ofthe amount of time they spend in the air. Skeldon concludes that the HongKong experience demonstrates dramatically the importance of policy andpolitical factors in explaining migration patterns. Hong Kong has been dealing with labor shortages in several ways. Mostimportant is the relocation of low-wage manufacturing jobs to nearby Guandong,China. According to Skeldon, Hong Kong-based manufacturers have three millionemployees there, or four to five times their Hong Kong workforces. Guandong,in turn, is attracting migrants from other parts of China: almost two-thirdsof the one million residents of the city of Shenzhen in Guangdong in 1990 wereimmigrants who had arrived within the past 12 months or had their registrationelsewhere in China. In this way, internal migration within China has in partsubstituted for labor migration to Hong Kong. Hong Kong also has several programs under which 80,000 to 90,000 immigrantsarrive each year. About one-third are relatives from China who are joiningfamily members in Hong Kong--an average 105 Chinese daily are permitted tosettle in Hong Kong. Another 10,000 to 12,000 are PTK migrant workers.Finally, the Hong Kong government announced a program to admit up to 25,000temporary workers for up to six years on renewable two-year work permits, plus5,500 migrant construction workers. Hong Kong has announced a plan to recruit 1,000 mainland Chinese to fillprofessional and managerial vacancies in Hong Kong. Graduates of 36 mainlanduniversities will be eligible to take jobs in Hong Kong, and a ballot systemwill be used to allocate them to Hong Kong employers. They will be issued aone-year visas, renewable for first two years, then another two years, andfinally three years. Their dependents will not be permitted to join them inHong Kong. Chung-tong Wu and Christine Inglis, "Illegal Immigration to Hong Kong", Asianand Pacific Migration Journal, Vol. 1 No 3-4. 1992. p. 601. Gary Fields, "theMigration Transition and International Trade," mimeo. 1993. 30pp. RonaldSkeldon, "Turning Points in Labor Migration: The Case of Hong Kong," mimeo,1993. Louis Won and Scott McKenzie, "China graduates to take `local jobs',South China News, March 5, 1994, p 4. ------------------------------------------------------------ IllegalImmigrants in Thailand Thailand has more than 500,000 illegal immigrants, described by the Thaigovernment as foreign workers and gangsters. Most (300,000) are believed to befrom Myanmar (Burma), China (100,000), and South Asia (50,000). Most of theimmigrants from Myanmar are unskilled construction workers, who are hiredbecause they are willing to accept low wages. The Cambodians generally work inrice paddies, and the Laotians find domestic and factory work. There are alsoimmigrants from the Indian sub-continent and Middle East who enter Thailandlegally, and then overstay their visas. "Thailand haven for illegal workers, gangsters" The Straits Times, March 17,1994, p. 13. ------------------------------------------------------------ PhilippineImmigration Crackdown The Philippine government has ordered a crackdown on the estimated 100,000foreigners who have been living illegally in the country for more than threeyears--there is a reward of 2,000 pesos for every illegal immigrant turned in.Most are Chinese and Indian nationals. The Manila Chronicle estimates thatthere are about 500,000 illegal immigrants in the country. The government is also firing corrupt employees in the immigration bureau. Itis believed that many foreigners were overstaying their visas because ofconnivance of some bureau officials and employees. Indians in the Philippines have complained that the crackdown has permittedImmigration authorities to extort money from them. Current Philippineimmigration laws reportedly permit an Indian to obtain legal immigrant statusfor 3,500 pesos. There are about 20,000 Indians in the Philippines, most ofthem Sindhis who left after the British partitioned India. There is also alarge Sikh community, m any of whom have traditionally been ruralmoney-lenders. " Manila out to nab illegal immigrants," The Straits Times, March 14, 1994."Philippines: Indians Cite Bias in Immigration Crackdown, InterPress Service,March 15, 1994. ------------------------------------------------------------ Malaysia: A Special Report The Malaysian government estimated that 50,000 mostly illegal Indonesians leftthe country during the March 14-15 Hari Raya festival that marks the end ofRamadan. According to Deputy Home Minister Megat Junid, the federal policecrackdown known as Ops Nyah II was largely responsible for these "voluntary"exits. Under Ops Nyah II, the Immigration Department arrested 54,155 illegalaliens between July 1992 and December 1993. According to Malaysian authorities, most of the illegal aliens in the countryare foreigners who pay bogus job agencies in their home countries for what theworker may believe to be a valid work permit and job. The mostly Indonesianand Filipino workers are then brought into the country illegally, and issuedfalse work permits--the cost of illegally crossing the 20 mile Strait ofMalacca that separate Indonesian Sumatra from Peninsular Malaysia is reportedlyless than US$10. Many Malaysian employers of foreign workers are labor contractors in theplantation and construction sectors. They argue that some of the foreignworkers arrested by Malaysian police during worksite raids are in fact legalworkers, and that only a slow government bureaucracy--it can take six to eightmonths from the time an employer applies for foreign workers until theyarrive-- makes the workers only technically illegal. They note that Malaysianemployers were certified to need 425,000 foreign workers between July 1, 1992and December 31, 1993, but that only 190,000 work permits were actuallyissued. In January 1994, Malaysia announced a freeze on the further admission ofunskilled and semi-skilled immigrant workers. However, Malaysia has continuedto permit employers to hire illegal alien workers who were in the countrybefore the freeze was announced. Malaysian employers whose need for foreignworkers has been certified are allowed to hire the 4,866 illegal aliens in whowere being held in eight detention centers in February, 1994. Malaysia is engaged in a debate over how to control illegal immigration intoone of Asia's fastest-growing economies that is already at full employment.Malaysia already has an employer sanctions law, but enforcement authoritieshave admitted that there goal is to "punish illegal workers, not Malaysianemployers." Many Malaysian employers reportedly believe the labor agents, whobring most of the foreign workers into the country, when they are told that theworkers are legal, and the agent is simply keeping their work permits forsafekeeping. There are apparently few fines levied against employers who hire illegalaliens, although in April 1994, the Malaysian Parliament is expected to approveamendments to the sanctions law that would increase fines on employers who hireillegal immigrants from M$5,000 (US $2500) to M$50,000 (US $2500), and permitthem to be caned, as in Singapore. Background Malaysia is a fast-growing country of 19 million in southeast Asia thatranks among the world's top immigration destinations. However, Malaysia isunique because it is a significant exporter and importer of unskilled migrantworkers. Estimates of the number of illegal immigrants in Malaysia range from200,000 to two million, and center on 1.2 million, while over 100,000Malaysians work in Singapore, Taiwan, and Japan. The Malaysian government's policies toward immigration and emigration havechanged significantly in recent years. The 1968 Employment Restrictions Act,which required Malaysian employers to get work permits for non-citizen workers,resulted in thousands of Indian and Chinese plantation workers being forced toleave the country. However, as manufacturing employment expanded in the 1980s,the gap between real wages in agriculture and manufacturing widened from one totwo in 1967 to one to three in 1981. Plantation owners complained of labor shortages--40 percent claimed that theylost rubber and palm oil production in the early 1980s because of insufficientlabor. The government "tolerated" the growing number of illegal alien workerson plantations, and permitted contractors to use foreign workers to clear landfor resettlement programs on which native Malays (Bumipatra) were to beresettled after foreign workers had prepared rubber and palm oil estates forthem. The number of illegal aliens rose to "crisis" proportions in the mid-1980s.The Malaysian government responded by stepping up border and interiorenforcement, and making agreements in 1984-5 with Indonesia and thePhilippines, Thailand, Bangladesh, India, and Pakistan to recruit legal foreignworkers in the event of labor shortages. Current Programs Under the government's current foreign worker program, employers try torecruit Malaysian workers by advertising for them and working with localEmployment Service offices to find local workers. If local workers are notavailable, the Ministry of Human Resources certifies the employer's need forforeign workers, and "Registered Agents" or labor contractors provide the namesof the Indonesians or Bangladeshis who will be brought to Malaysia. Foreign workers receive one-year work permits, which can be renewed. They arerequired to obtain Immigration Department approval to change jobs or employers.The penalty for violating these regulations is a maximum fine of $M 10,000(US$2500), or five years imprisonment, or both. In 1993, 8,893 foreigners weredetained for violating the terms of their visas and 4,925 were deported afterserving their sentences. Malaysia may imitate neighboring Singapore and refine the levy system it nowuses to discourage reliance on foreign workers--Malaysian employers must inmost cases pay $RM 420 per year--by adding sector-by-sector limits on foreignworkers. In response to a question, Singapore Labour Minister Lee Boon Yangnoted that the 200,000 foreign workers in Singapore are 12 percent of theworkforce of 1.6 million, and that Singapore is unlikely to be able tocompletely phase out foreign workers because of the slower indigenousworkforce growth and the rapidly aging population. Singapore regulates foreign worker employment with an annual levy--highest forunskilled workers--and per firm ceilings that vary from industry to industry.However, employers can have the levy rebated on foreign trainees--the lower of100 foreigners or 10 percent of a company's workforce-- who are in the countryfor up to six months. Singapore has 65,000 foreign maids, and is debatingmeasures--including random inspections-- to protect them from abuse. Nayagam, James. 1992. "Migrant Labor Absorption in Malaysia," Asian and PacificMigration Journal, Vol. 1, Number 34. pp 477-494. Adrian David, "More than50,000 illegals go home," New Straits Times, March 15, 1994, p. 6. "Agencieswhich supply illegal foreign workers warned," New Straits Times, March 20,1994. "Caning, stiffer fines to stop influx of illegal immigrants," New StraitsTimes, March 18, 1994. Patrick Pillai, "People on the Move: An overview ofrecent immigration and emigration in Malaysia" Institute of Strategic andInternational Studies (ISIS), Malaysia. ISIS Issue Paper, 60 pp. ------------------------------------------------------------ OTHER ------------------------------------------------------------ IllegalImmigrants Ordered Out of Nigeria Illegal immigrants in Nigeria must obtain residence permits by June 1994 orleave the country, the Nigerian Immigration Department announced in March.After the June deadline, all illegal aliens will be deported. In 1985, Nigeriaforced one million immigrants, primarily Ghanians, out of the country.Immigration officials estimate that about 300,000 illegal immigrants, mostlyfrom Chad, Niger, Benin and Cameroon, live in Lagos. Border controls have beentightened to prevent illegal immigrants from entering the country. The Nigerian Internal Affairs Minister also announced new efforts to regulatethe employment of foreigners. Foreign experts cannot be recruited if qualifiedNigerians are available, and the residence permits of expatriates will nolonger be renewed automatically. The Ministry of Labor estimates that 1.5million skilled Nigerians are unemployed. "Nigeria to flush out illegal immigrants," The Xinhua General Overseas NewsService, March 17, 1994. "Nigeria: Illegal Immigrants to be Deported,"InterPress Service, March 17, 1994. ------------------------------------------------------------ UnitedArab Emirates Tightens Sea Access Police records in the United Arab Emirates show that more than 25,000 peoplefrom Iran, Pakistan, India and other Asian countries have been arrested in thepast twenty years for illegally entering the country. The UAE installed radarand added guard patrols, but police records show that immigrants continue toarrive by small boat, often concealed under cargo. New rules aimed at reducingillegal immigration will restrict the movement of boats and ships inside UAEterritorial waters. Nadim Kawash, "UAE tightens shipping rules to fight drugs, intruders," AgenceFrance Presse, March 18, 1994. ------------------------------------------------------------ RESOURCES ------------------------------------------------------------ International Migration Bulletin, Vol. 3, November 1993, available fromMiroslav Macura, Chief, PAU/DEAP/UN/ECE, Room 470, Paiais des Nations, CH-1211Geneva 10. This bulletin, issued in May and November, is produced with the support of theUNFP to highlight current migration developments in Europe. The highlights ofthis issue, which reached California in March, 1994, include: in October,1993there were an estimated five million refugees and displaced persons in theformer Yugoslavia, and 85 percent remained inside its borders. Over half ofthe five million were in Bosnia. The number of asylum applicants expected inEurope in 1993 was projected to fall by 50,000 to 100,000 below the 1992 levelof 821,000. There are new "transit migrations" into the Czech Republic (36,071 persons weredetained during the first 10 months of 1993), Hungary, and Poland(15,248persons were detained during the first 9 months of 1993) of persons attemptingentry into Western Europe. The French Parliament on August 24, 1993 adopted anew law that tightens the conditions under which dependents and spouses ofFrench nationals and resident foreigners can join them in France. For example,a foreign spouse of a French national must now live in France for one yearbefore being able to acquire an independent residence permit. Hollifield, James. 1994. "The Migration Crisis in Western Europe: Causes andConsequences," to appear in the Summer issue of the Harvard InternationalReview. The issue will include articles devoted to immigration issues inFrance by Hollifield and two French Ministers who have opposing views on whatFrance should do about immigration: Simone Veil, Social Affairs, and CharlesPasqua, Interior. Hollifield's paper surveys the migration debate in Western Europe and makescomparisons with the US debate. Hollifield notes that demand-pull laborrecruitment and de colonization started most of the migrations into northernEurope in the 1950s and 1960s, and then networks permitted supply-push povertyand joblessness in emigration countries to maintain migration's momentum. Inthe 1980s and 1990s, this was manifested as asylum and refugee migration. Hollifield reviews political responses to anti-immigration opinion, policychanges, and the search for and evolution of national and international modelsto manage migration. In fairly detailed country studies, Hollifield shows thatruling governments have taken what have proven to be largely symbolic steps todiffuse anti-immigrant sentiment without really slowing the influx ofimmigrants. The internal dynamics of migration networks evolve, as do labormarkets and firm employment practices in industrial countries, so thatmigration takes on a life of its own. Dominque Schnapper, writes on "Migrants and Foreigners in France" in Vol 2 No 1of People and Place, a quarterly publication of the Australian Forum forPopulation Studies. According to Schnapper, there were 3.6 million foreignersrecorded in the 1990 census, up slightly from 3.5 million in 1982. Thisobscures the fact that there were about 100,000 immigrants in both 1990 and1991; the net increase in the foreign population is low because almost as manyacquired French citizenship each year. Jan Niessen (February, 1994). The Making of European Immigration Policies.Available from the Churches Commission for Migrants in Europe, 174 rue JosephII, B-1040 Brussels, Fax 32-2-231-1413. CCME Briefing Paper No. 15. . This 35 page monograph outlines proposals for a comprehensive Europeanimmigration policy. Part I places the debate within a social and politicalcontext, and Part II develops elements of a European immigration policy. Thepaper also includes a framework on how the Conference of Security andco-operation in Europe (CSCE), the Council of Europe, and the European Unioncould work together to develop a European immigration policy. __________________________________________Editor: Philip Martin Managing Editor: Cecily Sprouse Department of Agricultural Economics, University of California, Davis, Davis CA95616 Telephone: (916) 752-1530 Fax: (916) 752-5614 email:Phil Martin<martin@primal.ucdavis.edu> __________________________________________ WT02-B13-131IA090-000969-B024-129http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/By-Month/MN-Vol-1-94/MN_May_1994.html 128.120.36.171 19970122203915 text/html 76497HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 20:40:11 GMTLast-Modified: Thursday, 13-Apr-95 22:10:19 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 76239MIGRATION NEWS Vol. 1, No. 4 May, 1994 Migration News is a newsletter that summarizes key developments incomparative immigration and integration during the preceding month. Topics aregrouped by region: North America, Europe, Asia, and Other. The purpose of Migration News is to provide offer summaries of immigrationdevelopments that can be read in 30 minutes. Each issue also offers a specialreport on a selected topic, and abstracts of selected papers and articles andinformation on recent research publications. Distribution is by email; if you wish to be added to the mailing list,send your email address to: Migration News <migrant@primal.ucdavis.edu>.Back issues that include additional materials, migration data, and workingpapers can be accessed via gopher in the Migration News folder at:dual.ucdavis.edu We welcome your contributions: please fax news items of interest toPhilip Martin at (916) 752-5614, or send them to the email address above.Working papers and other materials to be listed in the RESOURCES section can besent to Philip Martin, Department of Agricultural Economics, University ofCalifornia, Davis, Davis CA 95616 USA. Those who contribute items may requestMigration News by mail or fax if email is unavailable. ------------------------------------------------------------ ------------------------------------------------------------ NORTHAMERICA ------------------------------------------------------------ StatesSue Federal Government California Governor Pete Wilson sued the federal government on April 29,1994 for reimbursement of $377 million that the state will spend this year onthe 17,000 illegal aliens held in state correctional facilities. On April 23,President Clinton attempted to head off such suits by asking Congress toallocate $350 million to reimburse states for the expenses they incur to jailundocumented aliens; if the crime bill passes, and the funds are appropriated,$200 million would go to California. In an effort to keep the limelight onillegal immigration, Wilson on April 29 ordered 127 members of the CaliforniaNational Guard to go to the US-Mexican border to assist the Border Patrol inits efforts to prevent illegal immigration. On April 12, Florida sued the federal government for reimbursement of the $1.5billion that the state has spent for the past two years on illegal aliens, andfor "prescriptive relief" from future costs. The Florida cost estimate did notinclude any revenues generated from illegal aliens. Two years ago, New Yorksued the federal government, claiming it should reimburse the state for thecosts of keeping illegal aliens in prison. That lawsuit is still pending.Since 1994 is an election year, the Clinton Administration is under pressure toestimate more exactly the costs that states and cities incur to provideservices to illegal immigrants, and to provide some monetary relief. Ken Chavez, "Wilson to file $377 million suit in immigration fight," SacramentoBee, April 26, 1994. James Richardson, "Immigrant suit called politics,"Sacramento Bee, April 27, 1994. James Bornemeier, " U.S. Aid Urged for StatePrison Costs; Spending: Clinton Administration Wants Congress to Allocate $350million to Help," Los Angeles Times, April 23, 1994, p. A25. "States' AliensTab Addressed; U.S. Offers Millions for Prison Costs," Arizona Republic, April23, 1994, p. A3. Ken Chavez, "Wilson sends Guard to Border," Sacramento Bee,April 30, 1994. ------------------------------------------------------------ IllegalImmigration: Numbers, Benefits, and Costs in California California has been at the forefront of the debate over whether the federalgovernment should reimburse states for the costs they incur to serve illegalimmigrants. Over 300 people attended an April 29, 1994 conference inSacramento, California to hear presentations on the number and the benefits andcosts of unauthorized immigrants. There is far more consensus on the number of unauthorized immigrants than ontheir benefits and costs. For example, the consensus is that there are about1.6 million unauthorized immigrants in California. However, there is much lessconsensus on how much these immigrants pay in taxes and cost in services, andthis uncertainty, combined with inabilityof experts to predict the futuretrajectory of the illegal immigrants and the economy, means that there isevidence on both sides of the central question: will the unauthorizedimmigrants arriving today be a future benefit or burden? Background In January 1994, Governor Wilson estimated that the state incurred $2.3billion in unreimbursed costs to provide federally-mandated services tounauthorized immigrants--$1.7 billion for education, $377 million forcorrections, and $300 million for health care costs. The corrections andhealth care cost estimates are based on counts of unauthorized aliensincarcerated and served; the education cost estimate is based on the estimatednumber of illegal aliens in the state. Wilson argues that, since the federal government has exclusive control overimmigration policy, the federal government should reimburse states for all ofthe costs they incur to provide services to unauthorized immigrants, especiallythose services, such as tuition-free education for school-age children, thatthe federal government or courts require the states to provide. Once theprinciple of federal reimbursement is established, there remains the questionof how much the federal government should pay. There is near agreement on the cost of providing these services to unauthorizedimmigrants and their children, e.g., incarcerating a prisoner in Californiacosts about $22,000 per year. The number of illegal aliens is the criticalvariable in determining how many illegal alien children there are and thus howmuch federal reimbursement California can expect. [Some argue that only themarginal cost of services for illegal aliens should be reimbursed, since therewould be, e.g., a criminal justice system even if there were no illegal aliens.Marginal costs could be higher than average costs, if new schools or prisonshad to be built; or lower, if the aliens fill otherwise vacant slots]. Numbers There was apparent consensus on four points: 1) the number of illegal aliensin the US today is about 3.8 million; 2) their number is increasing by about300,000 annually; 3) the California share of the illegal alien populationdecreased from 50 percent in the mid-1980s to about 43 percent; and, 4) theMexican share of US illegal aliens has decreased from 61 percent in themid-1980s to about 39 percent. These data are from the INS paper citedbelow. When Wilson's staff was preparing the budget in January 1994, they used an"unofficial" estimate that there were four million unauthorized aliens in theUS, and 2.1 million in California. Wilson requested a $2.3 billion federalreimbursement, or roughly $1,000 per illegal alien in the state. There are several benchmark estimates of the illegal alien population in theUS. Based on an analysis of Census data, it was estimated that there were 2.1million illegal aliens in 1980. This number then increased--by an average388,000 annually--so that in early 1987, there were thought to be about 4.8million illegal aliens in the US. Three million of these illegal aliensapplied for legalization in 1987-88, including 1.6 million or 53 percent inCalifornia. There is a now a rough consensus on what happened since 1987-88. The Censusestimates that there were about 3. 5 million illegal aliens in the US in 1992,including 1.2 to 1.7 million in California. The INS, using a differentmethodology, estimated that there were 3.4 million, including 1.4 million inOctober 1992. The California Department of Finance, estimated that there were2.6 million unauthorized US residents in 1993, including 1.3 million inCalifornia. The INS estimates that the number of illegal aliens in the US is increasing byabout 300,000 annually, and by 125,000 per year in California. This clearlysuggests that IRCA failed to stem illegal immigration. If the INS numbers areprojected to the year 2000, there would be 5.8 million illegal aliens in theUS, about the same as in early 1987. California would have 2.4 million illegalaliens at the start of the next century. These illegal aliens are concentrated in a few states and counties. The BigSix states--California (1.4 million illegal aliens in October 1992), New York(449,000), Texas (357,000), Florida (322,000), Illinois (176,000), and NewJersey (116,000)--include 85 percent of the illegal aliens in the US. InCalifornia, Los Angeles county has almost two-thirds of the state's illegalaliens. These data are suggestive rather than definitive. One of uncertainties inmaking illegal alien estimates is that very little is known about SAWs, the 1.1million mostly young Mexican men who became US immigrants because they did atleast 90 days of farmwork as illegal aliens in 1985-86. The massive fraud inthis program--perhaps two of three persons approved did not satisfy theprogram's requirements--encouraged new streams of aliens to head north, and thegrowth of the false documents industry and labor contracting has enabledillegal aliens to continue to find US jobs. What remains unclear is how fastSAWs and the "new-new" immigrants arriving are bringing their families to theUS. Immigration and California Politics According to polls, the top four issues for California voters are the economy,crime, immigration and education. The state lost 550,000 jobs, mostly inhigh-tech industries, over the past 3.5 years--so that relatively high-incomeAmericans moved out of California as poor immigrants moved in. (Due in part tomoneys flowing into California after the January 17 earthquake, 164,000 jobswere added in the first quarter of 1994, heralding a possible recovery). Thereis general agreement that the state government has a limited ability to restartthe economy on its own, and most candidates have already endorsed the "threestrikes" initiative that mandates life in prison for a third felony convictionto deal with crime. This leaves immigration and education. In both cases, California hopes forfederal dollars that can stimulate an economic revival. Other states withlarge illegal immigrant populations are feeling the same pressures. A poll inSeptember 1993 found that 63 percent of New Yorkers (New York has 13 percent ofthe US population of illegal aliens), want immigration reduced, but leadingpoliticians in the state are not discussing the issue. Florida, with 10percent of the US illegal alien population, sued for federal reimbursement, butpoliticians there are not engaged in anti-immigrant political rhetoric, perhapsbecause Cuban-American immigrants there vote. Wilson's request for federal reimbursement is supported by both Democrats andRepublicans in the State Legislature, although California commentators notethat: 1) some Democrats in the Legislature are "silent partners" in the sensethat they want federal reimbursement, but abhor the anti-immigrant rhetoricunleashed by Wilson; and, 2) the state's 54-member Congressional delegation issharply divided over what to do about illegal immigration. It includes some ofthe most vehement open- and closed- border Congressional representatives.Middle-of-the-road Democrats such as Senator Feinstein has been quoted assaying that, "the day when America could be the welfare system for Mexico isgone." With budget deficits looming, California voters are unwilling to approve taxincreases and the Legislature is unwilling to cut programs, federalreimbursement seems like the easiest way to close the state's budget deficit.California wants at least $1 billion of the $2.3 billion it is requesting, butothers are quick to point out that the California politicians demandingreimbursement played leading roles in the immigration reforms that createdtoday's immigration dilemma. Benefits and Costs There is a great deal of disagreement over the costs and benefits of immigrantsto the US and California. Studies in the early 1980s in Texas and New Yorkconcluded that the taxes paid by immigrants exceeded the cost of providingpublic services to them, but that the federal government got the surplus oftaxes over expenditures, and local governments had deficits. Los Angeles did astudy in 1992 that reinforced this conclusion. Donald Huddle of Rice University set the benchmark for today's debatewith a study that concluded that the legal and illegal immigrants who arrivedsince 1970 cost the US $42.5 billion in 1992, and $18.1 billion in California.According to Huddle, 7.2 million immigrants arrived legally and illegally inCalifornia since 1970, and the state incurred costs of $23 billion to providethem with services--half of the costs were for education and health care, andone-sixth were due to the costs of providing services to US residents displacedby these immigrants. As with all such studies, Huddle made assumptions about how many illegal aliensthere are, their usage of welfare and other public services, the taxes theypaid, and their indirect economic impacts. Jeff Passel of the Urban Institutereviewed and revised Huddle's US estimates, and his calculations turned the $42billion net cost into a $29 billion net benefit. Most of the $70 billion difference between these studies arises from theirestimates of the taxes paid by immigrants--Huddle assumes that post-1970immigrants paid $20 billion in taxes to all levels of government, and Passelassumes they paid $70 billion. And the major reason for the difference in taxestimates is that Huddle did not include the 15 percent of each worker'searnings that are paid in Social Security taxes, while Passel did--thisaccounts for over one-third of the $70 billion difference. Huddle excluded Social Security taxes because, in his view, contributions todayneed to be offset by the promise of benefit payments to immigrants when theyretire. Passel included them because the federal government treats SocialSecurity on a pay-as-you-go basis. Next Steps There was general agreement that "something" will be done about illegalimmigration in 1994, including some federal reimbursement to states and citiesto cover their cost of providing services to illegal aliens. What is not clearis whether federal action will stop with reimbursement of selected state andlocal government costs, or whether the prospect of continuing illegalimmigration and continuing reimbursement will produce broader immigrationreforms. As Congress and the public re-debate what to do about illegal immigration, itwas noted that past "Grand Bargains" between restrictionists and admissionistshave generally failed--the carrot and stick of sanctions and amnesty did notstop illegal immigration. Indeed, despite 200 years of experience withimmigration, the unanticipated consequences of US immigration reforms continueto have more lasting effects than their anticipated effects. By Philip Martin. Background papers available include Robert Warren, Estimates of theUnauthorized Immigrant Population, April 29, 1994, from INS Statistics,Tariff-Room 246, 425 I St NW, Wash DC, 20536. Donald Huddle, The Net Costsof Immigration to California, from Dept of Economics, Rice University,Houston, TX; Michael Fix and Jeff Passel, Immigration and Immigrants:Setting the Record Straight, May 1994 from the Urban Institute, 2100 M St,Wash DC, 20037. ------------------------------------------------------------ Jordanon US Immigration Policy "Furor" Former Texas Congresswoman Barbara Jordan termed the current USdiscussion of efforts to halt illegal immigration and reimburse states for thecosts they incur to provide services to such immigrants a "furor" rather than adebate. Jordan was appointed by President Clinton to chair the nine-memberCommission on Immigration Reform (CIR), which is scheduled to issue and interimreport that includes recommendations to deal with these issues in September1994. According to Jordan, the CIR agrees that control efforts such as Operation Holdthe Line--massing US Border Patrol agents on the border to deter illegalentries--must be strengthened, since border controls are the most humane way todeal with illegal immigrants. Second, there is a consensus that illegalimmigrants should not be entitled to social service benefits such as welfare,and an improved identification system should not be ruled out in order toensure that unauthorized aliens do not obtain such benefits. Jordan issympathetic to the pleas of states for federal reimbursement of the costs theyincur to provide services to illegal entrants, but she thinks that theirrequests for federal payments may have overstated immigrant costs andunderstated their tax payments. Third, in response to proposals for a "moratorium" on immigration, Jordan saidshe is not opposed to today's level of immigration. According to Jordan, theUS can and should improve opportunities for all American residents, natives andlegal immigrants alike. There are 150 pieces of immigration control legislation are pending in eitherthe House or the Senate, and they propose, inter alia, ditches along theMexican border; a tripling of the number of Border Patrol agents; and creatinga tamper-proof identification card. However, some observers predict thatimmigration reform legislation will not be enacted in 1994 because there havebeen few hearings scheduled on these proposals. Sen. Edward Kennedy, chairmanof the Senate Judiciary Subcommittee on Immigration and Refugee Affairs, isreportedly afraid that holding hearings could lead to anti-immigrant legislation. Roberto Suro, "New Voice in Immigration Debate," The Washington Post, April 13,1994, A15. Melita Marie Garza, Chicago Tribune, April 22, 1994, p. 7. Testimonyof Barbara Jordan, April 14, 1994; The San Francisco Chronicle, March 31, 1994,A1. ------------------------------------------------------------ UFW Marches in California United Farm Workers (UFW) supporters in April 1994 retraced the famous1966 march that led to the union's first collective bargaining agreements. Ina 335-mile trek from Delano to Sacramento, the UFW announced that it waschanging course, shifting its emphasis from urging consumers to boycott grapesto organizing immigrant workers in California fields. The UFW was transformed by immigration. The UFW won two 40 percent one-yearwage increases in the years that marked the era of low farmworkerimmigration--in 1966, and again in 1980. At its height in 1981, the UFW hadover 100 contracts, and 50,000 to 60,000 farmworkers worked under thesecontracts during a typical year. Today, the UFW has 20 to 30 contracts,covering 5,000 to 6,000 workers. In areas such as the Salinas Valley south ofSan Francisco, hourly wages are often lower today--$4.50 to $5.50--than theywere in the early 1980s--$5 to $7 (membership data are murky--some reportsspeak of 100,000 members at peak and 15,000 today, but the UFW has never paiddues to the AFL-CIO for so many members). Immigration and the rise of labor contractors contributed to the loss of UFWcontractors and members. The UFW called several strikes in the early 1980sthat were broken by labor contractors who employed recently-arrived andunauthorized workers. The UFW hoped that, by legalizing farmworkers in1987-88, it would win their loyalty, and that the expected end of illegalimmigration would enable the UFW to win wage increases. Despite aggressiveefforts, the UFW and employer organizations assisted fewer than one in 12 SAWapplicants, and IRCA contributed to the increased immigration of illegal alienswho found farm jobs with the help of labor contractors. The UFW continues to see growers, labor contractors, and what they believe tobe the pro-grower administration of California's farm labor law as the union'schief obstacles, not illegal immigration. Indeed, at a rally attended by12,000 on April 24 in Sacramento to mark the end of the 23-day march, therewere more calls for another amnesty than for tightening border enforcement.The march drew attention to the plight of California farmworkers, but put theblame on growers and labor contractors rather than illegal immigration. By Philip Martin. Mark Arax, "Pilgrimage to mark strategy shift for UFW," Los Angeles Times,March 27, 1994, A1. Edgar Sanchez, "Farm workers march into capital forrally," Sacramento Bee, April 24, 1994, B1. ------------------------------------------------------------ 50Million Californians in 2020 In 1985, the Population Reference Bureau published a monograph entitledPopulation Change and California's Future, which projected that thestate's population would reach 50 million by 2020. In April 1994, Censusprojections reached the same conclusion--California may have 48 million peopleby 2020--15 percent of the 326 million US population. The Census projects thatthere will be 20 million births in California, and that 10 million immigrantswill arrive in California between 1992 and 2020. Four million residents areexpected to leave the state, and after subtracting deaths California will gainan average 600,000 residents annually. There is also expected to be a dramatic change in the ethnic composition of thestate's population. In 2020, Latinos are projected to be 36 percent of thepopulation (they were 26 percent in 1990), non-Latino whites 34 percent (57percent in 1990), and Asian Americans 20 percent (9 percent in 1990). Leon Bouvier and Philip Martin. 1985. Population Change and California'sFuture. Washington DC, PRB; Tony Bizjak, "Nearly 50 million Californianspredicted in 2020," Sacramento Bee, April 20, 1994. B1. ------------------------------------------------------------ Aristideto Cancel US Return Policy Exiled Haitian President Jean-Bertrand Aristide notified the USgovernment that the agreement which allows Haitians sailing toward the US to beintercepted and repatriated will be canceled in 6 months, i.e., on October 4,1994. Under the 13-year old agreement, Haiti allowed the US Coast Guard tostop boats in Haitian and international waters to determine whether they werecarrying Haitians to the US; the US Coast Guard has intercepted and returned66,000 Haitians since 1981. Candidate Clinton criticized the US policy of intercepting and returningHaitians sailing for the US during the 1992 campaign, but President Clintonmaintained the policy, saying he was saving Haitians from drowning at sea. OnApril 22, the Coast Guard brought 400 Haitian "boat people" to Florida, butsaid that this was an "extraordinary circumstance," not a change in US policy.In early April, the US Coast Guard, for the first time, returned to theBahamas 19 Cuban émigrés who were bound for the US. Their returncame after the US was criticized over its handling of Haitians; previously,most Cuban émigrés were granted immediate political asylum. US policy toward Haitians came under attack in late April, as several USCongressional representatives were arrested for protesting US policies.According to US officials, US policies need only fine-tuning; some 55,000Haitians inquired about US refugee status in Haiti, 15,000 applied and wereinterviewed, and 3000 were recognized as US refugees and admitted to theUS. A former US ambassador to Haiti noted that, by canceling the return agreement,Aristide is trying to exert pressure on the US Administration. If theagreement is in fact canceled, Haitians might be arriving on Florida beachesjust as President Clinton is meeting with Western Hemisphere leaders in Miamiin December. Aristide was elected with 67 percent of the vote in 1990, but was ousted in amilitary coup seven months later. Aristide is currently touring the US askingfor grassroots support to reverse the policy of returning Haitians.Unemployment in Haiti is estimated to be 70 percent. Steven Greenhouse, "Aristide to End Accord that Allows US to Seize RefugeeBoats," New York Times, April 8, 1994, A6. "Immigration Pact to End, Aristidesays," Chicago Tribune, April 7, 1994, 9. "Aristide Attacks Refugee Policy,"The Guardian, April 8, 1994, p. 12; US to push Haiti Embargo, keep door shutto immigrants," AP, April 23, 1994. "Coast Guard Returns Cubans to Bahamas,"The Orlando Sentinel, April 7, 1994, p. A3. Ron Howell, "U.S. Admits Haitians;Critics Not Impressed," Newsday, April 23, 1994; "Haiti Standoff: The US WillTry Again," New York Times, April 29, 1994, A1 ------------------------------------------------------------ LivingWith NAFTA Most of the US debate over the North American Free Trade Agreement in Octoberand November, 1993 centered on how free trade would affect American workers.An April 8-9, 1994 conference at Yale University in New Haven, CT, turned thespotlight on Mexico, asking how Mexicans are living with NAFTA after the twoC's in Mexico--Chiapas in January and Colosio in March 1994. When thousands of armed Indians took over several Chiapas cities in January1994, they emphasized the fact that millions of Mexicans, especially ruralresidents, had been left behind in Mexico's recent growth spurt. According tothose familiar with Chiapas, the 700,000 to one million non-Spanish-speakingIndians in the Chiapas highlands became dependent on migrating to lowlandcoffee-harvesting and corn-growing jobs in the 1970s--virtually all of the120,000 adult men migrated seasonally to such jobs in the late 1970s. Cattle began to replace corn in Chiapas in the late 1970s, and many of theIndians, displaced from migratory farm jobs, were employed in public worksprojects after the 1979 run-up of oil prices. But the debt crisis of 1982ended these government jobs and, as Guatemalans poured into Chiapas to escapefighting, Chiapas Indians lost coffee-picking jobs to them. In 1989, coffeeprices fell by 50 percent, leaving a growing Indian population with ever-fewerjobs and little hope. There was an upsurge of conflict among the highland Indians which oftenmanifested itself as fights between Catholics and Protestants. The citiesgrew--San Cristobol's population rose from 30,000 in 1970 to over 100,000 in1990. According to some observers, it was no surprise that the Indians began aviolent protest; the surprise was that they tied the protest to NAFTA, andshowed considerable sophistication in dealing with the media. According to local observers, the Chiapas uprising has converted somepreviously anti-NAFTA forces in southern Mexico into NAFTA supporters. With nofuture in corn or coffee growing, the Chiapas Indians need jobs. Foreigninvestment, spurred by NAFTA, is likely to be the best way to get them. There was considerable discussion of the Mexican government's treatment of theChiapas rebels. According to human rights observers, there were three reasonswhy the government did not use the heavy hand of the military to repress therebellion--there was a shrunken security presence in the area, almost 500Mexican and national non-governmental organizations rushed into Chiapas, andthe international media arrived, so that military repression might havethreatened Mexico's image as a democracy open to foreign investors. Humanrights observers expressed hope that the combination of the Chiapas uprisingand the March 23, 1994 assassination of PRI presidential candidate Colosiowould generate enough interest in the August 21, 1994 election that Mexican andinternational pressures would lead to an honest election. According to several participants, Mexico has been pursuing its own version ofthe "East Asian" development model--an authoritarian government that moves faston changing economic policies to produce rapid economic growth, but slow onpolitical changes that would promote democracy. However, growth has recentlyslowed--Mexico barely evaded a recession late in 1993, defined as twoconsecutive quarters of a shrinking GDP--and the Mexican peso has slipped abouteight percent in 1994, to $US1=3.36 pesos in mid-April 1994. Mexico's economy can be seen as a half-full or half-empty glass. The Mexicangovernment expects Direct Foreign Investment (DFI) to increase by 24 percent in1994 to $6.1 billion, from $4.6 billion in 1993. But 85 percent of the foreigninvestments in Mexico continue to pour into stocks and bonds; such funds canexit the country quickly, as they have been doing in 1994 as a result of a 32percent fall in the Bolsa (in US dollars). The Mexican government says that$3.5 billion poured into stocks and bonds in the first quarter of 1994, whileone New York money manager estimates that $8 billion left Mexico. Some experts express puzzlement at why DFI is not flowing into labor-intensivemanufacturing plants producing goods for export. The explanations for the lackof DFI range from uncertainty over the political situation until after theAugust elections and September renegotiation of El Pacto--the government,employer, and union agreement on wage increases--to Mexico's deficientinfrastructure. It is clear that at least some US and Canadian NAFTA opponents see the turmoilin Mexico as vindication. And there is no consensus on what may happen inMexico in 1994. As one Mexican suggested, anything can happen in 1994.There is a debate, for example, between those who want to reform the Mexicanunion movement, so that it remains a key part of Mexican society, and some"technocrats" and employers who prefer the largely non-union maquiladora modelthat offers maximum labor market flexibility. (In Mexico, elections todetermine whether workers want to be represented by a union are sometimes notby secret ballot, a practice that led to protests at a Sony plant in NuevoLaredo in April 1994.) The foreign investors building plants in Mexicoallegedly want to hire young women who are just entering the workforce ratherthan experienced (and perhaps unionized) workers who are losing their jobs indownsizing and privatization. The first complaints under NAFTA's labor-side agreement were filed February 14by two US unions on behalf of workers allegedly fired for union activities inmaquiladoras owned by Honeywell and GE. Under the side agreement, there mustbe a ruling on these complaints within 60 days, i.e., by April 14, 1994.However, the tri-national labor commission, located in Dallas, is not yet fullyoperational. Many Mexicans have used the two "C" events--Chiapas and Colosio-- to press thegovernment to help them. In early April, thousands of people marched in MexicoCity to mark the anniversary of the death of revolutionary hero EmilianoZapata. President Salinas distributed $10 million to farmers throughoutMexico, and declared that the land reforms underway would "strengthen theejido." Ernesto Zedillo, the new PRI presidential candidate, announced thatMexico would not be able to maintain its economic progress unless democracy isstrengthened, a slogan that is to take concrete form in the establishment ofrules for the August 1994 election. The conference concluded on a question: would NAFTA turn Mexico into a giantmaquiladora or into the high-tech economy that the Salinas technocrats want?One somewhat surprising point of agreement was that virtually everyone in theMexican elite now supports NAFTA; the disagreement is over how to coupleeconomic change with political change. Philip Martin. Trade and Migration: NAFTA and Agriculture (1993),available from IIE, 11 Dupont Circle NW, Wash DC, 20036; Rebellion InChiapas: Rural Reforms, Campesino Radicalism, and the Limits To Salinismo,Neil Harvey, Luis Hernandez Navarro, Jeffrey Rubin, and The End of AgrarianReform in Mexico: Past Lessons, Future Prospects, by Billie R. DeWalt,Martha W. Rees, Arthur D. Murphy. Available from the Center for U.S.-MexicanStudies, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093-0510. ------------------------------------------------------------ ImmigrationFraud A Hispanic civil rights leader was indicted on charges of running a $6 millionimmigration fraud scheme that provided fake documents to illegal Asian andHispanic immigrants. Jose Velez, the president of the League of United Latin American Citizens(LULAC) is alleged to have brought illegal immigrants to Las Vegas to filefalse applications for amnesty under the 1986 Immigration Reform and ControlAct Special Agricultural Worker (SAW) program. Velez and three Taiwaneseco-defendants are charged with conspiring to falsely claim in documents,applications and statements to the Immigration and Naturalization Service thattheir illegal clients qualified for amnesty because they did at least 90 daysof farmwork in 1985-86. Velez's son and five others pleaded guilty on March22, 1994 to helping to process 5,600 false applications for $5.7 million.Individual aliens paid an average of $1,000 each for false documents (accordingto the INS, the fees ranged from $250 to $3,500). The SAW program has been termed "the largest immigration fraud ever perpetratedon the U.S. government." This "easy" legalization program--created largely tosatisfy California growers that they would have a supply of labor after IRCAmade it unlawful to hire illegal aliens--was the last-minute compromise thatpermitted IRCA to be enacted. According to the best estimates, there shouldhave been fewer than 300,000 to 400,000 SAWs approved, but the INS approved 1.1million, and set new streams of rural Mexicans and Central Americans headingnorth. As one result, already glutted farm labor markets got even moreworkers, farmers planted more apples and oranges, and labor contractorsemerged as "risk absorbers" to match unauthorized immigrant workers andseasonal farm jobs. "Hispanic rights leader indicted: Illegal immigrants brought in by busload,feds charge," USA Today, April 7, 1994, p. 3A. "Hispanic civil rights leaderindicted for immigration fraud," Agence France Presse, April 6, 1994.Immigration Reform and US Agriculture(1994), a 632 page book that documentsIRCA's failure to stem the illegal immigration into US agriculture, availablefor $40 from UC-DANR, 6701 San Pablo Ave, Oakland CA, 94608-1239,Fax-510-643-5470. ------------------------------------------------------------ EUROPE ------------------------------------------------------------ France: Foreigners and Immigrants There are 3.6 million foreigners and 4.2 million immigrants inFrance--immigrants include foreigners (69 percent) and persons born abroad whoacquire French citizenship (about 100,000 annually). About 55 percent of theimmigrants in France in 1990 were from European nations. Foreigners arepersons born abroad (79 percent) and those born in France of non-Frenchparents. France has a complicated procedure for granting "easy" citizenship. Accordingto the jus sanguinis principle, a child of French citizen parents isautomatically French, as in most countries. In addition, France as a specialtype of jus soli--a child born in France with one French parent has a right toFrench citizenship if he/she so chooses before age 18. Children born in Franceof non-French parents who have lived in France for at least 5 years can requestcitizenship between the ages of 16 and 21. The French right has often accused the government of understatingthe number of immigrants. There are 6.1 million residents of foreign origin,including children with at least one non-French parent, and 20 percent of theFrench population of 57 million has at least on foreign parent orgrandparent. Immigration a Campaign Issue A campaign by the anti-Maastricht party, L'Autre Europe, is using the treaty'spromise of freedom of movement for citizens of non-EU nations who are permanentimmigrants in one EU nation as an argument against the EU. L'Autre Europe saysthat freedom of movement could lead to the immigration of "socially andpolitically unsustainable" e.g. Turks into France. Pasqua Will Say No to Algerian Refugees French Interior Minister, Charles Pasqua, said on April 18 that France wouldrefuse to accept any "wave" of refugees fleeing Algeria if Moslemfundamentalists took power. According to Pasqua, the number of asylum requestsmade to French authorities by Algerians rose from 104 in 1992 to over 1,000 in1993. "France Throws Up Barrier to Algeria Refugees," Reuters, April 18, 1994. Newsfrom France, March 18, 1994, 5. Le Monde, March 8, 1994. William Rees-Mogg,"The challenge of the other Europe," The Times, April 11, 1994. ------------------------------------------------------------ KohlCalls for Expulsion of Violent Kurds German Chancellor Helmut Kohl called for the expulsion of Kurds who took partin highway blockades and violent demonstrations on and after March 19 toprotest the Turkish government's treatment of Kurds in southeastern Turkey(Kurds or "mountain Turks" are 10 to 15 million of Turkey's 60 million people).Rudolf Scharping, the SPD candidate for Chancellor, backed the expulsion ofKurds convicted of violent offenses. The German government is currently attempting to negotiate a deportationagreement with Turkey. The key sticking point is whether Kurds deported fromGermany to Turkey because of "threats to[German] public safety and order" facepersecution there. The German Interior Minister has asked Turkey to guaranteethat deported Kurds will not be tortured or executed. Kurds are one-fifth of the two million Turks in Germany, and an estimated onepercent of the 400,000 Kurds in Germany are members of the PKK, a group seekingan independent country in southeastern Turkey, northeastern Iraq, and westernIran for the region's 20 to 30 million Kurds. The PKK was banned in Germany inFebruary, 1993. Asylum Germany is a reluctant land of immigration--most of the 6.5 million non-Germancitizens in the country were not anticipated. During the 1960s and early1970s, Germany recruited "guestworkers" who were expected to work one or twoyears and return home with their savings. Instead, many Turkish guestworkerssettled. Originally imported to add only workers to the workforce, today theTurks contribute proportionally fewer workers to the German workforce than doGermans. During the late 1980s, foreigners began to take advantage of Germany'sconstitutional guarantee that "all persons suffering political persecutionshall have the right of asylum." During the three- to five-year applicationand appeal process, asylum seekers were housed and fed at local governmentexpense and, in some areas, they obtained permission to work. In 1992, over430,000 foreigners applied for asylum--which fewer than five percentreceived. Beginning July 1, 1993, Germany began refusing to accept applications frompersons who arrived via "safe" countries in which they could have applied forasylum. As a result, the number of asylum applications during the firstquarter of 1994 fell by two-thirds versus the first quarter of 1993, to anaverage of 12,000 per month. About one-third of the first quarter's 36,000asylum applicants were from the former Yugoslavia, and one-eighth were fromTurkey. Unions on Integration A Confederation of German Trade Unions (DGB) position paper, adopted onNovember 9, 1993, urges the German government to recognize that "Germany willcertainly need migrants" but that immigration must "be structured andorganized." This can be achieved with annual quotas on immigration that do notdiscriminate on the basis of, inter alia, country of origin and, once theimmigrants arrive in Germany, they must be integrated in a process thatinvolves mutual adaptation and respect. The DGB has a number of specific suggestions for the immigration policy itwants Germany to adopt. For example, it wants permanent immigrant statusgranted after five years of residence, and wants permanent immigrants to beallowed to vote in local elections. Foreign workers should be employed on anequal basis with German workers, and this means, according to the unions, thatso-called contract work in construction must be banned. Eastern Europeancontract workers are often brought to Germany as employees of a firm that winsa subcontract to complete part of a construction project in Germany. Agence France Presse, April 9, 1994. Süddeutsche Zeitung, March 22, 1994.Frankfurter Rundschau, March 24, 1994. Süddeutsche Zeitung, March 25,1994. Nürnberger Nachrichten, March 22, 1994. Die Welt, March 21, 1994.Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung, March 26, 1994. Die Welt, March 29, 1994.Frankfurter Rundschau, April 4, 1994. "Positive Action for an IntegrtedMigration Policy," Confederation of German Trade Unions, November 9, 1994. ------------------------------------------------------------ U.S.Criticizes German Treatment of Foreigners Foreigners continue to be attacked in Germany, and Douglas Jones, U.S.head of mission in Berlin, sharply criticized Germany for lacking "the will toconfront its extremism problem pragmatically." Specifically, he criticizedGermany's slow progress "toward guaranteed civil rights for foreigners." It is unusual for diplomats to be so blunt. Chancellor Helmut Kohl wascriticized for asserting that Germany "is not an immigration country,"because such a statement signals skinheads "that the nearly seven millionforeigners who live here legally do not belong here, and that I am [they are] justified in wanting them out." TheU.S. Embassy in Bonn immediately issued regrets for Jones' statement sayingthat Jones' remarks do not reflect U.S. policy. Stephen Kinzer, "U.S. Diplomat's Speech on Extremism in Germany Stirs Storm,"The New York Times, April 18, 1994. "US Envoy Hits at Kohl's Remarks," TheGuardian, April 18, 1994. The Guardian, April 18, 1994, p. 8. ------------------------------------------------------------ Russia'sGuestworkers The Russian Federal Migration Service reported that 15,000 nationals ofnon-Russian former USSR states, primarily Ukrainians, had received permissionto work in Russia by March 1994. Under a presidential decree adopted in December last year, enterprises need tobe authorized by the Russian Federal Migration Service to employ foreignworkers. The service can impose quotas on the number of foreign workers anenterprise can employ. Individuals are required to obtain work permits oncethe employer has received authorization to hire them. There are an estimated 25 million Russians living in ex-USSR nations; including11 million in Ukraine. These Russians are returning to Russia, especially fromthe Central Asian nations of Kazakhstan (6 million Russians), Uzbekistan (2million),Tajikistan (400,000), and Kirgizstan (1 million). An estimated 2.5million Russians have returned since 1991, but many complain that they are notwelcomed back into their country of citizenship--only "forced refugees" get$411 welcome money. The Russian government is trying to improve conditionswhere Russians live so that they do not return to Russia. US News and World Report, April 11, 1994, 42. TASS, March 30, 1994. ------------------------------------------------------------ Czech-PolishBorder Agreement Signed Poland's Border Guard Commander-In-Chief and the Czech Republic'sDirector for Border Police and Foreigners discussed illegal immigration intotheir countries from Romania, Bulgaria, Ukraine, Asia and Africa--in light ofthe new German asylum law--and signed a protocol on April 7, 1994. The Poleswant to set up a procedure so that residents of the Polish-Czech border zonecan cross the state border by showing only their personal identity cards. In an interview, the Bavarian Interior Minister called illegal immigration oneof the main problems on the Bavarian-Czech border. He hopes for a readmissionagreement between the Czech Republic and Germany that would allow Bavaria toreturn the aliens it catches who crossed the Czech border. In 1993, Bavarianborder guards detained almost 1,700 people for smuggling aliens acrossGermany's southeastern borders-- 1,258 were seized on the Czech border, and therest on the Austrian border. "Crime on Czech border: drug smuggling, illegal immigrants, Czechoslovak PressAgency, April 15, 1994. "Polish and Czech Border Commissioners Sign Protocolin Prague"," PAP News Wire, April 7, 1994. ------------------------------------------------------------ SwedenGives Asylum to 20,000 Albanians The Swedish government announced on April 13, 1994 that it will allow about20,000 ethnic Albanian asylum-seekers from the Serbian-controlled province ofKosovo to stay in Sweden. The amnesty will be for all refugee families withchildren who have been in Sweden for over 15 months. Over 80,000 Kosovoasylum-seekers entered Sweden in the past three years. Some have been allowedto remain under Swedish asylum laws, while several thousand have been deported. Many families who went underground after losing appeals against deportationorders will now receive an amnesty, including those who fled to Norway. Thedecision was made primarily in the interest of the children, according to theSwedish immigration minister. Greg McIvor, "Sweden-Refugees: Amnesty announced for 20,000 Kosovo Albanians,"Interpress Service, April 14, 1994. ------------------------------------------------------------ IllegalImmigrants in Netherlands Misunderstand New Law Thousands of illegal immigrants showed up at immigration offices in theNetherlands in early April under the mistaken belief that a new law would letthem settle there or that they could purchase a residency permit for $500. Thewould-be immigrants heard rumors that a new law issued a "general pardon" toall illegal immigrants. Some of them traveled from Italy, France, Belgium andGermany to get a permanent visa in the Netherlands. The law, which went intoeffect on April 1, says that immigrants wishing to settle in the Netherlandsmust apply to the Dutch embassy in their home country. "Thousands of foreigners misinterpret new law, seek to immigrate," AgencePresse France, April 5, 1994. Flood of immigrants seek Dutch residency," UPI,April 6, 1994. Marit Scheepmaker, "Netherlands: Would-be Immigrants Misled byFalse Permit Rumors, InterPress Service, April 5, 1994. ------------------------------------------------------------ PolishImmigration Prof. Marek Okolski, at a March, 1994 conference on migration in Warsaw,reported that immigration to Poland increased in 1992. Most of the immigrantscame from industrial countries: 68 percent were from Germany, United States,former Soviet Union, Canada, France and Great Britain. Emigration, however, exceeded immigration in 1993. "Coming and Going," The Warsaw Voice, April 3, 1994. ------------------------------------------------------------ BritainExcluded from US Immigration Lottery The US State Department has 55,000 places for immigrants and a lottery willdetermine who will be allowed in the country. The State Department hasexcluded Britain from the lottery saying that it is intended to promote racialdiversity and that in the recent years too many English, Scots and Welsh haveemigrated. Citizens from Northern Ireland remain eligible. This is the fourth year that the US has held a lottery for so-called diversityvisas under the 1990 Immigration Act. Whereas applications were previouslyrestricted to citizens of 36 countries, rules introduced this year open thelottery to the world, the only exclusions being countries which provided 50,000or more US immigrants in the five years to 1992. During that period, more than77,000 Britons emigrated but only about 40,000 Irish. This was despite the factthat in the first three years 40 per cent of the visas were for the Irish,whose Congress lobbyists argued that they had been disproportionately excludedfor decades. Maurice Weaver, "Britons lose chance to become new Americans," The DailyTelegraph, April 7, 1994, p. 11. ------------------------------------------------------------ UKNeeds Professional Immigrants A report from the Institute for Public Policy Research says that currentimmigration policies could be depriving the UK of needed managers andprofessionals. The report argues that the present immigration policy wasdesigned in the 1960s to control the flow of migrants seeking low-paid and lowskilled jobs. Although immigration should not be used to remedy skills shortages, thereshould be changes in immigration law that would make it easier forinternational companies to bring managers and professionals to the UK. "UK: Management-Memoranda," The Observer, April 10, 1994. ----------------------------------------------------------- ASIA ------------------------------------------------------------ ForeignWorkers Protest in Japan On March 14, 1994, 150 foreign workers held a rally in Tokyo to protest thepractice of some employers refusing to pay wages owed to foreign workers. Asof November 1993, the Zentoitsu Workers Union, which represents workers inmanufacturing and construction, had 420 foreign worker members, and it createda foreign worker section in 1992. As the Japanese unemployment rate has risen, to 2.9 percent in February 1994,both foreign and Japanese workers fear layoffs. Foreign workers cannot remainin Japan if they are unemployed; when they are laid off, they are required toleave. Young foreign professionals in Japan are satisfied with their jobs, butpessimistic about their chances for advancement, according to a recent survey.The Kaisha Society is a group of young foreign men who are usually hired asshokutaku, or contract workers, rather than as seishain, or regular staff.Many Japanese firms do not invest in training these foreigners because they donot expect them to stay with the firm; just one percent of those surveyedexpect to be with their current employer in 10 years. Most of these youngforeign professionals came to Japan because jobs were immediately available andwages were high and rising in their country's currency. The Nikkei Weekly, April 4, 1994, p20 and April 18, 1994, p16; The ChristianScience Monitor, April 4, 1994, p6. ----------------------------------------------------------- TaiwanEvaluates Guestworkers The Taiwanese Council of Labor Affairs (CLA) has identified six major problemsassociated with the foreign workers that have been brought into the countryover the past four and one-half years. The CLA noted that foreign workers haveeased the labor shortage, accelerated the completion of major infrastructureprojects, and improved relations with emigration nations. However, the CLA noted that there has been an inconsistent administration ofTaiwan's foreign worker polices, labor disputes between foreign workers andtheir employers, and violations of rules by workers, labor brokers, andemployers. Since October 1989, the CLA has approved employer applications for 170,351foreign workers. Some 84,724--two-thirds of them Thais--are in Taiwan.Foreign workers are admitted on one-year work permits, and may extend theirstay one more year. Many of the foreign construction workers have two-yearwork permits that expire in April 1994, and fears of labor shortages reportedlyled to the shift from two-to three-year maximum stays. In March, Taiwanannounced that foreigners may not be more than 65 percent of the labor force onmajor construction projects. In a related development, the Philippines announced in April that Taiwan laboragents recruiting Filipino workers will need to be accredited by the Departmentof Labor and Employment and have their commissions regulated. Filipinos havecomplained that these brokers fees can range from 38,000 to 65,000 pesos ($US1,400 to $2,400), with the broker pocketing half or more of this commission. Thailand has 200 labor brokers recruiting workers for jobs in Taiwan, and ThaiLabour Permanent Secretary Sawai Prammanee warned them not to overchargemigrant workers seeking to go abroad. Fees for two- year jobs abroad rangefrom 70,000 to 80,000 baht($2775 to $3172). There are 80,000 Thai workers inTaiwan, 20,000 in Libya, and 10,000 in Saudi Arabia. China Economic News Service, April 6 and 8, 1994; Central News Agency April 5,1994; Bangkok Post, April 14, 1994, P3 ------------------------------------------------------------ FilipinaMaids in Malaysia On Palm Sunday (March 27, 1994), Malaysian authorities detained 1,200 Filipinamaids inside and outside St. John's Church in Kuala Lumpur. The Philippinescomplained that Christian maids were being harassed by Malaysia'sMuslim-majority government; only 21 of the maids proved to be illegal aliens(38 according to Malaysian authorities). Some in the Philippines urged the government to protest this "roundup" bysuspending the migration of Filipino workers to labor-short Malaysia. However,Malaysian Deputy Home Minister Megat Junit Megat Ayub said that even thoughFilipinos were preferred as migrant workers in the spirit of ASEAN cooperation(and because they speak English), Malaysia could and would recruit foreignworkers from India, Pakistan, Bangladesh and China. Malaysian authorities said that the purpose of the raid was to ensure that themaids were not engaged in illegal activities during their Sunday day off. Morethan 10,000 illegal aliens have been detained since labor recruitment wasstopped and an effort was made to locate and expel illegal aliens in January1994. About 5000 remain in detention camps, and Malaysian employers who hadreceived approval to hire foreign workers before the freeze was announced canhire aliens in detention. In the Philippines, economic growth rose to 2.3 percent in 1993, "largelybecause of a 7.6 percent increase to $2.1 billion in remittances," makingremittances equivalent to almost 20 percent of Filipino exports of $11.3billion. The Philippines hopes that new power plants will eliminate brownoutsthat in 1993 left Manila without power for five to 10 hours daily, and increaseforeign investment, which was $328 million in 1993. UPI, April 8, 1994; South China Morning Post, April 4, 1994; Far EasternEconomic Review, April 21, 1994, 74. ------------------------------------------------------------ MalaysiaGrapples with Labor Shortages The Manpower Department's January 1994 Employment Trend report reviewed labormarket trends in 1993 and noted that employers were adopting a variety ofstrategies to cope with labor shortages in an economy with a three percentunemployment, including offering bounties to current workers who bring in newworkers, beginning to hire male production operatives, adjusting work hours(such as adding a 5 to 11 PM shift), and raising fringe benefits more thanwages to make workers loyal to one employer. Some 600,000 production workersin manufacturing got wage increases that averaged 4.6 percent in 1993, downfrom 8.7 percent in 1992, a decrease attributed to the availability of foreignworkers. The daily wages of production workers reached RM 9 to 14 ($3.30 to $5.20), andfringe benefits add RM80 to 150 ($30 to $55) per month to average monthlyearnings of $102. According to the report, industries offeringlower-than-average wages and unfavorable working conditions, includingagriculture and construction, face the most severe labor shortages. The LosAngeles Times reported that average daily labor costs were $6.50 inMalaysia in 1993, versus $1.50 in neighboring Indonesia. According to government calculations, foreign investors have listened tourgings to bring more capital-intensive projects to Malaysia. In 1989, each RM1 million in foreign investment created 14 new jobs, implying RM71,400 perjob($26,444). By 1993, the ratio had fallen to seven, raising the investmentto RM143,000 per job($52,963). Foreign workers dominate the workforces of Malaysia's two easternsemi-autonomous provinces, Sabah and Sarawak. Daily wages in Sabah, whichreportedly ranged from RM7 to RM12 for production workers, RM10 to RM20 forconstruction workers, and RM7 to RM15 for agricultural workers, were keptstable in 1993 by the ready availability of mostly illegal Filipino workers.However, the Sabah state government nonetheless arranged for 1,688 workers tomove to Peninsular Malaysia to fill vacant jobs there. Most of the estimated 1.2 million foreign workers in Malaysia are Indonesians,followed by Filipinos (335,000 are legal workers), Bangladeshis, and Thais.The Indonesian Manpower Minister announced that Indonesia was going toestablish training centers to train workers seeking jobs in Malaysia,ostensibly to help Malaysia to overcome its labor shortages. Indonesia alsoannounced plans to step up efforts to prevent illegal migration to Malaysia. Business Times, March 31, and April 2, 1994, P22; The Straits Times, March 31,1994 ------------------------------------------------------------ 100Million Migrants within China Labor Minister Li Botong, warned that China faced "unprecedented challenges indeploying all the jobless," primarily rural workers who are moving to cities.China has an estimated 100 million migrant workers, including eight million inGuangdong Province bordering Hong Kong. Inflation and 'sweatshop' conditions have led workers in some instances toestablish independent trade unions. Fearing that such unions could become athreat to its authority, the government is acting to remove the source ofdiscontent, including a crackdown on unsafe factories and on child labor--anestimated 500,000 children are employed in Guangdong province neighboring HongKong. Patrick Tyler, "Discontent Mounts in Chian, Shaking the Leaders," New YorkTimes, April 10, 1994, A3. "Chinese journal examines management of worseningrural labour exodus," BBC Summary of World Broadcasts, April 25, 1994. ------------------------------------------------------------ ForeignWorkers in South Korea There are an estimated 150,000 foreigners working in small-andmedium-size companies in South Korea. These mostly illegal workers facepenalties of up to 1.5 million won ($1,875), and this allegedly makes them subject to employer abuse--oneforeign worker assistance center in Seoul received 3,000 reports of foreignworker abuse in 1993, one-third of which involved wage disputes. There arealso 18,000 legally employed foreigners who are classified as technicaltrainees. South Korea has announced that all foreign workers--legal and illegal--are toleave the country by June 1994. A new guestworker program, operated by theKorea Federation of Small Business, will bring in 20,000 Asian workers ontechnical trainee visas. The hope is that, with employers directly contractingwith foreign workers and offering them two year contracts, abuse by laborbrokers will be minimized. In February 1994, Korea extended workers compensation insurance to legal andillegal foreign workers injured on the job. Suvendrini Kakuchi, "South Korea: Foreign Workers Face Abuse, Discrimination,"Inter Press Service, April 23, 1994. " Workmen's Compensation Extended toIllegal Foreign Workers," Korea Economic Daily, February, 17, 1994. ------------------------------------------------------------ ChineseProfessionals in Demand in Hong Kong Demand by employers to import 1,000 Chinese mainland management professionalsto Hong Kong was overwhelming. More than 4,000 employers paid the $500 HK to apply for the Chineseprofessionals, 16 times the quota of 250 for the first phase of the plan. AJune lottery will determine which employers can bring in mainlandprofessionals. Employers must then provide detailed information about thecompany and the vacancy to the Immigration Department for preliminary approval. There is concern that the plan will undercut the opportunities for Hong Konggraduates, but a director for a Chinese employment agency says that the 1,000Mainlanders will not fill Hong Kong demand for professionals. S. Y. Yue, "Mainland managers in huge demand; Employers vie for mainlandstaff," South China Morning Post, April 7, 1994, p. 1. ------------------------------------------------------------ OTHER ------------------------------------------------------------ EthnicTensions Rise in Australia Australia--along with Canada and the US, is one of the three traditionalcountries of immigration--is experiencing increased ethnic tensions which areputting stress on the country's immigration program. Firebombs exploded atGreek establishments in reprisal against the government's recognition of theformer Yugoslav republic of Macedonia (FYROM), one of the last of 58 countriesto do so. On April 11, 2,000 people demonstrated in Wollongong against the AustralianFederal Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs decision to refer to peoplefrom the FYROM as Slav Macedonians. Australia's publicly-funded ethnicbroadcasting service refused to use the name. There are nearly 500,000Australians from the former Yugoslavia. Australian MPs have called for those behind the violence to be returned toEurope. Others have renewed demands for stricter curbs on the country'simmigration policy. Robert Milken, "Balkan strife shakes Australia," The Independent, April 10,1994, p. 10. Meagan Howe, "Australia: Macedonia Protests Turns Ugly, SydneyMorning Herald, April 11, 1994. Minister's car pelted in Macedonian protest,"Agence France Presse, April 10, 1004. ------------------------------------------------------------ IsraelRecruits Guestworkers The Israeli government on April 10, 1994 announced that 18,000additional work permits would be made available so that Israeli employers canemploy foreign workers to replace Palestinians who were barred after April 7from entering Israel. There are 6,000 guestworkers from Thailand, Turkey,Romania and other Eastern European countries in Israel, and permission torecruit 7,000 more was granted in March 1994. After all of these guestworkersarrive, Israel will have 33,000 non-Palestinian foreign workers. There are two million Palestinians living in the West Bank and Gaza (excludingthe 150,000 in East Jerusalem). Earnings from jobs in Israel account for anestimated one-third of the GDP of the West Bank and Gaza, so that it costsPalestinians $4 million in lost wages each day they are barred from Israel.Almost 80 percent of the Palestinians who work in Israel are employed inconstruction and agriculture. However, of the 107,000 unemployed Israeliworkers, only 1,400 have indicated a willingness to do farmwork. Initial indications are that 15,000 of the additional foreign workers will befor the construction sector, which claims to be short 60,000 workers, and 3,000are for agriculture. The Israeli government has tried to avoid having foreignworkers do Israel's "dirty work," and there is concern that substitutingnon-Palestinians for Palestinians will aggravate frustration in the West Bankand Gaza, where unemployment runs 54 percent. Israelis seem to supportrestrictions on Palestinians workers because of terrorist activities. When Israel began to restrict their entry in March 1993, there were about100,000 Palestinians employed in Israel. Amy Dockser Marcus, "Israel will Grant More Work Permits for Foreigners toReplace Palestinians," Wall Street Journal, April 11, 1994; Agence FrancePresse, April 8, 1994. ------------------------------------------------------------ GATTand Labor Migration The Uruguay Round of trade negotiations that began in September 1986ended on April 15 with the creation of a new organization, the World TradeOrganization, to regulate trade between nations. France and the US led a driveto insist that the WTO address the issue of "social dumping," the notion thattrade agreements should include clauses that require trading partners toobserve at least minimum worker rights if they want to export their goods. Asian nations led the fight against the WTO taking up the worker rights issue.They argued that the industrial countries wanted to drive up their labor costs,thus making their exports less competitive. When the industrial nationsinsisted on linking trade and labor standards, Asian nations demanded that theWTO also take up the relationship between trade and migration. The compromise was to include both the relationship between the trading systemand internationally recognized labor standards and the relationship betweenimmigration policies and international trade as "critical issues" to beaddressed by the WTO. Far Eastern Economic Review, April 21, 1994, p. 82. ------------------------------------------------------------ DubaiTries to Curb Visa Overstays The Gulf emirate of Dubai is now requiring visitors to pay a US$1,362 deposit ,which is refunded only if the person leaves the emirate within the timerequired by the visa. In addition, a fine of US $27 will be imposed for everyday a visitor overstays the visa. Dubai imposed the deposit following sharpjumps in the number of tourists from eastern Europe, Russia and former Sovietrepublics. "Dubai brings in new visa curbs," Agence France Presse, April 6, 1994. ------------------------------------------------------------ BahrainDeports Expatriate Workers Bahrain deported 1,053 expatriate workers in the first three months of 1994 forviolations of immigration and residence laws. "1,053 illegal expat workers deported from Bahrain," Gulf Daily News, April 11,1994. ------------------------------------------------------------ RESOURCES ------------------------------------------------------------ Philip Martin. Trade and Migration: Issues for the 1990s.CGES-CIIP Working Paper 1, Available for $5 from CGES at 254 Moses Hall, UCB,Berkeley, CA 94720. This paper summarizes the facts about migration-for-employment, reviewsthe reasons why people migrate for economic reasons, and outlines the researchagenda. There are about 100 million persons living and working outside their countriesof origin, they remit at least $75 billion annually to their countries oforigin, and the three factors that regulate economically-motivated migrationare evolving in ways that promise more rather than less in the 1990s. Toolittle is known about the relative importance of demand-pull, supply-push, andnetwork factors in particular migration flows, and how the relative importanceof each of these factors changes over time. W. R. Böhning and M. L. Schloeter-Paredes(Eds). 1994. Aid inPlace of Migration. Available from International Labor Office, CH-1211Geneva 22. This eight-chapter book explores an overlooked question: could foreignaid that was targeted and structured reduce the need for migrants to leavetheir countries of citizenship as migrant workers and refugees? TheInternational Labour Office and United Nations High Commission on Refugeescommissioned papers that were presented at a May 1992 conference, and thisvolume is an edited selection of the papers presented. There are four ways in which rich industrial countries can affectemigration-increasing pressures in developing nations: trade policy, foreigndirect investment, promoting political freedom, and Official DevelopmentAssistance (ODA). Only ODA is directly under the control of donor governments,and the major conclusion of the refugee papers is that the traditional two R'sof refugee assistance--relief and resettlement--must be expanded to four R's,with the addition of repatriation and addressing the root causes. Reducing economically-motivated emigration requires industrial countries toshift from discussing trade or aid to trade and aid. Industrialcountries are often hypocritical when they complain that their ODA is noteffective in reducing emigration pressures, even as they erect barriers to thegoods produced by emigration countries. Foreign-Born Professionals in the US. Available from the Center forImmigration Studies, 1815 H St. N.W., Suite 1010, Washington, D.C. 20006-3604.(202) 466-8185. Leon Bouvier and David Simcox published a study that finds that Asianprofessionals born outside the United States have a higher median salary thanany US professional group. The highest median income is for South Korean-bornphysicians who earn $101,000 annually, followed by Indian-born doctors at$82,205. The study also found that although there were three times as manyblack professionals as foreign-born Asian professionals, 14,000 Asianprofessionals made more than $150,000 per year, while fewer than 4,000 blacksdid. The U.S. has 15.1 million native-born professionals and 1.3 millionforeign-born professionals, according to the 1990 Census. If current trendscontinue, a three-tiered professional labor market could develop, with Asianshaving the highest earnings, whites in the middle, and Blacks and Hispanics thelowest earnings. The Census Bureau has just released data on 110 racial and ethnic groups, andthey range in size from 30,085 Indonesians in 1990 to 45 million German-originresidents. More than half of the Egyptians, Iranians, Nigerians, Taiwanese,and Pakistanis had at least college degrees. Asian Migrant's January-March 1994 issue is devoted to Filipinoworkers in nearby Asian countries. The Philippines is the world'ssecond-largest exporter of labor after Mexico; one-third of the 500,000 migrantworkers sent abroad legally in 1993 went to Asian nations, many as maids. Available from Scalabrini Migration Center, PO Box 10541, Broadway Centrum,1113 Queson City, Philippines Asylum Issues are explored in three papers by Sharon Stanton Russell andCharles Keely. "Multilateral efforts to harmonize asylum policy along regionallines in industrial countries," is a 25-page paper that traces diplomaticefforts to coordinate asylum policy in Europe. The first section outlinesrecent political changes and economic performance in Europe and recentmigration flows. The second section discusses the development ofintergovernmental mechanisms and policies to deal with asylum in Europe. Thefinal section explores the challenges European governments face to coordinateasylum policies. "The future shape of developed countries' asylum policies: National securityconcerns" is a 10-page paper that assesses the asylum policies of variouscountries in Europe and argues that the logic of national security andregionalized approaches to asylum and refugee issues can also be applied toNorth America. "Responses of Industrial Countries to Asylum Seekers is a 14-page paper thatalso appears in the Winter 1994 issue of Journal of International Affairs thatsummarizes the two other papers. Available from Charles Keely, Department of Demography, Georgetown University,Washington, DC, 20057. __________________________________________Editor: Philip Martin Managing Editor: Cecily Sprouse Department of Agricultural Economics, University of California, Davis, DavisCA 95616 Telephone: (916) 752-1530 Fax: (916) 752-5614 email: Phil Martin <migrant@primal.ucdavis.edu> __________________________________________ Contributors: Graziano Battistella, Scalabrini Migration Center, PO Box10541, Broadway Centrum, 1113 Queson City, Philippines. Wolfgang Bosswick, European Forum for Migration Studies, University of Bamberg,Katharinenstrasse 1, D-96052 Bamberg, Germany. WT02-B13-132IA090-000969-B024-145http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/By-Month/MN-Vol-1-94/MN_June_1994.html 128.120.36.171 19970122203930 text/html 88206HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 20:40:25 GMTLast-Modified: Thursday, 13-Apr-95 22:24:21 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 87948MIGRATION NEWS Vol. 1, No. 5 June, 1994 Migration News is a newsletter that summarizes key developments inimmigration and integration issues during the preceding month. Topics aregrouped by region: North America, Europe, Asia, and Other. The purpose of Migration News is to provide summaries of recent events thatcan be read in 30 minutes. Each issue also offers a special report, abstractsof selected papers, and articles and information on recent researchpublications. Distribution is by email. If you wish to be added to the mailing list,send your email address to: Migration News <migrant@primal.ucdavis.edu>.Current and back issues--which include additional stories and data--can beaccessed via gopher in the Migration News folder at: dual.ucdavis.edu We welcome your contributions: please fax news items of interest toPhilip Martin at (916) 752-5614, or send them to the email address above.Working papers and other materials to be listed in the RESOURCES section can besent to Philip Martin, Department of Agricultural Economics, University ofCalifornia, Davis, Davis CA 95616 USA. Those who contribute items may requestMigration News by mail or fax if email is unavailable. _____________________________________________ NORTHAMERICA _____________________________________________ ClintonChanges US Policy on Haitian Refugees On May 9, President Bill Clinton announced major changes in US policytoward Haiti, reflecting increasing impatience with the failure of Haiti'smilitary leadership to restore democracy. The president announced that the INSwould conduct asylum hearings for Haitian refugees intercepted at sea,reversing the policy of returning Haitians and instructing them to submit theirapplications for asylum in Haiti. Clinton also announced the appointment of aHaitian special envoy--William Gray, the head of the United Negro College Fundand a former House majority whip. Despite the change in policy, the INS has continued to return Haitiansleaving the country in small boats--over 1,300 boat people were returned toHaiti in May after the change in policy was announced, while 2,000 Cubans andHaitians have landed in Florida. As in the past, the Cubans are released, andthe Haitians are sent to a detention center where they are screened. SomeFlorida politicians are calling for the INS to deputize local police so that,in an immigration emergency, they could help to deal with a mass arrival ofCubans or Haitians. The US is discussing with nearby countries, including the Bahamasand Belize, the possibility of setting up a temporary shelter for fleeingHaitians. The US does not want to house Haitian refugees at Guantanamo Bay inCuba, and it fears that cruise ships rented to house Haitian asylum seekerswhile their cases are heard will soon be full. President Clinton said on May 19 that the possibility of a "massiveoutflow" of Haitians is the most important of the six reasons why the US mayuse force to restore democratically-elected president Aristide to power 32months after his ouster by military forces. On May 21, tough new UN economicsanctions were imposed on Haiti. Douglas Jehl, "President Lists Reasons to Use Force in Haiti," New YorkTimes, May 20, 1994, A1. "U.S. looks at 3 foreign sites for Haitians?"Sacramento Bee, May 15, 1994, p. A14. "Clinton asks for use of BritishCaribbean to process Haitians: report," Agence France Presse, May 18, 1994.Grover Joseph Rees, "To the Rescue?" New York Times, May 24, 1994."Immigration Officers Face Florida Influx," St. Louis Post-Dispatch, May 29,1994, D10. _____________________________________________ Immigrationand Campaign 94 in California Immigration continues to be a headline issue in California. Governor PeteWilson, running for re-election, unveiled a television ad that shows Mexicansrunning en masse through the San Diego port of entry. Wilson accuses his majorDemocratic rival of saying that illegal immigration is not a problem, while hereminds viewers that he is suing the federal government for the costs incurredby California to provide services to illegal aliens. Ron Unz, who ischallenging Wilson for the Republican gubernatorial nomination, has adopted apro-immigrant and anti-welfare state position. He argues that "anti-immigrant"Blacks, union members, and environmentalists are Democratic party stalwarts,and that Republicans should embrace immigration but reject bilingual educationand affirmative action. The primary election--in which political partiesselect their candidates--is June 7th. The "Save Our State" initiative collected about 600,000 signatures--farmore than the 387,974 registered voters required-- to qualify an initiative forthe November 8th ballot. If passed, the initiative would attempt to denypublic education, non-emergency public health care services and most othersocial services to illegal aliens, and require state agencies to report anyillegal aliens they detect to the attorney general (some of these services mustbe provided to illegal aliens according to federal laws or court orders). ALos Angeles Times poll of 1,471 registered voters questioned between May 21and 25 found that respondents approve the initiative 59 percent to 32 percent.A majority of Hispanics and Blacks polled oppose the measure, but whites favorit 64 percent to 26 percent. On May 28, Latinos throughout California rallied against the"anti-immigrant hysteria" in this year's California election. The protestsranged from a march through of 8,000 or more in Los Angeles to picketingGovernor Wilson's reelection headquarters in Sacramento. California state legislators have decided to put off until after theNovember election a possibly contentious debate about problems along theCalifornia-Mexican border, especially the issue of providing free publiceducation to US citizen children who live in Mexico. The issue was raised by avideotape, made by the staff of freshman Assemblyman Jan Goldsmith, whichshowed children crossing into the US from Mexico and boarding a bus for a USschool--the schools are eager to enroll these children, since they receivepayments for each pupil. A bi-partisan task force will hold public hearingsafter the November election on residency and border issues, including problemswith low-income housing and poverty in San Diego County. The state's $55 billion budget, currently moving through theDemocratic-controlled Legislature for the 1994-95 fiscal year that begins onJuly 1, includes $3 billion that the state is requesting the federal governmentto reimburse for services provided to illegal aliens. Even though there islittle hope that California will get (fully) reimbursed, and despite somediscomfort with Wilson's attacks on illegal immigration, Democratic legislatorshave kept the hoped-for reimbursement in the budget so as "not to undercut theGovernor's request." Los Angeles Times editorial writer Jack Miles reviewed Mexicanacademic Jorge Castaneda's argument that California is becoming less democraticbecause it includes an ever-increasing number of aliens ineligible to vote.Castaneda argued, in an article published last year in The California-MexicoCollection, that California should follow the example of the Scandinaviancountries and extend at least local voting rights to non-citizens. Miles thenreviewed the Border Patrol's success in holding the line on the US-Mexicanborder in West Texas--by moving Border Patrol agents from the interior to theborder, apprehensions of illegal aliens fell from 800 to 1,000 daily to 150. Miles advances the proposal to link effective border control with anotherlegalization program in a repeat of the 1986 IRCA, which linked sanctions andamnesty. He considers this unlikely Grand Bargain better than the status quo. A poll conducted last month by the Hospital Council of San Diego andImperial Counties found that two-thirds of the respondents thought thathospitals should deny emergency care to illegal aliens. Under current law,hospitals are required to treat all emergency patients regardless of theirability to pay or immigration status. According to the Hospital Council,border county hospitals get from $36 to $50 million in Medi-Cal payments tocover the unreimbursed costs for emergency care for illegal immigrants. Brad Howard, "Foes gird for ballot fight over illegal immigration," andKimberly Moy, "Task force to study border issues in fall," Sacramento Bee, May27, 1994. Rex Dalton, "Many oppose medical care for illegalimmigrants," San Diego Union-Tribune, May 11, 1994. Jack Miles, "A BoldProposal on Immigration," The Atlantic, June 1994, Vol 273, No 6, p32. RonUnz, "How to Grab the Immigration Issue," Wall Street Journal, May 20, 1994 A8.Marcos Breton, "Latinos to Stage Wide Protests on Immigration Issue,"Sacramento Bee, May 28, 1994. ____________________________________________ IncompleteAmnesty The Immigration Reform and Control Act of 1986 included two distinctlegalization programs: one based on residence in the US before January 1, 1982(LAW), and the other based on having done at least 90 days of farmwork in1985-86 (SAW). To the surprise of many observers, the number of SAWS was 1.1million, or equivalent to two-thirds of the 1.7 million LAWS, even though itwas widely asserted that only 10 to 20 percent of all illegal aliens worked inagriculture. The SAW program was the last-minute compromise that enabled IRCA to beenacted, but it has proven to have major flaws. First, there was enormousfraud in the SAW program--the best estimates are that as many as two out ofthree people who were granted legal status did not in fact qualify, buteligibility rules were written in a manner that required the US government toprove that the alien was lying, rather than requiring the alien to convince thegovernment of his eligibility. Second, the fraud in the SAW program encouragedthe expansion of the fraudulent documents industry, and farmers began to hiremore of their workers through labor contractors. Thus, enforcing labor andimmigration laws in a labor market that hires 1.5 to 2 million seasonal workerseach year--two-thirds of whom are immigrants--became more difficult. SAW left a third human dilemma--only workers were legalized, in the falsehope that they would leave their families in Mexico and commute legally toseasonal US farm jobs. Instead, many brought their families to the US,producing mixed families, such as a family with a legal immigrant father (mostSAWS are young men), an illegal alien mother and several illegal children, a UScitizen baby, and perhaps a child protected by a "family fairness" provisionenacted in the 1990 IMMACT to prevent the breakup of families. Illegal aliens who want the protection of "family fairness" must havearrived illegally in the US before May 1988 and apply for protection fromdeportation to the INS. As of March 30, 1993, only 66,198 illegal aliensapplied for "family fairness" protection, and 56,495 received it. However,there are an increasing number of stories of children threatened withdeportation because they cannot satisfy the requirements to be protected under"family fairness." In a typical profile, a five year-old--born after May1988--is threatened with deportation after her mother sneaked her into the USbecause she cannot qualify for "family fairness." Activists estimate thatthere are 100,000 children in California who are illegal aliens and cannotsatisfy family fairness criteria to stay legally, prompting CaliforniaAssemblywoman Marguerite Archie-Hudson (D-LA) to introduce a resolution thatwould ask the federal government to grant a Temporary Protected Status to allof the illegal alien children in mixed families. Philip Martin, "Good Intentions Gone Awry: IRCA and U.S. Agriculture,"Annals of the AAPSS, July 1994. Marcos Breton, "Immigration lawsleave child in limbo," Sacramento Bee, May 26, 1994. _____________________________________________ AsianImmigrant Poverty More than 30 percent of the Southeast Asians in the US--versus eightpercent of all American residents-- are on welfare, the highest rate of welfareparticipation of any ethnic group. The seven million Asians in the US arethree percent of the US population. In a study released by the Asian Pacific American Public Policy Institute,Paul Ong of UCLA concluded that the economic status of Asian-Americans has abarbell or hourglass shape--for every family with an income over $75,000, thereis another Asian-American family with an income of less than $10,000. Overone-third of all Asian-Americans 25 and older have a college degree or more,while almost one-fourth do not have a high-school diploma. About 300,000 of the one million Southeast Asians in the US are on welfare;they comprise about two percent of the US Aid to Families and DependentChildren population of 15 million. The first wave of Southeast Asianrefugees--urban and educated Vietnamese who arrived between 1975 and1978--integrated fairly easily and successfully. Later waves of SoutheastAsian refugees included more rural peasants--three-fourths of the adultSoutheast Asians on welfare in California have less than a high schooleducation. Focus groups that ask people about health care reforms find that bymargins of 2-1 to 3-1, participants oppose providing tax-supported health carebenefits to non-US citizens. A House Republican proposal to reform welfarebegins with "The Problem: Too Much Welfare For Too Many Immigrants," assertingthat 11 percent of all welfare recipients, and 20 percent of elderly onwelfare, are not US citizens. The latest version of the Clinton welfare planwould raise $3.3 billion of its $9.5 billion additional cost over five years byreducing federal aid to non-US citizens. Ashley Dunn, "Southeast Asians Highly Dependent on Welfare in US," NewYork Times, May 19, 1994, A1. "Asian-Americans success story a myth; report,"Agence France Presse, May 17, 1994. _____________________________________________ Texas,Arizona Sue Federal Government Texas announced on May 26 that it plans to sue the federal government forthe costs it incurs to provide services to the estimated 550,000 illegal aliensin the state. Texas has not yet decided how much federal reimbursement torequest, but in the fall of 1993, it was estimated that the cost of state andlocal services was nearly $500 million, some of which was offset by sales andother taxes and fees--other sources say that Texas will request $1billion. Unlike the California lawsuit filed last month, Texas Governor Ann Richardswent out of her way to describe the suit as a federal-state dispute overunfunded federal mandates, not as an attack on illegal immigrants. Richardssupports Operation Hold-the-Line, which has been able to reduce illegal entriesinto El Paso by concentrating INS agents on the border. Arizona joined the list of states suing the federal government by filingsuit in early May for the $121 million the state allegedly spends to imprisonillegal aliens. States view the requirement that they must provide services to illegalaliens as unfunded federal mandates: the federal government fails to stopillegal aliens, but requires cities and states to provide services to them. InCalifornia, 40 percent of the babies born on Medicaid are born to illegal alienmothers, and 17 percent of the state's prisoners are illegal aliens. Most observers believe that these state suits will fail; California failedto win the reimbursement it sought to care for illegal aliens in 1989-90. Amajor constitutional problem is that state suits to force the federalgovernment to pay certain costs in particular states run afoul of Congress'sprerogative to decide on federal spending. A political problem is that over 80percent of the immigrants are in just six states and, even within these stateCongressional delegations, there is disagreement over whether additionalfederal funds should go to more enforcement or to reimburse state governmentsfor service costs. Sam Howe Verhovek, "Texas Plans to Sue US Over Illegal Alien Costs," NewYork Times, May 27, 1994, A7. Bill Lambrecht , "Candidates Hop AboardImmigration Issue; Illegal Aliens More Resented Now, Polls Say," St. LouisPost-Dispatch, May 9, 1994. David LaGesse and Christy Hoppe, "States'immigration suits futile, experts say," Dallas Morning News, May 28, 1994,A33. _____________________________________________ CanadianImmigration Targets for 1994 Despite a 1993 poll that found that 47 percent of Canadians believe thatthe country is accepting too many immigrants, and pressure from the ReformParty to reduce immigration, Canada in February 1994 announced that it wouldmaintain the previous government's target of 250,000 immigrants and refugees in1994. Some 111,000 of these immigrants are in the family category, whosesponsors must promise to support them for 10 years. Another 86,700non-sponsored immigrants are expected; they are selected on the basis of apoint system that gives preference to younger professionals. Canada will alsoadmit up to 24,000 investor immigrants. Canada announced that it was preparedto admit 28,300 refugees in 1994. The Reform Party wanted immigration reduced to 150,000 because ofpersisting high unemployment. The unemployment rate was 11 percent in April,1994. The number of persons applying for refugee status at Canadian borders fellfrom 37,720 in 1992 to 20,492 in 1993, a decline attributed in part to aFebruary 1993 law that requires refugee applicants to be fingerprinted and topay a $360 fee. Canada now stations immigration officers at airports overseaswho prevent aliens likely to request asylum in Canada from boarding planes thatwould fly them there. Airlines and shipping companies must pay a fine ofC$5000 for each illegal alien they bring into Canada. Some provinces aretightening refugee access to social services: Ontario is ending healthservices for refugees on June 1, 1994, expecting the federal government toprovide for them. Immigration Minister Sergio Marchi has said his office will tightencontrols on entrepreneurial visas which give landed or permanent immigrantstatus to aliens who invest at least US$181,000 in a Canadian business andcreate one or more jobs for Canadians. Thousands of Hong Kong residents haveused entrepreneurial visas to emigrate to Canada. The immigration ministerclaims that many do not keep their part of the bargain by investing andcreating jobs. In the first nine months of 1993, 28,217 immigrants arrivedfrom Hong Kong, about one-fifth of them with entrepreneurial visas. "Staying the course on immigration," The Gazette (Montreal), February 4,1994. Anne Swardson, "Canada Welcoming Fewer Immigrants," The WashingtonPost, May 17, 1994, A11. "Canada's immigration chief says he will clamp down onvisa," Agence France Presse, May 23, 1994. Anne Swardson, "Canada Shutting ItsDoors to Refugees," International Herald Tribune, May 18, 1994. _____________________________________________ USRevises Asylum Policies On March 29, 1994, Immigration and Naturalization Service CommissionerDoris Meissner announced a grant-refer system to more quickly grant asylum whenwarranted, and refer claims in doubt to immigration judges. In order to doublethe number of asylum officers from 150 to 334, the INS will charge a fee of$130 to those who can afford to pay--the INS puts the average cost ofadjudicating each asylum application at $615. Asylum applicants will not beeligible to apply for employment authorization until at least 150 days aftertheir filing date. The number of immigrants expected to arrive in California is projected todrop by almost 50 percent, from 300,000 in 1993 to 207,500 in 1994, accordingto Nancy Bolton of the UCLA Business Forecasting Project. Some 200,000 more Californians are expectedto leave than arrive from other states in 1994, 10 percent as an aftereffect ofthe January 17 Northridge earthquake. This means that the state will havepractically no increase in population due to immigration for one of the fewyears since 1940. The immigrants are arriving from Mexico, Vietnam, thePhilippines; Californians are migrating to Washington, Arizona, and Nevada.There are fewer Hispanic school-aged children in Los Angeles in 1994 than therewere in 1993. Net immigration to California peaked at 453,000 in the 12 months endingJune 30, 1993. The San Francisco Examiner, March 30, 1994 _____________________________________________ InternationalPopulation Conference to Discuss Migration The Fifth International Conference on Population and Development willconvene in Cairo in September. Held every decade under the auspices of theUnited Nations, the conference focuses on the choices and responsibilities ofindividuals, communities, nations and the world to achieve a balance betweenhumans, their needs and the plant's resources. The conference will yield a"New Plan of Action," which will lay out the goals to be met and policies andprograms that countries will undertake to meet them on their own and throughinternational cooperation. Migration is not a central topic at the conference, but two chapters areincluded in the program: Urbanization and Internal Migration and InternationalMigration. The discussions of international migration so far have not been asource of north-south conflict, as occurred at earlier regional meetings. _____________________________________________ USPublic is Anti-Immigrant A poll by CBS television found that one in five Americans want to send homeimmigrants-- 53 percent of those surveyed agreed that immigrants cause problemsin the United States, while only 29 percent thought that they made positivecontributions to the country. Some 65 percent of Americans agreed that therecession contributed to opposition to immigrants, up from 60 percent in June1993, and 45 percent in 1986. Only 34 percent believe the United States shouldstop all immigration. "Anti-immigrant sentiment up in US, poll finds," Agence France Presse, May23, 1994. _____________________________________________ FederalAppeal for Chinese Immigrants Denied A federal appeals court ruled on May 5 that 300 Chinese who ran aground inNew York last summer on the Golden Venture could not appeal for asylum as agroup. This decision upheld a lower court ruling. Deportation of 50 of theChinese is expected within several weeks because they have completed the appealprocess. The case is expected to be appealed to the US Supreme Court. "US court clear way for deportation of hundreds of Chinese," Agence FrancePresse , May 6, 1994. _____________________________________________ EUROPE _____________________________________________ European-AmericanImmigration Convergence? Will similarities in the nature of the twin problems of controllingunwanted immigration and absorbing newcomers lead to a convergence of Europeanand American immigration and integration policies? A conference of 70 leadingAmerican and European researchers and policy makers in Charleston, SouthCarolina on May 13-14 sponsored by the European Communities Studies Associationdiscussed the gap between immigration goals and realities on both sides of theAtlantic, and worried about whether current steps taken to promote integrationwill be successful. They reached apparent consensus on three points: 1)immigration pressures in Europe and the US are rising and are unlikely to soonabate; 2) there is no compelling economic or demographic case for openingborders now to mass migration; and 3) there are no clear historical orcontemporary models that provide beacons to guide integration policies. European Concerns The 12-nation European Union in 1992 had a population of 347 million. By2025, the population of the EU-12 is projected to fall to 340 million. Therewere 14.2 million legally-present foreigners in EU countries in 1990, and 4.9million or one-third of them were citizens of one EU nation living in another,i.e. there are 9.3 million so-called third-country nationals in the EU, andthey represent less than three percent of the population. These data suggest that foreigners and immigration should not be majorconcerns in Europe, yet immigration is a top political issue from the UK toItaly. There are several reasons. First, many foreigners who reside in the EUdo not show up in these immigration data--those excluded include the onemillion asylum seekers who arrived in EU nations since 1990, ethnic Germansmoving from Russia to Germany, and illegal aliens, estimated to number 2.5million in 1990. Even though massive east-to-west migration did not occur, assome expected, the entry of one to two million newcomers annually forced themember nations of the EU to take restrictive actions. European participants expressed conflicting opinions about whether there isan immigration problem and what should be done about it. For example, onenoted that the annual rate of immigration varies from over one percent inGermany--one million newcomers arrived in 1992 in a country with a populationof 81 million--to 0.5 to 0.6 in the Benelux and Scandinavian countries, to 0.1to 0.3 in southern Europe. However, it was noted that concern aboutimmigration was not two to five times greater in Germany than elsewhere,suggesting to a European observer that rates of immigration were about whatEuropean countries wanted them to be. Furthermore, it was argued that Europeangovernments prefer that immigrants remain illegal--most European illegal aliensarrive as legal tourists-- so that they fill seasonal and low wage jobs but areless likely to become residents since they cannot easily gain access to publichousing or social services. European governments, in this view, can try tofurther tighten controls or tackle the root causes of emigration and integratethose immigrants who do settle until emigration pressures diminish. Other Europeans took the view that the perception of out-of-controlmigration was dangerous because it allowed generally conservative parties toappeal to voters with open or subtle anti-foreigner appeals. In France,Germany, and the UK, it was argued, conservative political parties played theanti-immigrant card to gain votes, although when the political elite from allparties agreed that immigration had gotten too hot to handle, they developedcompromises to "take immigration out of politics," as Germany reportedly didwith its asylum compromise in the fall of 1992. Explaining the Gap Several participants developed theories to explain why there is a gapbetween generally restictionist immigration policy goals in Western Europe andthe US and the immigration reality of larger-than-anticipatedimmigration--there is, it was said, nothing more practical than a good theory.Most theories of why immigration control is difficult to achieve deal at leastin part with the liberal paradox--the notion that industrial democracies pushnations to embrace free trade and investment, and warn them that their failureto open their borders to free trade will result in slower economic growth andless World Bank and IMF funds. On the other hand, industrial nations complainthat now open-developing economies are sending workers over industrial-countryborders. The most interesting theory of why there is a gap between immigrationpolicy goals and outcomes was based on the behavior of three "actors" inindustrial countries: individual voters, organized interest groups, andgovernment officials. According to this theory, individual voters arerationally ignorant about the true nature of the benefits and costs of aphenomenon as complex as mass or unskilled immigration--labor migration,whether legal or illegal, tends to produce immediate and fairly concentratedbenefits, while its costs are deferred and hard to measure. In such a situation, effective immigration control is akin to a public goodthat has no effective advocate. Organized groups that benefit from massimmigration, and the government actors who regulate immigration, can ignorerestrictionist public opinion, especially when the economy is booming. Thisgives immigration in the industrial democracies an expansionist flavor, sinceit takes a long time to mobilize restrictionist public opinion. This theory suggests that immigration will typically be higher than publicopinion would support, especially since elites in the traditional immigrationcountries such as the US and Canada are pro-immigrant. Furthermore, so long asorganized interest groups are able to re-label their immigration programs,turning, for example, guestworker programs into seasonal and contract workerprograms, they can continue to have large numbers of immigrant workersadmitted. Integration There are many models of immigrant integration, and they have in common anostalgic sense that they worked in the past, but doubts that these sameintegration models will work in the future. The French "Republican" model,which stressed public conformity to national values while tolerating privateexpressions of religious and culture differences, American models from"Americanization" to melting pot to salad bowl metaphors, and Scandinavian andDutch models of subsidizing and celebrating ethnic differences represent verydistinct integration models. There was a great deal of speculation about howwell these models are likely to work with the current wave of newcomers, but noone seemed willing to assert that a particular model is "best" for anyparticular EU country or for the US. Cooperation and Convergence? There are clearly new forces impinging on immigration policy making. InEurope, there is tension between the various EU bodies and nationalgovernments, although its was stressed repeatedly that immigration remains thedomain of national governments, and talk of burden sharing is confined todiscussions of what to do about asylum seekers. EU officials seem to embracethe notion that cooperation in dealing with asylum applicants should also beextended to other migration-related issues, from how to deal with the smugglingof illegal aliens to providing aid that addresses the root causes of migration. Rising migration pressure at a time when states' borders are becoming moreporous and public opinion in aging societies that are experiencing highunemployment makes immigration a potentially explosive issue in industrialdemocracies. This conference provided a great deal of information on why it isso hard to develop and implement effective immigration controls, but itgenerated much less guidance for policymakers struggling to incrementallyadjust the doors so that the foreigners they want can easily enter, and theforeigners they do not want are excluded. Philip Martin and Mark Miller, "European-American Immigration Convergence:A Conference Report," May 22, 1994. A complete report will be published in thenext issue of the International Migration Review. _____________________________________________ IncreasedAnti-Immigrant Rhetoric in the Netherlands The recession, immigration and unemployment have begun to erode theNetherlands tolerance for immigrants. In March 1994 elections, the extremeright Central Democrats won three seats, while the extreme left Socialist Partygained two seats in the 150-member Lower House of Parliament. The Liberals,who propose barring the children of illegal immigrants from school, gained nineseats, and now hold 31, while the D66 party, which preaches ethnic andreligious tolerance, doubled their seats to 24. The increased number of asylum seekers in the Netherlands and an increasein racial violence reportedly helped the anti-immigrant Central Democrats andthe Center Party to gain seats in the March election. The Central Democratshave promised to repatriate all asylum seekers unless they face the deathpenalty or life imprisonment in their homeland. One Central Democrat member boasted during a television broadcast that heset fire to immigrant hostels in the 1970s. He was arrested for arson andexpelled from the party. Another Central Democrat local council member madeanti-Semitic remarks about migrant workers, prompting other council members tocall for prosecution for hate crimes. A Dutch court found another far-rightmember of Parliament guilty of making racist statements in 1989 and 1990 inpolitical party broadcasts and fined him $3,240. The Netherlands has tightened its border controls. Immigration officialsare now stationed at the airports to identify those suspected of entering thecountry and then illegally overstaying their tourist visas. They are nowexpelled immediately. Airplanes take aerial photographs of suspected illegalentrants crossing Dutch borders so that the Netherlands can prove that anasylum seeker entered from Belgium or Germany and should be returned there toapply for asylum. Beginning June 1, the Dutch police will be able check theidentification papers of anyone . In 1993, there were 35,400 asylum seekers in the Netherlands, double the1992 figure of 17,450, and requiring the expenditure of $500 million--about$14,000 per applicant. About half of the asylum applicants were granted safehaven. Dutch asylum procedures have been streamlined so that most cases can behandled within 24 hours, and difficult cases can be decided in six monthsinstead of the seven years it previously took. Beginning July 1, 1994, twocentral registers will be created in the Netherlands to which all asylumseekers, except those landing at Schiphol Airport, will have to submit theirasylum applications. Since April 27, 1994, the Dutch government has beendetaining rejected asylum seekers until their deportation, and it estimatesthat 4,000 asylum seekers will be detained this year. The Dutch government ispreparing a list of "safe countries"--asylum applicants from these countrieshave the burden of proving that they face persecution--that must include atleast all of the countries on Germany's list. Jeremy Lovell, "Dutch Set for Period of Introspection after election,"Reuter, May 4, 1994. "Dutch Ultra-Right Party Fined for Inciting RacialHatred," Reuters, May 4, 1994. Ian Geoghegan, "Ruling coalition Seen KeepingPower Despite Losses, Reuter, May 4, 1994. Tyler Marshall, "No Longer Welcomein Europe," Los Angeles Times, May 17, 1994. Suddeutsche Zeitung, April 28,1994. "Dutch tolerance trampled under refugee backlash," Toronto Star, May 25,1994. _____________________________________________ BritishImmigration: Rules Changed, Numbers Up The British Home Office presented to the Parliament new immigration ruleswhich will go into effect October 1, 1994. The new rules eliminate referencesto gender in immigration categories, creates a entrepreneurial businesscategory, tighten rules on private students and hospital patients to eliminateabuse, and set up a new clearance system for vacationing youth from throughoutthe Commonwealth who work in the UK to support themselves. The new"entrepreneurial investor" status will allow wealthy foreigners to live in theUK for one year if they demonstrate that they have at least L1million (US $1.5million) and agree to invest L750,000 (US$1.13 million) in UK government bonds,stocks, or corporate bonds. Investors must make Britain their main home and,if they can maintain themselves without employment, their stay can be extendedfor three years. A Home Office report noted that in 1993, 55,000 people were grantedresidence in the UK, up from 2,900 in 1992. Over half of the immigrants werefrom India, the Caribbean and former British colonies in Africa. Nearly 44percent were from non-Commonwealth countries and the remainder were fromAustralia, New Zealand and Canada. There were 22,400 asylum seekers in Britain (excluding dependent relativesand children), five times the number who applied six years ago, but a drop of2,200 from 1992. Under public pressure, the British Home Office has decided toend the use of Pentonville Prison to detain asylum seekers. Asylum seekers atthe Campfield House near Oxford held a hunger strike in March to protest theuse of the prison to house asylum seekers. A detention center run by theImmigration Service will house asylum seekers in a wing of Rochester Prison inKent. There are 637 asylum seekers being held in detention centers in Britain. The anti-immigrant British National Party (BNP) lost its only sitting citycouncil member when Derek Beackon, who campaigned on a "Rights-For-Whites"platform, was defeated in a London local election. Britain--without a historyof fascism, a first-past-the-post voting system which requires a party slate toget a sizable percentage of the vote to gain a seat, and national politicalparties that have been able to co-opt anti-immigrant feelings by makingstatements that appeal to voters who want tighter immigration controls--has noanti-immigrant political parties, but there are attacks on immigrants--anestimated 130,000 in 1993. "Immigrants numbers on the rise," Daily Mail, May 6, 1994, p2. LucyJohnson, "Xenophobia-Britain: Far Right Wiped Off British Political Scene?"Inter Press Service, May 6, 1994. "Home Office Press Release-Statement ofChanges in the Immigration Rules," UK Government Press Release, May 23, 1994.Teilo Colley and Chris Moncrieff, "Got a Million--Come to Britain," PressAssociation Newsfile, May 23, 1994. "Britain Tightens ImmigrationRegulations," Reuters, May 23, 1994. "Asylum Seekers to be Spared Jail Stigma,Ministers rethink after damning reports on Pentonville," The Guardian, May 21,1993. _____________________________________________ Asylumin Europe From Sweden to Spain, European governments fearing that a wave of asylumseekers threatens prosperity and social cohesion have tightened access to andeligibility for asylum. Critics of the crackdown on asylum complain that itmay result in genuine refugees being returned to face persecution, and thatclosing the asylum door encourages illegal alien smuggling. The number ofillegal aliens in Western Europe has been estimated to be 2.5 million, but thatmay be too low--an airplane crash into an apartment building in Amsterdam inOctober 1992 revealed that many of the victims were illegal aliens. On April 12, the parliamentary committee of the Council of Europe inStrasbourg urged the creation of a European Refugee Commission to coordinatethe asylum procedures of the member states, the appointment of a European HighCommissioner for Refugees to work with the UN Commissioner for Refugees, andthe establishment of a fund to assist countries with large numbers ofrefugees. The Council also asked European countries to accept more refugees. A European Union representative requested that EU development funds beappropriated to Albania, Bosnia and Croatia to help stem illegal immigration.The proposal is supported by Greece and Germany--both have large numbers ofillegal immigrants fleeing from the poverty in Albania and the war in Croatia.The issue was raised at an informal meeting of EU ministers May 6-7 in Greece. According to Europeans, the southern European nations of Greece, Italy,Portugal, and Spain have already closed their doors to legal immigrants andasylum seekers because illegal immigration is considered to be out ofcontrol--the number of asylum seekers in these four countries fell from 89,278in 1992--95 percent in Spain--to 41,675--90 percent in Spain. The number of asylum seekers in the 16 western European nations was 494,784in 1991, 671,510 in 1992, and 543,658 in 1993. The number of asylum seekersfell by 26 percent in Germany between 1992 and 1993, but rose 75 percent in theNetherlands. Costas Paris, "EU Considers to Fund Balkan Countries Producing Refugees,"Reuters, May 6, 1994. "Asylum/Immigration: Warm Welcome from EU Ministers forCommission Plan," European Report, May 12, 1994. Tyler Marshall, "No LongerWelcome in Europe," Los Angeles Times, May 17, 1994, A1. _____________________________________________ Update Asylum Seekers and Illegal Immigration In April, a total of 12,164 people applied for asylum in Germany,bringing the total to 47,986 for the first four months of 1994. Over14,000 were from Serbia and Montenegro, 6,500 from Turkey, 4,400 from Romaniaand 2,800 from Bosnia-Hercegovina. The German border police report that theyhave stopped the recent increase in illegal entrants who arrive by air. Thenumber of ethnic Germans arriving in Germany was 65,234, up slightlyfrom the first four months of 1993--they are considered German citizens upontheir arrival and are not counted in German immigration statistics. Stricter border controls have been in force since April 1st to preventasylum seekers from entering Germany by ferry. The ferry companies in Norway,Sweden and Finland must now check whether passengers have valid immigrationdocuments --the companies are liable for fines between DM 2,100 and DM 31,900if they transport passengers without the proper permits. In Hamburg, localofficials have been accused of selling residence permits for DM1,000 to DM3,000each. The German government signed an agreement on April 25 with Croatia whichoutlines a two-step process for the "repatriation" of Croatian war refugeesstarting May 1, 1994. The state of Bavaria plans to gradually "repatriate"90,000 civil war refugees from Bosnia-Hercegovina and Croatia. Germans Invest in Polish Factories Near Border German employers are investing in factories just inside the Polish borderto take advantage of wages that are one-seventh those of the former EastGermany. One garment manufacturer reported that Polish hourly wages of DM3($1.80) are just one-eight of Berlin wages of D25. Poland has the fastestgrowth rate among the former Eastern Block nations but, according to oneGerman, the German-Polish wage gap is twice the US-Mexican gap. Hate Crimes In Magdeburg in the former east Germany, German youth drinking on AscensionDay (May 12) beat up five Africans on a downtown street and then followed theminto the Turkish-owned cafe where they took refuge. Several Turkish customersstabbed four of the German youth, and for hours afterward Germans andnon-Germans attacked each other on the streets, leading Commissioner for AlienAffairs Cornelia Schmalz-Jacobsen to assert that anti-foreigner violence hadhit a new "high point." In response, the German Government introduced new laws againstracially-motivated crimes. They would increase jail sentences, utilizepreventative detention and punish those who deny the Nazi atrocities of WorldWar II. Nationality Less than five percent of the major groups of foreigners inGermany--including Turks, Croats, and Italians--become naturalized Germancitizens. Under current law, most foreigners must live in Germany for 15years, and then renounce their allegiance to their native country, e.g. Turkishcitizenship to become a naturalized German citizen. Commissioner for AlienAffairs Cornelia Schmalz-Jacobsen in February 1994 introduced a package ofmeasures that would have made naturalization easier by permitting dualcitizenship and reduced from 15 to eight years the required period of residencein Germany, but the Kohl government in March 1994 rejected her proposals.Under current law, a Turk born in Germany must at age 16 apply for a workpermit. The Bundestag on April 28 rejected two bills that would have facilitatednaturalization and dual citizenship. Commissioner for Alien Affairs CorneliaSchmalz-Jacobsen discussed the possibility of resigning in frustration. Jane Perlez, "Polish-German Border an economic frontier," New York Times,May 14, 1994, A6. Stephen Kinzer, "Anti-Foreigner Riot Hits German Town, NewYork Times, May 14, 1994, A6. Jeffrey Gemin, "For East Germans, LifeImproves--Attitudes Don't," The Wall Street Journal, April 8, 1994. "Germanyfights race thugs," The Herald (Glasglow) May 16, 1994. Frankfurter Rundshau,April 27, 1994. Suddeutsche Zeitung, April 5, 1994, Frankfurter Rundshau, May5, 1994. Suddeutche Zeitung, March 31, 1994. Craig Whitney, "German AideFaults Policy on Foreigners," New York Times, May 29, 1994, pA9. _____________________________________________ UNReports on Transit Migrants The United Nations International Organization for Migration released areport on May 17 indicating that thousands of people from Africa, the MiddleEast and Asia are migrating through Central and Eastern European countries,hoping to get visas to the West. However, the tightening of immigrationcontrols in Western European countries means that many are left stranded inCentral and Eastern European transit countries. Many of the Chinese travelingthrough Eastern Europe to the West are smuggled by Chinese gangs. IOM estimates that 100,000 to 140,000 so-called "transit migrants" enteredthe Czech Republic in 1993, mostly from Tunisia, China, Bulgaria, Romania andthe former Yugoslavia. IOM's conservative estimate is that 100,000 "transitmigrants" entered Poland in 1993. Many migrants from the former Soviet Unionand Romania traveled to Bulgaria, taking advantage of the country's liberalentry regulations; some were stranded, while others remained and got businessvisas to establish companies. "Transit migration soars in Europe," UPI, May 17, 1994. "MoreWestward-bound Migrants Settle in East Europe," Reuters, May 16, 1994. _____________________________________________ HungaryChanges Immigration Rules Hungary amended its immigration rules in May 1994 to require, inter alia,that visitors from neighboring countries must have at least US$10 to enter thecountry, while others must have US$50 to cover the cost of their entry, stayand departure. For the first time, foreigners are permitted to travel anywherein the country . Over 40 million foreigners enter Hungary every year, mostlyfrom Slovakia, Romania, Ukraine, and the former Yugoslavia. Over the past three years, 70,000 immigrants came to Hungary, primarilyfrom Romania, the former Soviet Union and the former Yugoslavia. Work permitswere issued to 12,000 foreigners, and about 27,000 foreigners are currentlyworking or studying in Hungary. The new immigration rules do not affect thoseapplying for refugee status. Since 1990, 60,000 foreigners were found to be illegally in Hungary, and30,000 were returned to their native country. New law grants preferential entry treatment to neighboring countries," BBC,May 23, 1994. "Budapest introduces entry restrictions," European InformationService, May 26, 1994. _____________________________________________ IllegalImmigrants Brought to Russia by Criminals A report by Aleksandr Mukomolov entitled, "You Won't Fool Around Under theInterpol Cap," estimates that in 1992 there were 40,000 Chinese living inMoscow, and now there are 150,000, many with false documents. Mukomolovasserts that the underground business that supplies false passports and visasis centered in China, Hong Kong and Malaysia. The Russian Ministry of ForeignEconomic Relations disputes Mukomolov's figures, saying that about 50,000Chinese nationals lived in Russia in 1993, and that most of them worked inagriculture, logging and construction. Other sources place the number ofChinese living illegally in Moscow at about 50,000. The Russian Federal Counterintelligence Service reports that criminalgroups in the Moscow region are illegally smuggling Chinese, Vietnamese,Afghans and others to Russia and then to the West. Moscow has begun a programto halt visa overstays; many students receive education visas, then purchase afalse passport in Moscow and leave for the West. Others remain in Moscow towork or become criminals. The service has requested that the federal government tighten immigrationcontrols and allow it to detain illegal immigrants. "Moscow and Moscow Oblast face problems of illegal immigration, ITAR -TASS,May 13, 1994. "Paper views Chinese criminal activity in Moscow," World Service(Moscow), May 23, 1994. Paul J. Smith, "Illegal Chinese Immigrants Everywhere,and No Letup in Sight," International Herald Tribune, May 26, 1994. _____________________________________________ Permitsand Temporary Stays Restricted in Former USSR State New restrictions on permanent residence permits and temporary stays havebeen imposed on foreigners in Krasnodar Kray in the former USSR. Thegovernment estimates that there are 600,000 immigrants in Kuban, most of whomare not registered in the Kray and do not have residence permits. Many arefleeing from areas of inter-ethnic conflict. The immigration service inKrasnodar Kray is granting refugee or enforced migrant status to people whohave relatives living in Kuban for more than five years. Temporary stays aregiven by the local government only to citizens of the former USSR and thosewithout citizenship who have been invited to Krasnodar Kray by the localgovernment. "Krasnodar Kray imposes 'severe' residence restrictions." Izvestiya, May 4,1994. p1. _____________________________________________ ASIA _____________________________________________ SouthKorean Guestworkers South Korea has experienced one of the world's fastest migrationtransitions: in 1982, over 200,000 Korean workers emigrated, and in 1994, theSouth Korean government is debating how to deal with the 20,000 foreign"trainees" and 50,000 to 100,000 illegal aliens who arrived with tourist orstudent visas. Officials routinely announce that the country will need 100,000foreign workers to overcome the labor shortages arising from rapid economicgrowth (an average real 8.5 percent per year rate between 1985 and 1992),affluence ($6,800 GNP per capita in 1992), and a slow growing population (the44 million population increases by one percent annually). Under a plan scheduled to go into effect on June 1, 1994, South Korea willcrack down on illegal alien workers and permit the Korean Federation for SmallBusiness to import up to 20,000 foreign trainees for 4,200 small businesses.They will be housed, fed, and paid $260 per month. Initial quotas allocate8,000 slots to China and 3,000 to the Philippines. Alternatives In a talk delivered to the Korean Federation for Small Business April 19,1994, Roger Bohning of the International Labour Office argued that "undesiredjobs" are at the bottom of all firm, industry, and societal labor markets, andthat rapid economic and job growth and slow labor force growth gives rise to awidening scissors labor shortage, as the demand for workers to fill undesiredjobs increases, while the supply of domestic workers willing to fill themshrinks. In Korea, Bohning notes, wages rise with the size of the firm inmanufacturing, and the wages of skilled workers are rising relative tounskilled workers, leading to an acute labor shortage for small firms. Thismakes Korea different from Western Europe, where large firms experienced laborshortages that were filled by guestworkers in the 1960s. Bohning concludes that the current policy of admitting trainees andtolerating illegal aliens is not sustainable--in part because the monthly wagepaid to trainees is less than usual illegal earnings. He recommends that thetrainee system be abolished, that the employment of illegal aliens be deterredby fining the employers who hire them, and that a legal guestworker system beestablished after consultations with employer and worker representatives(p21). Defector Bonuses South Korea has changed its policy of offering cash to defectors from NorthKorea because of an expected flight of refugees escaping the worsening NorthKorean economy. Previously, defectors received $19,000 to $31,000 forresettlement and a reward of gold for information or equipment from NorthKorea. Since the start of the program, about 100 North Koreans have defectedsouth. One defector reportedly received $630,000 in government support in1987. An ad-hoc committee will examine possible ways to help the defectorsadjust to South Korea and live on their own. Recent defectors have said foodshortages are forceing the North Korean government to loosen movementrestrictions to search for food and, as a result, some North Koreans are usingthe opportunity to escape into neighboring China and South Korea. Experts saythat 2,000 North Koreans are hiding in China, but that 80 percent of those whoflee there are returned to North Korea. Thousands of North Koreans are workingin Siberia as contract loggers. Analysts predict that conflict or a collapseof the economy could force as many as two million North Koreans to seek refugein other countries If North Korea's economy collapsed, analysts predict that 4.5 millionpeople would flee south, and that the cost of unification would exceed $1.2trillion. North Korea, with 23 million people, is about half as populous asSouth Korea, with 44 million, but the North's GNP is believed to be less than10 percent as large as South Korea's $300 billion GNP. "Migrant Foreign Workers," Korea Economic Daily, May 3, 1994. TeresaWatanabe, "S. Korea Braces for Defectors from the North" Los Angeles Times, May13, 1994. W. R. Bohning, International Labour Office, "Undesired Jobs and WhatOne Can Do to Fill them: The Case of the Republic of Korea," presentation tothe Korea Small Business Institute, Seoul Korea, , April 19, 1994. "KoreaEstablishes Centre to Recruit Foreign Labour," Bangkok Post, May 14, 1994. ____________________________________________ ChinaLoosens Internal Migration Controls China is planning to change its decades-old rules that restrict internalmigration. The government will, as soon as June 1, 1994, relax rules whichcurrently prevent farmers from settling in cites. No rural-urban influx isexpected: at most, it is predicted, several million peasants will apply forpermanent residence in the cities. The reform of the registration system(registration in an area is necessary to obtain housing and coupons forrationed goods) will also regularize the status of the 20 to 30 millionpeasants "illegally" living in cities. There are an estimated 100 million internal migrants in China, a numberequivalent to the worldwide population of persons living outside theircountries of citizenship. The Chinese registration system was coming understrain because of the uneven economic boom in the country--the economy has beengrew in real terms by six percent annually between 1985 and 1992, but much ofthe job growth was in the urban areas of southeastern China. Internal Chinese migrants send remittances to their villages of origin: 50billion yuan, or US$5.7 billion, by one estimate. Under the revised registration system, internal migrant workers must carrytheir ID card, work permit and single status or family planning certificate.Many Chinese states have formal procedures through which migrant workers mustfind jobs, including signing up with the local labor service office. Throughthis mechanism, Beijing feels it has effectively managed migration throughoutthe country. In October 1993, the Chinese Ministry of Labor published an urban and ruralemployment coordination plan which called for organizing the rural labor exodusthrough legitimate channels, for regional governments to formulate necessarylabor market rules and management systems to handle migrant workers, and toimprove services to migrant workers during their trans-regional travel. TheMinistry hopes that the implementation of these measures will ensure an orderlyflow of labor throughout the country by 1996. Internal Chinese migrants may look to emigrate. Russia, Hong Kong, Taiwan,Spain, Japan, Indonesia, among others, have expressed concern thatdeteriorating conditions and internal migration within China could lead to amass exodus. China's Labor Ministry reported that it found jobs for only 1.2 million o fthe 5.4 million urban workers who were laid off in 1993. There are reportedly100 million underemployed Chinese peasants. The 47,000 foreign-funded firms operating in China are to have unions tocover their six million Chinese workers within two years. There have beendisputes over foreign "exploitation" of Chinese workers. "Labor Disputes in China Grow", The Wall Street Journal, April 27, 1994, p.A9. Kathy Chen, "China to Ease Policy Favoring City Over Farm, " The WallStreet Journal, April 26, 1994. BBC Summary of World Broadcasts, April 25,1994. "China to Unionize Foreign Firms," The Wall Street Journal, May 11, 1994. _____________________________________________ Effectsof 1997 Vary With China preparing for its takeover of Hong Kong in 1997, there is adebate about whether the increased availability of low-wage mainlanders willdepress wages and displace higher-paid Hong Kong residents. The popularity ofthe recent program to bring 1,000 mainland Chinese professionals into Hong Kongas management trainees has been cited as an example of how Hong Kong workersmight be replaced by Chinese mainlanders. The 100,000 Filipino maids in HongKong have expressed fears that they will be replaced with lower-paid Chinesedomestics after 1997, echoing similar concerns of other unskilled foreignworkers now in Hong Kong. There are already 23,000 mainland Chinese working inHong Kong on temporary permits and over 10,000 employees of Chinese-owned firmshave special visas. The number of Hong Kong residents leaving the protectorate prior to 1997dropped 20 percent to 53,000, in 1993. The recession in Western countries andreduced immigration quotas are believed to have caused the decline. In 1991,60,000 residents left the country, and 66,000 in 1992. Most go to Canada,Australia, New Zealand and the United States. Peter Lim, "Hong Kong labour worried by entry of Chinese," Agence FrancePresse, May 15, 1994. "Hong Kong emigrants down nearly 20 percent," AgencePresse France, May 23, 1994. _____________________________________________ TaiwanChanges its Foreign Worker Program--Again The Taiwan Council of Labor Affairs announced that foreign workers shouldhave the same benefits as native staff in businesses with more than 50employees. The council recommended that businesses collect 0.5 percent fromthe wages from the foreign workers to place in an employee welfare pool. According to the Taiwan Interior Ministry, approximately 207,500 foreignerswere living in the country at the end of March 1994, including 21,012 illegalaliens. The ministry approved employer applications to bring 169,417 foreignworkers to Taiwan in 1993, and 83,701 foreign workers were in Taiwan as of lateMarch, 1994. But the Council of Labor Affairs imposed stricter rules onforeign employment, limiting alien workers to 30 percent of the work force inany firm. Employers also will not be allowed to increase the number of foreignworkers they employ; they can only replace vacancies created by foreign workerswho leave. Currently, each employer has a set number of jobs which can befilled by foreign workers--each of whom can remain for two years--under the newguideline the period of stay will be extended to three years. Manufacturers and companies responding to a survey by the Ministry ofEconomic Affairs in May said that they hoped the government will permit moreforeign workers into Taiwan. "Taiwan Foreign Benefits," China Economic News Service, May 13, 1994.Danielle Yang, "207,000 Foreign Residents in Taiwan," Central News Agency, May12, 1994. "Investment willingness at Home Rebounds," Central News Agency, May11, 1994. "Taiwan: CLA Sets Stricter Rules for Hiring of Foreign Workers,"China Economic News Service, May 3, 1994. _____________________________________________ Malaysia:Mixed Signals on Immigration Malaysia stopped the recruitment of unskilled and semi-skilled foreignworkers on January 7, 1994 in order to give the government time to reassertcontrol over illegal immigration--there are believed to be 500,000 to 1.5million illegal aliens in Malaysia, meaning that illegals outnumber legalforeign workers by 5 or 6 to 1. However, in March 1994, the governmentpermitted a labor-short factory to bring "skilled" factory operatives into thecountry, even though these "skilled" workers were paid unskilled worker wages.In May 1994, the government permitted federal agencies that operate plantationsto import unskilled foreign workers legally despite the recruitment ban.Private employers immediately wanted to know why they too could not recruitforeign workers. To add to the policy confusion, the Deputy Home Minister of Malaysiaasserted that 100,000 more Indonesians were needed to supplement Malaysia'splantation work force, which includes workers from Bangladesh, Pakistan, Indiaand the Philippines. Under an agreement with Indonesia, a consortium of laborsupply agents will be established to improve coordination and monitoring offoreign workers by ensuring that all workers sent legally to Malaysia meet atleast minimum health, security and experience requirements. Only recruitmentagents who join the consortium will be recognized by Malaysia's Home Ministry.According to Malaysian authorities, ninety percent of the 500,000 foreignworkers in Malaysia are Indonesian (other estimates put the number of foreignworkers at one to two million). During the first meeting of the Joint Committee for Border Cooperation heldin early May, Malaysia and the Philippines agreed to tighten border controls inSabah, where an estimated 500,000 Filipinos are 40 percent of the population. The Malaysian Minister of Science, Technology and Environment unveiled anew plan to bring foreign scientists and engineers to the country. Hepredicted that by the year 2000, 56,000 engineers will be needed in thecountry, versus the current 20,000. The ministry plans to visit developingcountries to recruit engineers to work in Malaysia. Foreign workers in Malaysia will be offered personal accident insurancecoverage by the Malaysia National Insurance Company. The insurance will beoffered to workers on an individual basis, and in late summer, group policieswill be available to recruitment agencies. The group policy will pay benefitsin the event of accidental death, permanent and total disablement, funeralexpenses, and costs associated with returning the worker home. The companyhopes to sign up one million foreign workers in the first year. "KL plans incentives to woo foreign scientists, engineers," The StraitsTimes, May 18, 1994. "Jakarta, KL join effort to prevent illegal entry," TheStraits Times, May 3, 1994, p2. "Philippines, Malaysia to enhance bordercooperation," Xinua General Overseas News Service, May 6, 1994."RP-Malaysia border cooperation meeting to begin Wed.," Japan EconomicNewswire, May 3, 1994. Mustapha Kamil, "MNI Group Policy for foreign Workers,"Business Times, May 6, 1994. Malaysia: Nod to recruit foreign workers anexception," Business Times, May 24, 1994. _____________________________________________ IllegalImmigration Arrests Up in Japan The Japanese Justice Ministry reported that the number of foreignersdeported for violating Japanese immigration laws increased 3.8 percent in 1993to a record 70,404 . Ninety percent of the violations involved working withouta proper visa. The number of aliens arrested trying to enter Japan with falsepapers rose 95 percent to 4,467 in 1993. Thais topped the list of those arrested for overstaying or mis-using theirvisas; they were 20 percent of the 70,404 illegal aliens apprehended, followedclosely by Malaysians (19 percent), South Koreans (18 percent), and Iranians(14 percent). Seven men were apprehended for every three women. Nearly 19,000foreigners were not permitted entry into Japan, down 26 percent from 1992, adecrease attributed by the Japanese government to stricter policies againstillegal workers. "93 Deportations Hit High of over 70,000," Jiji Press Ticker Service, May16, 1994. "Illegal Workers on the rise in Japan," United Press International,May 16, 1994. "Deported foreigners top 70,000 for first time in '93." JapanEconomic Newswire, May 15, 1994. "Foreign Entrants Drop for 1st Time in 7Years," Jiji Press Ticker Service, May 6, 1994. _____________________________________________ OTHER _____________________________________________ ImmigrationQuota Increased in Australia Australia will be increasing its number of immigrants in 1994-95 by 10,000to 86,000, including 13,000 refugees. Most of the additional immigration slotsare reserved for Chinese students who came to Australia after the TiananmenSquare massacre. The business migration program will also be expanded--thehope is to attract and keep wealthy Hong Kong business migrants in Australiainstead of losing them to Canada. Over the next year, 73,000 immigrants willbe admitted under family reunion, skilled, business and investment criteria, anadditional 13,000 will enter on humanitarian grounds, and 750 as otherrefugees. The number of skilled migrants will rise from 17,000 last year to25,000 in 1994-95, and those under the family reunification program willincrease by 2,000 to 47,000. The redesigned business skills category will require applicants to investat least Australian $750,000 (US$535,500) in government securities for threeyears, demonstrate a record of business or investment achievement, and haveEnglish-language proficiency. The new rules include allowing temporaryresidents who have established successful businesses to remain permanently inAustralia, instead of leaving Australia to apply for immigrant status fromabroad. Immigrants to Australia may find life difficult. Unemployment has hoveredat 10 percent over the past two years, and over one-third of the 949,200unemployed have been jobless for one year or more. A new study by theAustralian Bureau of Immigration and Population Research found that somemigrants cannot find employment because of the recession and changing attitudestowards newcomers. The study-- based on immigrants in Adelaide--recommends newprograms to educate Australians to accept immigrants--especially about theircontributions to society. Another study by the Bureau of Immigration Research explored the status ofthe nearly 120,000 Vietnamese immigrants in Australia. Their unemployment rateis about three times the rate of the general population, and double that forall migrants from non-English speaking countries, and their median annualincome is $8,300, nearly $5,900 less than for those born in Australia. Nearlyall the Vietnamese live in large cities, with 75 percent in Melbourne orSydney. Karen Middleton, "Australia: Recession Hits Immigrants Harder-Study," TheAge (Melbourne), May 19, 1994. Karen Middleton, "Australia: From Vietnam toUncertainty," The Age (Melbourne) May 14, 1994. "Australia: Boost toImmigration," The Age (Melbourne), May 12, 1994. Karen Middleton, "ChineseStudents to Get Residency in Migrant Intake Boost," The Age (Melbourne), May10, 1994. "Increased Immigrant Inflow to Favor Wealthy," Japan EconomicNewswire, May 10, 1994. Peter Gill, "New Business Migration Rules Unveiled,"Australian Financial Review, May 10, 1994. Mark Riley, "Australia: Migration Upby 10,000 Next Year," Sydney Morning Herald, May 10, 1994. "New AustralianMigration Plan Targets Rich Asians," Reuters, May 9, 1994. _____________________________________________ FijiWants Professionals to Return Over 30,000 Fijian Indians have left the country after the 1986 coup, whichhas seriously drained the islands of professionals. During the coup, Indianswere removed from senior government positions and many were treated likesecond-class citizens. The government is pleading with them to return. Fiji, with a population ofjust 700,000 in 1986, lost 5,500 people each year between 1987 and 1991, and4,100 in 1992 and 1993. Mary-Louise O'Callaghan, "Fiji: Come Back and Help Fiji, Indians Urges,"The Age (Melbourne), May 11, 1994. _____________________________________________ IndiaWants Illegal Immigration from Bangladesh Halted India's home minister has proposed holding a meeting of the chief ministersin the northeastern states to discuss illegal immigration. Home MinisterChaven has said that India has taken the following steps to control illegalimmigration from Bangladesh: increased border patrols and new fences andidentity cards for residents in the border areas. The state governments havebeen issued standing orders to deport illegal aliens. "India Unhappy with steps to curb immigration from Bangladesh," BBC, May 2,1994. _____________________________________________ Africa: Laden with Refugees and Displaced Persons Africa has 600 million people--about 12 percent of the world'spopulation--but one third of the world's 18 million refugees and 60 percent ofthe world's 16 million internally displaced persons. Refugee assistanceorganizations deplore the advent of youthful gangs who sometimes wage warindiscriminately on civilians, encouraging farmers to migrate to cities, wherethey must be fed with imported food. John Darton, "Crisis-Torn Africa Becomes Continent of Refugees," New YorkTimes, May 23, 1994, A3. _____________________________________________ RESOURCES _____________________________________________ Fix, Michael and Jeffrey Passel. 1994. Immigration and Immigrants:Setting the record Straight. Available for $10 from the Urban Institute,2100 M St NW, Wash DC, 20037. This well-written monograph explains that US immigration policy seeks toadmit legal immigrants and refugees and keep out illegal aliens in order toachieve the social goal of family unification, the economic goal of growth, thecultural goal of promoting diversity, the moral goal of providing safe haven,and the security goal of preventing illegal immigration. Annual immigration isestimated to be 1.1 million but, because 400,000 immigrants die or emigrateevery year, net immigration is 700,000 per year. These mostly Asian and LatinAmerican immigrants are concentrated in eight cities in six states. Two substantive chapters review data on the labor market and public financeimpacts of recent immigrants. The best indicator of economic success in the USis years of education. If US-born persons are ranked by their years ofeducation, the result is a diamond-shape--in 1990, 23 percent of those 25 andolder had less than a high-school education, 57 percent had a high schooldiploma, and 20 percent had at least a college degree. If recent immigrantsare similarly arrayed, the distribution has an hourglass shape--41 percent ofthose 25 and older had less than a high-school education, 35 percent had a highschool diploma, and 24 percent had at least a college degree. Making adistribution for subgroups of immigrants indicates that Mexicans and CentralAmericans have a pyramid shape--75 percent lack a high-school diploma, whileonly five percent have a college degree. The federal government makes and enforces immigration laws, while state andlocal governments provide most of the public assistance to integrateimmigrants, from education for immigrant children to welfare. The UrbanInstitute is currently reviewing various studies of the costs and benefits ofimmigrants to federal, state, and local governments, and it concludes that, onbalance, immigrants pay more in taxes than they use in benefits, but the taxesthey pay are primarily Social Security taxes paid to the federal government,while the education, justice, and health services they use are provided andpaid for by state and local governments. Bericht der Beauftragten der Bundesregierung fuer die Belange derAuslaender ueber die Lage der Auslaender in der BRD: 1993. March 1994.Available from Postfach 140280, D-53107 Bonn. fax 49-228-527-2760. This 111-page report was prepared by Cornelia Schmalz-Jacobsen, Germany'sCommission for Alien Affairs. As a result of the law that changed Germany'sasylum procedures on July 1, 1993, there will be an annual report of foreignersin Germany. There were about 6.8 million foreigners living in Germany at the end of1993, making them 8.5 percent of the population. About three-fourths are fromnon-EU countries, including 28 percent from Turkey. The number of foreigners in Germany rose by two million since 1989,excluding ethnic Germans who become German citizens upon their arrival from theformer Soviet Union. Nonetheless, most foreigners in Germany have been inGermany 10 or more years, and three-fourths of the foreign children in Germanywere born there. There are signs of convergence and divergence. Foreign children are a muchlarger fraction of those in the 16-19 age group that can be apprentices thanthey are of the apprentices in training, and the unemployment rate for foreignworkers is about 1.5 times that of Germans. Foreigners remain concentrated inolder apartments abandoned by Germans, and they often suffer discrimination inthe housing market. As a result of the Maastricht Treaty, EU foreigners livingin Germany will gain the right to vote in local and European Parliamentelections, but non-EU foreigners will not. The report ends with a call for a policy to regulate immigration, and apolicy to promote the integration of foreigners. Zimmermann, Klaus. 1994. European Migration: Push and Pull.Paper presented at the World Bank's Annual Bank Conference on DevelopmentEconomics. April 28-29. This paper concludes that European governments were able to initiatedemand-pull labor migration during the 1960s, but have been less successfulcontrolling supply-push and network migration since the 1970s. According toZimmermann's analysis, migration from Yugoslavia and Turkey was alwaysdominated by supply-push factors, while migration from southern Europeannations such as Spain and Portugal shifted from demand-pull to supply-pushafter 1973. Asylum seekers, according to Zimmermann, are influenced byeconomic variables in choosing a country to seek asylum--instead of ahouse-on-fire metaphor, a follow-friends-and-relatives-to-opportunity metaphormay be more appropriate. As in the US, more recent cohorts of immigrants, especially those who areethnically or culturally different, seem to be having a harder time catching upto similar natives in earnings. Although the studies reach contradictoryconclusions, even based on the same data, one study by Zimmermann found that inGermany, a one percent increase in the share of foreigners in the workforcereduces average hourly earnings by 4.1 percent, or by DM 0.70 ($.42) from anaverage DM17.70 ($10.72). However, the wages of more numerous blue-collarworkers fall 5.9 percent, and the wages of white collar workers rise 3.5percent.(p31). Stark, Oded. 1994. Frontier Issues in International Migration.Paper presented at the World Bank's Annual Bank Conference on DevelopmentEconomics. April 28-29. This paper extends the author's thinking from the relationship betweenmigrants and their families at home to migrants and their employers abroad.Three questions are posed: why do some migrants return even though wage gapsremain, why do those who settle abroad continue to send remittances, and why domigrants seem to catch up and surpass similar natives in earnings? Stark asserts that employers who have incomplete information on migrantshire all of them initially at a low wage but, after they are on the job, thebetter migrants obtain higher wages and the lesser-skilled migrants return (theso-called return of failure). High-skilled migrants who settle allegedly remitsome of their savings for selfish reasons--to keep low-skilled migrants fromjoining them abroad and perhaps lowering their wages. Third, in a lengthydescription of migrants and nonmigrants, and cooperative and noncooperativeagents who provide information about opportunities abroad, Stark finds thatmigrants with cooperative agents who go abroad will do better than nonmigrantswho stay at home. Tanton, John, ed. "End of the Migration Epoch," Social Contract,Spring, 1994. The Social Contract's Spring 1994 issue includes six immigrationarticles. Editor John Tanton's "End of the Migration Epoch" argues that themedical revolution of the 17th century allowed the world's population to grow;that the industrial revolution made rural-urban and later overseas migrationnecessary, while the transportation revolution made long-distance travel easierand cheaper; and that the communications revolution made potential migrantsaware of opportunities elsewhere. Kingsley Davis noted that during the1820-1920 migration epoch, historical patterns were reversed, as migrants movedfrom more to less densely settled areas rather than from rural to urban areas.Tanton lays out 10 principles that he thinks should undergird immigrationpolices for the 21st century. Available for $7.50 from 316 1/2 E Mitchell St,Petoskey, MI 49770. Wallace, Helen, MD; Judith Fullerton, and Frank P. Rust. 1994. MaternityCare for Hispanic Women Who Cross to the U.S. Side of the Mexico Border,Mimeo. This 40-page paper reports on interviews with Hispanic women who had babiesin 1991-92 in San Diego county. Of the 587 women interviewed, 12 percent (75)said they crossed the border specifically for prenatal care or to deliver theirbaby; 78 percent (459) lived in the US or crossed the border, but notspecifically to have their babies, and 9 percent (53) did not report why theycrossed. The "crossers"--women who came specifically to the US to delivertheir baby--went to the US because: 1) they wanted a baby born in US (65percent), 2) the medical attention is better in US (59 percent) and 3) medicalpersonnel are friendly and receptive (37 percent). Almost all of the"noncrossers" were born in Mexico--83 percent--indicating that they had in factcrossed the border, but for reasons other than having a baby in the US. Overall, only 14 percent of the women had health insurance; 70percent had access to Medi-Cal. This lack of health insurance was asignificant barrier in getting prenatal care. A considerable proportion of theborder crossing women were high risk and required specialized medical care.The report recommends joint planning on both sides of border to developstrategies to provide adequate care for the women, such as using public nursesto provide follow-up care for high-risk pregnancies on both sides of theborder. Helen Wallace , MD; Ronald Coen, MD; Sylvia Micik, MD; and Paul Wise, M.also wrote a 112-page Report of Infant Mortality Study San Diego County (ThirdParty Publishing Company, Oakland, CA. 1994) that examined infant mortality inSan Diego County. The report explores the major causes of infant death andrecommends that the community establish a system for prenatal care to reducethe mortality rate. During the 1980s, San Diego County experienced a plateauin the infant, neonatal and postneonatal mortality rates--in 1985 there were8.8 deaths per 1000 live births, and in 1990 there were 7.2 deaths. Duringthis period, the number of live births increased, as did the percentage ofminority mothers and babies requiring maternal and infant care increased. Available from Helen Wallace, Professor of Maternal and Child Health, 6505Alvarado Rd., Suite 202D, San Diego, CA 92120-5005. ____________________________________Editor: Philip Martin Managing Editor: Cecily Sprouse Department of Agricultural Economics, University of California, Davis,Davis CA 95616 Telephone: (916) 752-1530 Fax: (916) 752-5614 email: Phil Martin <migrant@primal.ucdavis.edu> __________________________________________ Contributors: Graziano Battistella, Scalabrini Migration Center, POBox 10541, Broadway Centrum, 1113 Queson City, Philippines. Wolfgang Bosswick, European Forum for Migration Studies, University ofBamberg, Katharinenstrasse 1, D-96052 Bamberg, Germany. WT02-B13-133IA090-000969-B024-169http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/By-Month/MN-Vol-1-94/MN_July_1994.html 128.120.36.171 19970122203948 text/html 85820HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 20:40:37 GMTLast-Modified: Saturday, 15-Apr-95 19:05:45 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 85562MIGRATION NEWS Vol. 1, No. 6 July, 1994 Migration News is a newsletter that summarizes key developments inimmigration and integration issues during the preceding month. Topics aregrouped by region: North America, Europe, Asia, and Other. There are three versions of Migration News. The paper copy is eight pagesor about 6,000 words; the email version is 10,000 to 12,000 words; and thegopher version is 12,000 to 15,000 words. The purpose of Migration News is to provide monthly summaries of recentimmigration developments that can be read in 60 minutes or less. Each issuealso offers a special report, abstracts of selected papers, and articles andinformation on recent research publications. Distribution is by email. If you wish to subscribe, send your emailaddress to: Migration News <migrant@primal.ucdavis.edu>. Current andback issues can be accessed via gopher in the Migration News folder at:dual.ucdavis.edu We welcome your contributions: please fax news items of interest toPhilip Martin at (916) 752-5614, or send them to the email address above.Working papers and other materials to be listed in the RESOURCES section can besent to Philip Martin, Department of Agricultural Economics, University ofCalifornia, Davis, Davis CA 95616 USA. Those who contribute items may requestMigration News by mail or fax if email is unavailable. NOTE TO READERS: Immigration developments after June 25, 1994 will becovered in the August, 1994 issue of Migration News. ___________________________________________ ___________________________________________ NORTHAMERICA ___________________________________________ Between 1971 and 1986, the US debated what to do about illegal immigrationagainst a backdrop whose metaphor was that illegal aliens displaced Americanworkers and depressed their wages by working "hard and scared." This labormarket discussion was inconclusive, largely because case studies that foundthat illegal aliens displaced Americans and depressed their wages could not beconfirmed in econometric studies that found few or no such effects in thecities and states with the most immigrants, suggesting that any negative labormarket effects of immigrants were very localized. One reason why there were few negative effects of immigrants detectedduring the 1980s was that the economies of the states that attracted the mostimmigrants--California, Texas, and Florida--grew rapidly, taking the edge offof any labor market effects of illegal immigrants because Americans weredisplaced. In the end, the rationale for IRCA in 1986 was that illegalimmigration is illegal, and that the back door of illegal immigration should beclosed in order to keep the front door open. Today the debate over illegal immigration has changed. The new emphasis ison the PUBLIC costs and benefits of legal and illegal immigrants--how much dothe services provided to them cost (and which level of government pays forthem), how much do immigrants pay in taxes, and to which level of government dothese taxes flow. There is agreement that the taxes paid by immigrants tend toflow to the federal government, while the costs of the services they consumeare paid for by state and local taxes (MN, May, 1994). There is disagreement on the amounts of taxes paid and the costs ofservices provided, but, once again, perhaps the most important question cannotyet be answered--how will the balance of taxes paid and the cost of serviceschange over time? Immigrant Catch-up The first studies of immigrant economic integration were generallyoptimistic. Economist Barry Chiswick found that the motivation etc thatencouraged people to move across borders also helped them to catch up and earnmore within about 15 years than US-born people with similar levels of education. These studies were based on 1970 and 1980 data, so they reflected theexperiences of immigrants who arrived in the 1950s and 1960s. During the1980s, studies by economist George Borjas found that the average level ofeducation of immigrants was declining and, with less education, theirprobability of achieving ever-higher US incomes fell. The 1990 US Census demonstrated that the immigrants who arrived during the1980s were significantly different than the US population. When ranked byeducation, the immigrant characteristic most likely to indicate economicsuccess has a barbell or hourglass shape--they are more likely than natives tohave a college education, AND they are more likely than natives to have lessthan a high-school education. US-born citizens, when arrayed by their years ofeducation, have more of a diamond-shape, with most Americans in the middle atthe high-school graduate level. Immigration and Welfare According to the 1990 Census of Population, the 20 million legal andillegal immigrants were 8.5 percent of the US population. Almost half of theseimmigrants arrived during the 1980s, and almost two-thirds of the 1980simmigrants arrived in the second half of the decade. The US spent $300 billion on means-tested assistance in 1992, and anestimated $5 trillion on cash payments (AFDC) to poor families, food stamps,and similar programs since 1965. Since not all of these programs determineaccurately the legal status of recipients, it is very difficult to determinewhether a higher percentage of immigrants or natives are and will be receiving"public assistance." An analysis of 1990 Census data by George Borjas foundthat slightly more households headed by foreign-born persons received welfareassistance, and these immigrant households received a disproportionate share ofwelfare payments in 1989. However, welfare dependence varies between immigrant subgroups.Only refugees and elderly legal immigrants tend to go on welfare upon theirarrival or as soon as they are eligible. Relatively few non-refugees whoarrived in the 1980s--many of whom were illegal aliens who became legalresidents in the 1986-87 amnesty--received public assistance in 1989, in partbecause many were ineligible when the 1990 Census of Population asked themabout their income the year before. Because so many of the immigrants included in the 1990 Census of Populationwere not eligible for welfare assistance, "snapshot" analysts must be verycareful about making over time projections of welfare dependence on the basisof one-year's data. For example, it is true that Census data show that poorMexican immigrant households in California are much less likely to be onwelfare than poor US-born Mexican-American households, but it is not clearwhether the immigrants' lower welfare usage in 1989 reflected theirineligibility OR an anti-welfare immigrant culture, as some haveclaimed. The data support the conclusion of demographer Frank Bean of the Universityof Texas --a rising number of poor immigrant households during the 1980s didNOT translate into a proportional increase the number of welfare recipients in1989. Some extend this to argue that the US and California can receive poorimmigrants and not see its welfare rolls increase. About 41 percent of thenative-born poor Mexican households received public assistance, versus 18percent of the poor immigrant households headed by persons born in Mexico.[The number of poor immigrant households in California doubled duringthe 1980s to 509,000, and 20 percent of them (104,000) received publicassistance, versus 26 percent (230,000) of the poor non-immigrant households]. However, no one knows whether these "snapshot" studies will be indicativeof the relationship between poor immigrants and welfare in the 1990s. It seemsclear that eligibility restrictions, among other things, prevented most poorimmigrants from immediately getting public assistance. The exceptions arerefugees and the elderly, who do go on welfare at relatively high rates whenthey become eligible. The effect of newly-legalized aliens on welfare rates may be significant,since higher percentages of immigrants who arrived before 1980 are on welfarethan 1980s arrivals from countries in which the largest numbers of persons werelegalized in the 1987-88 amnesty (newly-legalized aliens were generally noteligible for welfare in 1989, the Census year for income data). For example,13 percent of the Mexicans who arrived before 1980 were on welfare in 1989,versus 11 percent of all Mexican immigrants in the US in 1990, 10 percent ofthe El Salvadorans who arrived before 1980, versus seven percent, and 30percent of the pre-1980 Dominicans, versus 28 percent. Countries from which large numbers of refugees came to the US have apattern of declining welfare dependence. Refugees are eligible for welfareupon their arrival, and 26 percent of all Vietnamese immigrants, but only 16percent of pre-1980 Vietnamese immigrants, received welfare in 1989. Snapshot data from the Census cannot answer the really important question:will poor immigrants get public assistance after they are in the US long enoughto be eligible for benefits? Americans clearly worry that as poor immigrantsbecome eligible for welfare, they will apply for benefits. According to theLos Angeles Times, three-fourths of California voters support that Save ourState initiative that is likely to go before voters in November 1994--it wouldcut off most welfare benefits to undocumented residents. Half of those polledwould support preventing illegal children from attending public schools. Poor immigrants are entitled by law and court decisions to a number ofwelfare benefits, so that, in many cases, changes would have to be made inorder to deny them benefits. The major three programs that provide benefits toillegal aliens are public education (Head Start, public school education fromgrades K through 12, and school meal subsidies), WIC food coupons, andemergency health care. In most studies, public education, at about $5,000 perchild per year, accounts for two-thirds of the costs of these benefits. Oncealiens achieve a permanent legal status (green card), they are entitled toAFDC, Food Stamps, and Medicaid. For example, a profile of a Mexican illegal alien receiving welfare inTexas indicated that those interviewed--single mothers--intended to cleanhouses, not go on welfare. But after a baby born in the US gave the family aUS citizen who was eligible for welfare, this poor family began receiving FoodStamps and WIC food coupons available to mothers with small children. Thismother asserted that, even if these benefits on which her family depends wereeliminated, she would try to stay in the US, largely because the US offeredmore opportunities for poor children like hers. Economist George Borjas believes that immigrants such as this woman arebecoming more dependent on welfare. Among non-refugees, the morerecently-arrived cohorts are more likely than were earlier immigrants to getsome welfare benefits, and to remain more dependent on at least somemeans-tested programs over their lives than were earlier immigrants. Amongrefugees, many of whom get welfare upon their arrival, the rate at which theyreduce their welfare dependence seems to be declining among recentarrivals. Conclusions There are two benchmark studies of the public benefits and costs ofimmigrants--the Huddle study concluded that the immigrants who arrived in theUS since 1970 impose annual costs of $70 billion, while the Urban Instituteconcluded that these immigrants represent a $30 billion net gain (MigrationNews, May 1994). Both look back to see how immigrants who arrived in earlieryears were faring 10 or more years later, and both make assumptions about thehard-to-measure effects of immigrants on natives. But neither tackles thequestion of how fast immigrant earnings are likely to rise as they integrateinto the US--will they remain poor and go on welfare as they become eligible,or will they succeed economically, and avoid applying for benefits even if theyare eligible? The debate is most heated in California, a high tax and high service statethat is relatively generous with welfare benefits---it was the only majorindustrial state to increase benefits with the cost-of living--and it receivesabout 40 percent of the nation's immigrants. In the past, California receivedimmigrants from abroad and migrants from other states. Today, California islosing older and higher income residents to other states--between 1990 and1993, California lost residents aged 35 and older, as well as those high schoolgraduates who had not completed college--and gaining young persons without ahigh-school diploma. While no one can predict the future, the Great Migration from the US Southduring the 1950s and 1960s may provide some useful insights. When over onemillion US citizens annually left rural and southern homes for northern cities,there were predictions that these migrants would not seek welfare because suchassistance was not available in the areas from which they came, and that therewere cultural barriers to dependence on government programs. A combination ofresidency restrictions and man-in-the-house rules seemed to prove thesespeculations initially correct. However, as the 1960s unfolded, there was a steadily rising participationof rural-urban immigrants in a welfare system that was offering more benefitsand easier access to them--the rate at which those eligible participatedresembled the letter S--initially few participated, then there was a sharplyrising rate of participation, and then participation leveled off. No one yetknows whether eligible immigrants will follow a similar path. Suzanne Solis, "Immigrant Reliance on Welfare Questioned," San FranciscoChronicle, June 2, 1994, A3. Gregory Spears, "Congress Eyes Legal Aliens forCuts," New York Times, May 30, 1994. "Voters Support Denying Services toIllegal Immigrants," Washington Post, May 30, 1994; Sam Howe Verhover, "StopBenefits for Aliens? It Wouldn't be that Easy?", New York Times, June 8, 1994,A1, 12. Michael J. Mandel, "It's Really Two Immigrant Economies," BusinessWeek, June 20, 1994, 74 and 194. ___________________________________________ Wilson-ClintonSpar over Immigration Monies California Governor Pete Wilson filed a second suit on May 31, against thefederal government in an attempt to recoup nearly $370 million in costs forproviding health services to illegal immigrants. The first lawsuit filed byWilson seeks nearly $2 billion from the federal government to reimburse costsfrom incarcerating illegal alien felons. The $370 million suit seeks to collect funds from the federal government topay for the costs of providing "emergency" medical services to an estimated309,000 illegal immigrants. Wilson said, "The federal government can't keepsweeping the problem of illegal immigration under the rug while sweeping thecosts onto our already overburdened state taxpayers." The Clinton Administration responded on June 21 with a proposal to spend$25 billion on immigrants, including $8.4 billion in California, one-third morethan the Bush Administration spent. The Wilson Administration countered thatthe Clinton spending promise mixed together funds for legal and illegalimmigrant aid. The governors of California, Arizona, Florida, who have already sued thefederal government, testified on June 21 before the Senate AppropriationsCommittee to press their demand for reimbursement of the costs their statesincur to provide services to illegal aliens. Senators were sympathetic to thegovernors descriptions of the influx of illegal aliens as analogous to anatural disaster or an invasion, but told the governors that it would be hardto respond to their pleas for money because of the federal budgetdeficit. It is difficult to get Congress to approve immigrant impact assistance fora handful of states. The April proposal by the Clinton Administration toprovide $350 million to help cover the cost of incarcerating illegal aliens instate prisons was converted in June to an anti-drug program that would providebenefits to all states. Press Release of Governor Pete Wilson, May 31, 1994. "Wilson suing US forSecond Time," San Diego Union-Tribune, June 1, 1994. Herbert A. Sample, "Statemay get more immigrant aid," Sacramento Bee, June 15, 1994. James Bornemeier,"Clinton seeks $24.8 billion for immigration," Los Angeles Times, June 22,1994, A3. Deborah Sontag, "3 Governors Take Pleas on Aliens to the Senate,"New York Times, June 23, 1994, A10. ___________________________________________ FirstHaitians Processed at Sea Six of the 35 Haitians picked up at sea on June 16 and processed on theship Comfort, anchored in Kingston Harbor, Jamaica, were granted refugeestatus. During the first week of the program, 226 Haitians who left Haiti insmall boats were picked up by the US Coast Guard and taken to Jamaica todetermine if they were refugees. These are the first Haitian refugees to be processed at sea under the newClinton plan. Previously, the Haitians would have been immediately returned toHaiti and would have to apply for asylum from their country regardless of thethreat of persecution. The Haitians will not be allowed to enter Jamaica, andthe operation is scheduled to last for less than six months. The ClintonAdministration is expecting the number of Haitians to be processed to jump toabout 2,000 per week . That is a dramatic increase over the 130 Haitians thatthe Coast Guard has been picked up each week this year. A representative from the UN Commission for Refugees will be on board theship to explain to the Haitians how the interviews will be conducted and toanswer questions. The UNHCR has said that those rejected for asylum should besent to a safe country until the current Haitian government is removed. The 29Haitians who were denied asylum on June 16 will be returned to Haiti. A sympathetic portrait of the 450,000 Haitian-Americans--the 1990 Census OfPopulation counted only 306,000 in a severe undercount--emphasizes thediversity of the immigrants from the nation of seven million (average percapita GNP in 1991 was $380) that shares an island of Hispanola with sevenmillion Dominicans (average per capita GNP in 1991 was $940).Haitian-Americans are mostly middle class--in the 1990 COP, 40 percent had atleast some college education, while only 10 percent had less than aneighth-grade education. Haitian-Americans are concentrated around New YorkCity, where they are 1.5 percent of the population, and Miami (6percent). Haitian immigration to the US peaked in 1980-81, when 45,000 Haitiansarrived. In 1981, President Reagan ordered that Haitians be stopped at seaand, through 1991, only 28 of 22,716 Haitians intercepted were admitted to theUS. Despite generally high levels of education--half of the adult Haitians inNew York City have some college education--seven percent of the Haitianimmigrants there, and 25 percent of second-generation Haitians--are onwelfare. Florida in June deported the first 113 of the 2,700 illegal aliens who werejailed in the state for committing non-violent offenses in the US. All butthree of the first prisoners to be deported were convicted of drug trafficking,and their release is expected to save Florida up to $15,000 per alien per year.Some 4,100 of Florida's 54,000 prisoners are foreigners and, according to INS,1,400 of the foreigners were in the US legally when they committed theircrimes. Deborah Sontag, "Haitian Migrants Settle In, Looking Back," New YorkTimes, June 3, 1994, A1, 5; "US to hold Haitian Refugees in Jamaica for asylumtrials," Sacramento Bee, June 2, 1994. Steven Greenhouse, "US Expects Big Jumpin Haitian Applicants," International Herald Tribune, June 8, 1994; "Florida isFirst in Deporting Jailed Aliens," New York Times, June 9, 1994, A8. "Haitiansget asylum interviews off Jamaica," Sacramento Bee, June 17, 1994. ___________________________________________ ImmigrantDay Laborers In many California cities, immigrants congregate in lumber and hardwarestores parking lots and on street corners to wait for employers to hire themon a daily basis. These labor shape-ups are considered less-than-satisfactoryby immigrant advocates, who note that unscrupulous employers can go from one toanother cheating the workers they hire; by local residents, who complain ofloitering immigrants; and by employers, who are not sure if qualified workerswill be available. Union employees complain that the illegal immigrants hiredin such day labor markets are willing to work for cut-rate wages--from lessthan half of union rates to below minimum wage. The undocumented workers arecompeting in construction markets that already offer fewer jobs because of astall in home building. Several cities have tried to organize hiring halls--buildings that offersanitary facilities and some services, such as English as a Second Language,for day laborers. Some hiring centers cater only to undocumented workers,others welcome all the unemployed, and some screen workers to determine if theycan work legally in the US. However, if the centers do screen for legalstatus, then they may duplicate state Employment Services, an already existingnetwork of offices that match workers with jobs for no fee. If the centers donot screen workers for legal status, they may be using public funds to helpunauthorized workers find US jobs. Hiring centers that are "immigration blind" do not usually offerspecialized services because they serve a diverse unemployed clientele. Hiringcenters that screen for immigration status offer more services, but only todocumented workers. Some workers avoid the hiring centers for fear employerswill not hire workers who go to them. Hiring centers have been tried numerous times as substitutes for curbsidehiring in southern California, especially after communities ban curbsidehiring. A University of California, San Diego study of three such centersconcluded that the one which did not screen workers for legal status was moresuccessful than the two that did. It also concluded that hiring centers can notwork without community support. Los Angeles is one of the most recent cities trying to deal with theproblems created by curbside hiring. After protests by local residents, LosAngeles County on May 24 enacted an ordinance that bans, effective July 1,1994, laborers from curbside solicitation of jobs--curbside job-seeking willbe a misdemeanor punishable by up to six months in jail and a $1,000 fine. Thethree county supervisors who supported the measure to restrict day laborerssaid that they were trying to reduce traffic and sanitation problems, not sendan anti-immigrant message. Los Angeles' district attorney threatened not to enforce the ordinance,saying that, "it would be difficult for me to prosecute someone for simplytrying to get a job." The ban on curbside hiring affects only unincorporatedareas of the county, where about 10 percent of Los Angeles 9.2 million peoplelive. The city of Los Angeles has opened hiring halls for immigrants, whilenearby Agoura Hills banned curbside hiring in July 1991 after a worker waskilled in the rush to trucks to find day jobs; its ban was upheld by Californiacourts in May 1994. The wealthy Malibu Colony outside of Los Angeles has had a mixed experiencewith hiring centers. A hiring center opened in 1990, but closed four monthslater. In December 1991, a task force recommended opening an official hiringcenter and passing an ordinance to prohibit employers from hiring atunauthorized sites. In 1993, the Malibu Labor Exchange Center opened withsupport from city and county officials, and it is credited with reducing thenumber of places day laborers congregate. Over 30 workers report to the centereach day, and 20 requests for workers are made by employers. In the Northern California county of Marin, the INS reports that legalimmigrants are turning in illegal immigrants at day labor sites because toomany workers are competing for too few jobs. The Canal Area of Marin has anestimated 10,000 residents; since January 1993, the INS has arrested between1,000 and 1,500 illegal immigrants in the area. However, many are set free with temporary workpermits so that they can support themselves until their deportationhearing--one to 12 months later. Temporary work permits entitle illegalimmigrants to apply for temporary Social Security cards and work anywhere inthe United States--2,000 are issued each month in the Bay Area. Frederick Muir, "Supervisor Defends Vote to Restrict Day Laborers" LosAngeles Times, May 26, 1994, Anna Cearley, "Hiring Hall may get new test," SanDiego Union-Tribune, May 25, 1994. Anna Cearley, "Hiring Hall Advocates runsinto resistance," San Diego Union-Tribune, May 27, 1994. David LaGesse,"California immigrant issue grows," Dallas Morning News, May 22, 1994. KateTaylor, "Immigrants Split over Job Scarcity," San Francisco Chronicle, May 17,1994. Todd Eisenstadt and Cathy L. Thorup, Caring Capacity versus CarryingCapacity: Community Responses to Mexican Immigration in San Diego's NorthCounty, Center for US-Mexican Studies, UCSD, Monograph #39, 1994. ___________________________________________ Immigrationand the California Election '94 Between 1980 and 1990, California added six million to its population,bringing it to 30 million, and three million jobs. The population growth wasfueled by natural increase (births exceeding deaths) and by immigration aswell as more Americans from other states moving to California than left thestate. The job boom was the result of economic growth nationwide, andespecially rising defense expenditures. Since 1990, population growth has slowed, and California has lost jobs.Natural increase is about 400,000 annually, and legal and illegal immigrationadds about 300,000. However, about 250,000 more Americans leave than enterCalifornia, meaning that the state adds only about 450,000 new residentsannually, two-thirds of 1980s levels. California lost 600,000 jobs since mid-1990, or 200,000 per year. Many ofthe lost jobs paid relatively high wages, since they were associated withdefense manufacturing. Many of the new jobs created, on the other hand, havebeen lower wage service jobs. Immigration was not the cause of the demographic or economic shifts inCalifornia in the 1990s, but the fact that legal and illegal immigrantscontinue to arrive in large numbers at a time when the state budget is strainedmade immigration one of the top four issues in the race for Governor --in a LosAngeles Times exit poll on June 7, the day the political parties picked theircandidates for the November 8 election, immigration and education joined theeconomy and crime as the issues most important to voters. California GovernorPete Wilson highlighted immigration as a problem for California and advocatedreducing services especially to illegal immigrants, as well as developing morereliable identification documents. His Republican challenger did not makecontrolling illegal immigration the basis of his campaign--but he did proposereduced services and preferences such as bilingual education and affirmativeaction to turn off the "social welfare magnet" that allegedly encouragesillegal immigrants to come to California. The two major Democratic candidates also argued that something mustbe done to reduce illegal immigration, but they favored border and interiorenforcement to keep illegal immigrants out and prevent those who slip in fromgetting jobs. Kathleen Brown argued for more federal Border Patrol agents and areliable identification system, while John Garamendi argued for a reliableidentification system and endorsed PRIDE principles--Proponents for ResponsibleImmigration Debate and Education--which include continuation of jus solis,continued immigrant access to health and education services, and economicassistance for Mexico and other sending nations. US Senator Diane Feinstein (D-CA) reintroduced legislation to requirecounterfeit-proof worker ID cards for all workers and to cut some welfarebenefits now available to immigrants. Feinstein's bill also proposes stifferpenalties for alien smuggling, streamlines mechanisms for deporting criminalillegal aliens, and establishes a $1.00 border-crossing fee to help pay forbeefed-up enforcement. Sacramento Bee, June 5, 1994, A25. Michael Doyle, "Feinstein gets tougheron immigration," Sacramento Bee, June 16, 1994.___________________________________________ PublicOpinion on Immigrants A public opinion poll released by the Field Institute on June 9 found thatmost Californians support measures to slow down illegal immigration, includinga $1 dollar fee for crossing the border to provide more funds for borderenforcement and deporting illegal immigrants convicted of serious crimes. Proposals to deny services to illegal immigrants vary by the ethnicity ofthe respondent. Three-fourths of the Californians polled believe illegalimmigrants should not receive welfare payments. Among white voters, 85 percentoppose welfare for illegal immigrants; among Latinos, 50 percent are in favor.Illegal immigrants are not eligible for US welfare, but their US citizenchildren are entitled to benefits. About 55 percent of whites favor amending the US Constitution to denyautomatic citizenship to children born in the US of undocumented immigrants,and 59 percent of the whites believe that the children of illegal aliens shouldnot be allowed to attend public schools--77 percent of the Latinos, bycontrast, approve illegal alien children in public schools. Non-voters tend tosupport public education for illegal alien children, while voters do not. Most Californians do not support the creation of special identificationcards to control illegal immigration--49 percent said agreed such a was not agood idea. However, 55 percent of the whites oppose an ID card, while 56percent of the Latinos thought it would be a good idea. A national CBS poll conducted in May found that 29 percent of thosesurveyed think immigrants contribute to the US, while 53 percent said theycause problems. Only 16 percent agreed that immigrants would make Americansociety better, 41 percent said they would make it worse, and 32 percent saidthey wouldn't affect American society. The share of Americans who agree that economic hard times in the UnitedStates make it difficult to continue welcoming immigrants who arrive with fewassets rose to 65 percent, up from 60 percent in January, and 45 percent in a1986 poll, CBS reported that despite these opinions, only 34 percent saidimmigration should be stopped, while 19 percent said the US should alwayswelcome immigrants. Thirty-two percent said immigrants take jobs fromAmericans, but 52 percent said they were jobs Americans didn't want anyway. The US Conference of Mayors reported the results of a survey of the leadersof 78 cities at their annual meeting in Portland on June 13. It found that thebenefits produced by immigrants in these cities are believed to outweigh theproblems associated with the delivery of services to them. The report found that foreign-born persons represent an average 11 percentof the population in the 78 cities, and more than one-fourth of the citiesbelieve that their foreign-born population was undercounted in the 1990 census.Just over two out of three of the cities reported that they have benefited fromthe presence of immigrants, principally through economic development, increasedavailability of both skilled and unskilled labor, and social and culturalcontributions to the community. The major problems were in the delivery and financing of health, social,language and other services. Fifty-seven percent of the cities said theseproblems relate to the presence of legal immigrants; 56 percent said theyrelate to the presence of undocumented persons. City governments in nearly one-third ofthe cities help new immigrants to resettle. Officials surveyed called forincreased resources for the Border Patrol to reduce illegal immigration. "Huddled masses aren't welcome," Washington Times, May 24, 1994. AmyChance, "Split on immigrants," Sacramento Bee, June 10, 1994. Gerry Braun,"Immigration reform favored, Majority wants to curb welfare, schooling," SanDiego-Union Tribune, June 10, 1994. ___________________________________________ ImmigrantSelf-Employment--A Two-Edged Sword A higher percentage of immigrants (7.6 percent) than natives (7 percent)were self employed in the 1990 Census Of Population, and the proportion ofimmigrants who are self employed tends to rise with time in the US.Self-employed immigrants have the highest average incomes of all types ofimmigrants--$30,000 in 1989--and they are credited with revitalizing inner cityneighborhoods from Watts to Brooklyn. However, immigrant revitalization can be a two-edged sword. Chineseimmigrants who created New York's third largest Chinatown in Brooklyn drove outdrug dealers and pushed up real estate values, but they also brought sweatshopsand Asian gangs into the area. An estimated 10,000 Chinese immigrants--perhapsone-third illegal aliens--work up to 70 hours weekly for as little as $500monthly, an hourly wage that is less than half of the federal $4.25 minimum.It has proven to be very difficult to enforce labor and other laws that setminimum standards in neighborhoods with large numbers of recentimmigrants. Many of the 65,000 Chinese in Brooklyn were legalized under a provision ofIMMACT (1990) that opened slots for those in the US after the 1989 TiananmenSquare killings. E.S. Browning, "A New Chinatown Grows in Brooklyn," Wall Street Journal,May 31, 1994, B1 ___________________________________________ English-OnlyRules in the Workplace The US Supreme Court refused to decide on the validity of a 24-year oldEqual Employment Opportunity Commission policy that employer rules whichrequired only English in the workplace were presumed to be discriminatory.According to the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, 120 US employers havebeen accused of unfairly imposing English-only rules. In 1993, the NinthCircuit Court of Appeals ruled that the EEOC had no authority to issue such arule prohibiting English-only in the workplace and, when this ruling wasappealed to the US Supreme Court, the Clinton Administration urged that thefederal appeals court ruling be overturned. This means that a California company can continue to require that itsemployees speak only English on the job. The Clinton Administration had arguedthat the appeals court ruling--which made it more difficult for employees tochallenge English-only workplace rules--makes it too hard for employees whowish to speak a language other than English at work to challenge the "businessnecessity" of such rules. In one such case in San Francisco, five Filipino-American security guardswere reassigned after a false alarm got officials out of bed because the guardon duty allegedly had such a strong accent that his explanation could not beunderstood. They were awarded $87,500 from the US government, and additionalfunds from their employer, a private security firm, for discrimination. Richard Carelli, "Administration argues against English-only rules inbusinesses," AP, June 3, 1994; Jane Adams, "5 Filipino-Americans winaccent-bias settlements," Sacramento Bee, June 3, 1994, B5, New York Times,June 20, 1994, A10. "High court backs 'English only,'" Sacramento Bee, June 21,1994. ___________________________________________ ImmigrationEnforcement Operation Hold the Line has reduced the number of illegal aliens enteringthe US near El Paso, Texas from 10,000 to 100 per day, according to the INS. However, there may be some diversion of aliens attempting entry to Arizona.The Tucson INS sector, for example, apprehended an average 6,000 aliens monthlyin FY 1992, and 7,700 monthly in FY93. However, in April 1994, apprehensionsrose to almost 15,000, leading some to speculate that aliens are simply beingdiverted along the 2000 mile US-Mexican border. In a visit to the border region in San Diego, INS Commissioner DorisMeissner said that over the next six months, 400 border agents will be added tothe San Diego border area and they will get 222 new patrol cars with encryptedradios so that alien smugglers can't hear their conversations. A new computersystem called ENFORCE puts 51 INS forms into an integrated computer databaseand reduces processing time from 20 minutes to three or four minutes for eachalien apprehended will be tested in San Diego in July. Reacting to the success of Operation Hold the Line, the HouseAppropriations Committee on June 15 approved the addition of 700 Border Patrolagents. The $4.5 million measure must now be approved by the full Houseof Representatives and the Senate before these additional agents can be hired. The US House of Representatives also authorized the use of active-dutymilitary personnel to police the Mexican border. This amendment to the defenseauthorization bill would authorize the Secretary of Defense to order militarypersonnel to assist the Customs Service to inspect cargo, motor vehicles andaircraft arriving in the country. The Senate must now approve the measure. "Flow of Immigrants diverted to AZ," Tucson Citizen, June 5, 1994. JohnDillin, "A Big Knock on US Door as Immigrants Pour In," Christian ScienceMonitor, June 7, 1994. "Help coming, INS chief says," Sacramento Bee, June 13,1994. Marcus Stern, "Panel OKs 700 new border agents, Action in Houseunderlines tensions," San Diego Union-tribune, June 16, 1994. ___________________________________________ EUROPE ___________________________________________ BorderControls and Foreign Workers in the EU The 12-nation European Union promised four freedoms when it was founded in1957--the freedom to move goods, services, capital, and labor across theborders of member nations. The Single European Act (EC-92) and the MaastrichtTreaty restated the EU's commitment to a border-free Europe, and nine EUmembers signed the Schengen agreement (all but Denmark, Ireland, and the UK),which established the goal of removing border checks on their common borders byJanuary 1, 1993, meaning that EU nationals, such as Germans and Frenchmen, aswell as third-country nationals such as Americans and Turks, could movefreely from Germany to France or between Belgium and the Netherlands. Four deadlines for a border-free Europe have come and gone. The currenttarget date for a border-free Europe is October 1994. There are today morestories of restoring border checks and controls than progress toward theirelimination. As one perhaps unanticipated consequence of another EUagreement--the Dublin agreements that require asylum applicants to have theircases heard in the first EU country they reach-- countries such as theNetherlands have stepped up their use of border checks--including using videocameras to prove that asylum applicants entered from Germany for asylum, andthus must be returned to Germany to apply. In May 1994, Denmark applied to become an observer under the Schengenconvention, a move expected to put pressure on Britain and Ireland, as well asthe other Nordic countries expected to join the EU in 1995, to take stepstoward a border-free Europe. The European Parliament will create a European Ombudsman after June 1994elections and, according to some observers, complaints about border controlsshould keep the ombudsman busy. On June 20, 1994 EU Justice and Home Affairs Ministers approved aresolution that would confirm at the EU level national restrictions onimmigration. Over the protest of the Belgium minister, a Resolution thatnational polices restricting immigrant workers from entering countries "should be maintained andwhere necessary reinforced" was approved. According to the resolution, EU membernations should "refuse entry to their territories of third-countrynationals for the purpose of employment," with "admission for temporary employment"permitted only as " a very narrow exception" in cases where there is a vacantjob that requires specialized skills and, if unfilled, the viability of thebusiness is threatened. There are exceptions for seasonal foreign workersemployed for less than six months, and for trainees in the host EU country forup to 12 months. This resolution contradicts the February proposal (COMMA (94) 23) ofPadraig Flynn, the European Commissioner with responsibility for immigrationissues, to permit the nine million legal immigrants living in the EU to moveand work in another Member State. The ministers also approved a feasibility study of the EURODAC network. Ifimplemented, the system would fingerprint asylum-seekers and suspected illegalimmigrants at their first point of entry, and then circulate the informationamong member nations. "EU Ministers to set out foreigners' Work Rules," Reuters, June 17, 1994.David Gardner, "EU ministers agree on foreign workers," Financial Times, June21, 1994. Raphael, "Return of the Border Guards," Wall Street Journal, May 31,1994, A16; The Reuter European Community Report, May 27, 1994; European Report,June 22, 1994. ___________________________________________ Immigrationin Germany Germany is the major country of immigration in Europe. Over the past fiveyears, an average 830,000 foreigners annually arrived in the former WestGermany, producing one of the world's highest rates of immigration. In theformer West Germany, deaths exceed births, so that immigrants who add about 1.5percent annually to the 60 million population there are far more visible thanthe comparable rate of immigration to turn-of-the-century US. Germany's "melting pot" has been marked by violence against and marches insupport of foreigners; Ueberfremdung(overforeignization) was deemed the"worst" new word to enter the German vocabulary in 1993. However, there isstill no German immigration or immigrant (integration) policy. Chancellor Kohlhas appealed to his EU partners to develop an EU-wide immigration policy todeal with immigration, what he called the central challenge "facing Europe inthe 1990s." However, after 12 years in office, his coalition government hasdealt only with asylum--it has not so far tackled naturalization or rules foradmitting immigrants. Naturalization Germany has a rather difficult naturalization procedure that includes therequirement that persons wishing to become German citizens give up theiroriginal citizenship. One proposal to deal with naturalization is to allowdual citizenship and to allow non-citizen residents to vote in local elections.At its three-day congress in early June, 1994, the FDP (Free Democratic Party)pledged to introduce legislation that would reform Germany's 1913 citizenshiplaws and permit foreigners to vote in local elections if Chancellor HelmutKohl's governing coalition is returned to power in the October 1994 election. Cornelia Schmalz-Jacobsen, Commissioner for Aliens Affairs, was elected tothe FDP presidium at the Congress. She has been championing dual citizenshipand similar reforms to promote the integration of foreigners in Germany. President Demirel of Turkey in April 1994 appealed for Turks living inGermany to give up their Turkish citizenship and become naturalized Germans sothat they could become a more effective "lobby for Turkey" in Europe. Asylum The number of asylum seekers in Germany continued to fall in 1994. Afteraveraging 12,000 monthly between January and April, the number of asylumseekers fell to 9,300 in May. There has been a great deal of speculation about how illegal attempts toenter Germany would respond to the July 1, 1993 changes in German asylum lawsand procedures. On the German-Polish border, apprehensions have decreased,from an average 1,500 monthly--two-thirds Romanians-- in 1993 to 1,200 monthlyin April and May 1994. In 1992, there were 46,200 foreigners apprehended onthe job in Germany, and there were 5,200 preliminary proceedings initiatedagainst contract workers suspected of working illegally. About 86,000 Germans emigrated in 1992; two-thirds of them remained inEurope. Almost 50,000 Aussiedler (ethnic Germans), most from the Asian republics ofthe former USSR, arrived in Germany during the first three months of 1994.Under a 1993 revision of the German law, a maximum 225,000 Aussiedler arepermitted to enter Germany each year from the former USSR. In April 1994, the German Parliament amended its Employment Promotion Law(Beschaeftigugngsforderungsgesetz) to permit private employment agencies tomatch even unskilled workers and jobs. This reform also permits unemployedworkers drawing UI benefits to be placed for up to three months in seasonalagricultural jobs for which they will receive 25DM ($15) daily. In 1993, mostof the 200,000 seasonal foreign workers employed in Germany worked inagriculture. David Gow, "A Cold and Wet Reception For Illegals On The Union's EasternFrontier," The Guardian, June 3, 1994, p. 11. The Economist, May 14, 1994,p. 55; May 21, 1994, p. S5. Judy Dempsey, "Pledge on German immigrationlaws," Financial Times, June 6, 1994; This Week in Germany, April 22, 1994, p.4. ___________________________________________ Immigrationin European Elections Immigration was an issue in recent elections across Europe. Voters inEuropean Union nations went to the polls on June 9 and 12 to choose members forfive-year terms in the European Parliament. The Greek chair of the EU'sCouncil for Foreign Ministers says that employment and migration flows will bethe "main economic and social problems for the next decade." However, local issues rather than overarching issues such as immigrationseemed to influence voting in many countries. Voter turnout was low--about 50percent. The Socialists were rejected by voters in France; Chancellor HelmutKohl's Christian Democrats staged a major comeback after a shaky start; JohnMajor's Conservative Party lost half of its 32 seats in the European Parliamentto the Labor Party; and the governing Spanish Socialists led by Prime MinisterFelipe Gonzalez paid for Spain's 22 percent unemployment rate losing to theconservative Popular Party. Hard campaigning by Chancellor Kohl in Germany, as well as a recoveringeconomy and a strong stand against continued immigration, helped the CDU widenits lead over the Social Democrats. A compromise between Kohl's CDU and theSocial Democrats in 1993 sharply decreased the number of asylum seekers intoGermany, and helped to explain why the rightist Republicans are likely to fallshort of the five percent threshold needed to win seats in the Bundestag in theOctober federal elections--they won only 3.9 percent of the vote. The far-right Nationalist Front in France experienced similar problems.Instead of an expected 15 percent of the vote, the Nationalist Front receivedonly 10.5 percent. Analysts say the conservative government's success inimposing stricter immigration controls negated the Nationalist Front's hottestissue--immigration. On June 12, 1994, Austria said yes to Europe--66 percent of Austrian votersapproved the country becoming the thirteenth member nation of the EU. A yesvote, which seemed assured earlier in 1994 when Austria, Norway, Sweden andFinland scheduled referendums on EU membership, was made uncertain by fearsthat Austria would lose its identity and be overrun by foreigners. Thequestions directed to the government's "Say yes to Europe" campaign officesincluded "Could all foreigners, including Turks, settle in Austria?" reflectingfears that foreigners would flood the country due to the EU's allegedly looserborder controls. Graham Brown, "Unemployment, immigration key issues for Euro-voters,"Agence France Press, May 31, 1994. "The Rumbling in Europe," InternationalHerald Tribune, May 30, 1994. Roger Thurow, "Austrians Express last-minutedoubts as Vote to Join European Union nears," Wall Street Journal, June 10,1994, A6. Rick Atkinson, "German Far Right Soundly Rejected in Voter Backlash,International Herald Tribune, June 14, 1994. William Drozdiak, "EuropeanVoters Settle Local Scores; Election of Continental Parliament ProducesParochial Results," Washington Post, June 13, 1994. ___________________________________________ SwedenAttracts Illegal Immigrants from Baltic States Over the past two years, about 870 refugees--many without passports ordocuments-- have arrived in Sweden by boat from Latvia, which is only 90 milesacross the Baltic Sea. In early 1994, the Swedish government attempted to slowthe flow of asylum-seekers by raising the penalty for smuggling aliens from sixmonths to two years in prison. Sweden also donated nine retrofitted formercoast guard patrol boats to the three Baltic countries, and helped traincustoms officers in Estonia. Almost all of the boat refugees en route to Sweden come via Russia.Official Russian estimates are that more than 500,000 foreigners are awaitingonward passage. A Swedish immigration ministry spokesperson said that Sweden'sliberal asylum laws and generous welfare system attract asylum-seekers. TheSwedish government does not return asylum seekers to Afghanistan or Iraq, butdoes return those from Bangladesh. Sweden would like the Baltic states toimprove border controls and sign the Geneva Convention on Refugees so that theSwedish government could return asylum-seekers. The Nordic countries, the United States and Canada will give the Balticsand Belarus $1.5 million to support their efforts to prevent illegalimmigration and assist refugees. The program includes assistance to Russianspeakers in the Baltics who want to remigrate to Russia, and also for those whowant to move to Latin America or other regions. Greg Mcivor, "Trawler Seized as Sweden acts to block Baltic Refugee Route,"The Guardian, June 9, 1994. "Boat carrying 48 Kurds and Bengalis interceptedoff Sweden," Agence Press France, June 8, 1994. "Western Aid for refugees andto prevent illegal immigration, BNS News Agency, May 31, 1993. ___________________________________________ NoMore Seasonal Yugoslavs in Switzerland Switzerland, a country with a per capita GNP 50 percent higher than that ofthe US in 1992 ($36,230 vs. $23, 120) has a mass tourism industry for residentsof lower-income countries staffed largely by seasonal and other immigrants.Beginning January 1, 1994, the right of seasonal workers who worked 36 of 48months in Switzerland to obtain one-year resident permits was ended. On April13, 1994, the Swiss government announced that effective January 1, 1995, nomore seasonal workers from the former Yugoslavia would be admitted in order "toslow down the increase in the number of foreign residents" from there. The number of asylum seekers averaged 1,400 monthly so far in 1994; 5,200arrived during the first four months of 1994. Switzerland in May 1994 began toreturn some of the 22,000 Tamils from Sri Lanka, beginning with the mostrecently arrived. NZZ, April 14, 1994 ___________________________________________ Estonianand Russian Migration The Estonian Interior Ministry has announced that only 1,000 people will bepermitted to immigrate in 1994. Under Estonian law, the annual immigrationquota cannot exceed one-tenth of one percent of Estonia's resident populationof 1.5 million, or 1500. The head of the remigration bureau at the Estonian Citizenship andImmigration Department reported on May 23 that an average of 12,000 to 14,000foreigners leave Estonia every year. Each foreign citizen leaving the countryis entitled to a US$77 to $192 departure bonus. Discussions are underway to obtain foreign aid to finance the emigration ofRussians from Estonia. Many Russians say they are compelled to leave Estonia,because Russia supports only those settlers who claim they have been forced toleave. The estimated 500,000 illegal immigrants from Asia, Africa, and the MiddleEast in Russia--up from an estimated 50,000 in 1992--are blamed for increasingthe crime rate. According to police, foreigners committed 15,000 crimes in1993, up from 530 in 1992. Many of the victims were other foreigners. "Immigration of non-Estonians limited to 1,000 people in 1994," BBC, June3, 1994. " Over 12,000 foreigners a year level Estonia," BBC, June 3, 1994.The Record, June 22, 1994 ___________________________________________ Greece,Romania Sign Immigration Accord Greece and Romania signed an agreement on June 6 to return illegal Greekand Romanian immigrants to their own countries. The agreement includes thosewith expired residence and working permits. "Greece, Romania sign accord on illegal immigration," Xinhau GeneralOverseas News Service, June 6, 1994. ___________________________________________ IrishImmigration Policy Nonexistent An estimated 5,000 to 10,000 illegal immigrants are in Ireland--a countrywith no official immigration policy. The criteria used by the Department ofJustice to grant legal immigrant status include residence for fiveyears, intention to reside in Ireland, and being of good character. But theJustice Minister says that the ministry may waive certain conditions based onthings such as "Irish associations," including Irish relatives. Carol Coulter, "There is no immigration policy," Irish Times, June 4,1994. ___________________________________________ Emigrationfrom Portugal Portugal is the poorest EC member-nation, with a per capita income of$7,450, or less than one-third the levels of France and Germany, and there wasspeculation that large numbers of Portuguese would emigrate after they got fullfreedom of movement rights on January 1, 1992. The Portuguese NationalInstitute of Statistics reported that in 1992, 39,000 workers left the country,57 percent permanently (with the intention of being gone one year or more), and43 percent temporarily. Half of both types of migrants went to France andSwitzerland. Portugal has a workforce of about 4.9 million, so the emigrants representedalmost one percent of the Portuguese labor force and about two-thirds of theaverage annual growth in the Portuguese labor force. Dairo de Noticias, April 13, 1994; OECD Labor Force Statistics,1994. ___________________________________________ ASIA ___________________________________________ TaiwanThreatens to Halt Importation of Filipino Workers Taiwan is threatening to halt the importation of Filipino workers becauseof new employment requirements placed on the workers and their Taiwaneseemployers by the Filipino government. Taiwan has about 183,000 foreign workersin the country, including at least 50,000 Filipinos, who work primarily asdomestics and nurses. The employment requirements are meant to protect Filipinos working inTaiwan. They require Taiwanese employers of Filipino domestic helpers andprivate nurses to provide workers compensation insurance in the event ofon-the-job injury and advise the worker of their financial status. The Taiwangovernment objects to these rules because they infringe upon its sovereignty.The issues are expected to be discussed at the annual labor talks later thismonth. The Taiwan Association of Employment Agencies supports a ban on newFilipino workers--it is not submitting requests for any new workers to Manila.Taiwan labor officials say that if the additional Filipino workers are banned,they will allow employers to bring in workers from other countries. The Taiwan Council of Labor Affairs has considered freezing theimportation of foreign workers because the labor shortage is "over." Thecouncil would make exceptions for companies investing over NT$100 million, butthese companies would not be allowed to have foreigner workers exceed 30percent of the company's work force. Some Taiwanese employers apparently do not treat foreign workers well--theyhave been ordered to improve the safety, health and welfare conditions fortheir foreign workers or face penalties. Typical violations include too manyovertime hours, no days off, and failure to provide proper welfare benefits. "Taiwan: Labor Council Gives Ultimatum to Philippine Government on Workers"China Economic News Service, June 8, 1994. "Work Conditions-Regulations," June7, 1994, China Economic News Service. "Decision On Filipino Workers Could HarmBilateral Relations," China Economic News Service, May 31, 1994. ___________________________________________ Japan:Chinese Illegal Immigrants and Guestworkers Over 4,000 Chinese entered Japan illegally, primarily to work, in the pastfive and one-half years, according the Justice Ministry's Immigration Bureau.Many of the illegal immigrants are believed to have been smuggled aboardfreighters and other vessels by the Chinese mafia, called Snake Head. The number of migrants being smuggled into Japan in groups is rising. In1990, 18 Chinese arrived in two groups; in 1992, 396 arrived in 14 groups; and,in 1993, 335 arrived in seven groups. Between January and May, 1994, 250Chinese in eight groups were smuggled into Japan. Some Vietnamese set out in boats for Japan, transiting through Hong Kong,because of a rumor that Japan is welcoming foreign workers with financialassistance and extended visa stays. The UNHCR is working in Hue, Vietnam tohalt the spread of the rumor. Last month Japan announced that it would returnany boat people who arrived in the country after March 5, without screeningthem for refugee status. Thirty-one nations agreed at a meeting in Geneva in February thatVietnamese would no longer be given preferential treatment over asylum seekersform other countries. Japanese Guestworkers Haruo Shimada, Japan's best-known labor economist, recently released a220-page book that showcases his proposal to develop a work-and-learn programthrough which unskilled workers could fill vacant jobs, learn skills and, ifthey settled, be accepted and integrated into Japanese society. The book haseight chapters grouped into three parts--overview, a work-and-learn temporaryworker proposal, and long-term solutions to the problem of illegal immigrationand labor shortages in Japan. Getting the Japanese to accept foreigners maynot be easy--a Tokyo poll reported that 64 percent of residents dislike havingforeigners in their neighborhoods, and 57 percent agreed that the Japanesediscriminate against foreigners. Most of the book is devoted to explaining why guestworkers are inevitable,and why the foreigners admitted must have legal status, be paid appropriatewages and housed and trained by their Japanese employers, and why Japan must beprepared to integrate those who will settle after their three- to five-yearwork-and-learn programs. The book provides a valuable summary of recent Japanese immigration policyand data, and carefully explains a leading proposal to deal with illegalimmigration. It is hortatory, however, and may not do full justice to thosewho oppose foreign workers in Japan. The need or demand for (foreign) workersdepends on their cost, and if EMPLOYERS had to bear all of the costs that wouldbe implicit in the work-and-learn proposal--everything from preparatoryJapanese language training to on-the-job training in Japan--they may decidethey do not need many foreign workers--automating, adjusting workplaces andwages to attract local workers, or investing abroad might seem more attractive.If society as a whole bears these costs, then employers who offer 3Djobs--dirty, dangerous, and difficult--are being subsidized to maintain suchjobs. The central issue facing countries such as Japan is simple. Demographicsmake it clear that the supply of workers in the future will be limited--even ifwages and workplaces were radically altered, low-fertility Japan would soon runout of the workers needed for a growing labor force. What is not clear is howsensitive the demand for additional workers is to rising wages, i.e., howneeded are unskilled foreign workers? Industrial nations are not testing thesensitivity of the demand for unskilled foreign workers to labor shortagesbecause illegal workers are showing up everywhere, making such testsunnecessary. If their presence is inevitable, as Shimada asserts, then it isbetter for legal and humanitarian reasons that they be legal rather thanillegal, which is what gives rise to proposals for managing foreignworkers. Neither the traditional immigration countries of North America nor theguestworker countries of Western Europe have managed to find a happy compromisebetween wanting foreign workers but not foreign residents. This book inseveral places says that "just a little more effort" to open the work-and-learnprogram to "hundreds of thousands" of unskilled foreign workers will enableJapan to succeed in managing migration. "Illegal Chinese entrants to Japan total 4,132 in 5 years," Japan EconomicNewswire, June 11, 1994. "False rumor prompts Vietnamese to set sail forJapan," Japan Economic Newswire, May 30, 1994. Shimada, Haruo. 1994. Japan's"Guest Workers:" Issues and Public Policies. Tokyo: University of TokyoPress. Wall Street Journal, June 6, 1994, A9. ___________________________________________ Bangladeshisand Indonesians in Malaysia There are over 200,000 Bangladeshi migrant workers in Malaysia, half ofwhom are there illegally. Most of the Bangladeshis work in plantations andconstruction. The Malaysia-Bangladesh Friendship Clinic was set up in Bangladesh toprovide lab tests for communicable diseases such as hepatitis B,tuberculosis, syphilis and cholera and to register Bangladeshi workers headedfor Malaysia. There was a 30 percent increase in tuberculosis patients in Malaysia in1993, although the disease was thought to be eliminated in the country. Someblame the increase in foreign workers on the increasing number of persons withcommunicable diseases. A team of Malaysian doctors inspected 70 clinics in Bangladesh and foundthat none were conducting medical tests that meet Malaysian requirements, andsome clinics were selling medical certificates to prospective job seekers. TheFriendship Clinic is staffed by Malaysians. Since April 1994, the clinic hasscreened 50,00 workers bound for Malaysia and found 2,273 to be medicallyunfit. According to press accounts "thousands" of illegal Indonesian workers haveset up squatter colonies deep inside estate plantations in Malaysia, living intents and moving to where jobs are available. The National Union of Plantation Workers, the largest union in Malaysia with 60,000 members,reports that such migrancy from plantation to plantation is a newphenomonon. Squatting is a major issue in booming Malaysia--in booming areas such asKuala Lumpur and Johore Bahru, as many as one-eighth of the population aresquatters. According to some reports, Malaysians who move into low-costgovernment housing rent out their own squatter housing to Indonesianimmigrants. Some Malaysians argue that the Indonesians do not want to spendmoney on housing, since they aim to remit 50 percent of their earnings toIndonesia. Dafizeck Daud, "Inflow of Bangladeshis into Malaysia Surges," BusinessTimes, June 17, 1994. "Illegal immigrants set up squatter camps in estates,"The Straits Times, May 25, 1994 ___________________________________________ OTHER ___________________________________________ TheUS Immigration Lottery Lottery fever has hit Bangladesh. Thousands of Bangladeshis are jammingpost offices to apply for the 55,000 "diversity immigrant" slots--including6,873 reserved for all Asian countries except China, India, the Philippines,Vietnam , South Korea and residents of Hong Kong--available in the USimmigration lottery in 1995. The US Department of State will groupapplications by region, and select the winners at random. Five years ago the Bangladesh post office was besieged by millions hopingto get a US visa. And just because a Bangladeshi becomes registered for visaeligibility, does not guarantee they will make to the US. Under that mistakenimpression in the last round, thousands of Bangladeshis left their jobs andsold their property but were not admitted to the US. In the Philippines, hundreds of children attempted to prove that they hadAmerican military fathers and thus qualified for immediate US citizenship. Inan annual one-day ritual, the mothers of 500 children brought evidence ofAmerican fatherhood to a one-day registration on June 21. Nadeem Qadir, "'American dream' fever grips Bangladeshis--once again,"Agence France Presse, June 4, 1994; New York Times, June 22, 1994, A5. ___________________________________________ NewZealand's Business Migrants Not Creating Jobs New figures released by the Immigration Department on June 6, show that themajority of business immigrants are investing their money in banks, governmentstocks or bonds and real estate. The Immigration Department figures indicatethat of the 285 million NZ dollars (US$165 million) brought to New Zealand bybusiness immigrants since November 1991, 255 million (US$148 million ) aredestined for passive investments. A business immigrant is required to investat least 500,000 NZ dollars (US$290,000) and the money must remain in NewZealand for at least two years. The New Zealand Immigration Services released figures on June 11, showingthat the number of immigrants to New Zealand from South Africa increased by 17percent over the past three years. South Africa, with 4,044 immigrantsarriving between April, 1993 and April, 1994, is now the second largest sourceof immigrants after Britain, with 4,646 over the same time period. The numberof immigrants from South Korea soared 700 percent, from 424 in 1991-92, to3,506 in 1993-94. "Job-creating immigrations urged in NZ," Xinhua General Overseas NewsService, June 7, 1994. "Number of South African Immigrants to NZ risessharply," Xinhua General Overseas News Service, June 11, 1994. ___________________________________________ Australia:Immigration and Housing Australia has announced an immigration quota for 1994 of 86,000, whichincludes the conversion of 8,300 Chinese students into immigrants. Immigrationto Australia is down sharply despite the fact that the economy is booming--the1994 quota is less than half the 1988 peak of 173,000. There are several reasons why Australia is reducing immigration (MN, June1994). Unemployment remains at 10 percent. Asians rather than Europeans arearriving--43 percent of 1992-93 immigrants were from Vietnam, the Philippines,and Hong Kong, and other Asian nations. Australia abandoned its "whiteAustralia" immigration policy in 1972, but there seems to be some backlashagainst the rising proportion of Asian immigrants. The Indicative Planning Council for the Housing Industry, the Australiangovernment's adviser on housing, has said that the long-term demand for housingis affected by demographic factors, including immigration. The IPC's mostrecent report states: "The level of immigration, which at present iscontributing less than half of total population growth, is a particularlyimportant determinant of the long-run trend in the demand for housing." Ahigher level of immigration will lead to a substantial increase in demand forhousing and household formation. The Housing Industry Association uses a rough "rule of thumb" that 3,000 to3,500 houses must be built for every 10,000 immigrants who arrive in Australia.There are variations by type of immigrant-- family unification immigrants aremore likely to live with a family rather than buy their own house immediately.Business migrants, on the other hand, will likely have more resources at theirdisposal and obtain housing immediately upon their arrival. The Bureau of Immigration and Population Research reported this year that"by adding to excess demand for low-priced homes and cheap rental accommodationon inner and middle suburbs, it may be argued that immigrants have inflatedrental and property values." However, "if immigration stimulates economicdevelopment, proportionally fewer people will be poor and redevelopment becomeseconomically more feasible...." Simon Anderson, "Immigration--A Floor Under Housing," Australian FinancialReview, June 3, 1994. The Economist, June 11, 1994, p. 34. ___________________________________________ GuatemalansSign Refugee Deal The Guatemalan government and leftist guerrillas signed a deal on June 17to resettle about 60,000 Guatemalans in Mexico. Many live in refugee camps andabout one million people were forced to leave their homes in Guatemala duringthe 33 year conflict. A complete peace accord is expected to be signed in late1994. Once the treaty is signed, the United States has promised $60 milliondollars in aid to improve living condition in Guatemala. "Guatemalans Sign Refugee Deal," Los Angeles Times, June 18, 1994. ___________________________________________ RESOURCES Center for Immigration Studies. 1994. Immigration-RelatedStatistics-1994. Available for $4 from CIS, 1815 H St NW, #1010, Wash DC20006-3604. There were 261 million American residents in mid-1994, including 23 millionforeign-born persons. Legal immigration in FY93 was reported to be 972,000,plus an estimated 300,000 illegal aliens who settled--there were 1.3 millionillegal aliens apprehended in FY93. CIS data differ form INS data because of their treatment of refugees andasylees. The INS considers to be immigrants only persons whose status has beenso adjusted by the US government; CIS data are actual refugee entries plus anestimate of the number of asylum applicants likely to remain in the US. The Zentrum für Sozialpolitik, Uni Bremen, Parkallee 39, D-28209Bremen has several working papers on immigration and integration issues inGermany. Thomas Faist, in How to Define a Foreigner? The Symbolic Politicsof Immigration in German Partisan Discourse, 1978-1992 (12/93) explains howGerman politicians have been able to maintain that the country was not animmigration country even as immigrants poured in. If Germans who were expelledfrom the east are included, then 18 million "immigrants" arrived in the formerWest Germany between 1945 and 1989, versus 16 million immigrants to the USduring this period. Political parties knew that voters thought too manyimmigrants were in Germany, and they advocated hard to enforce symbolicpolicies to stop migration and promote returns and at the same time encourageintegration. This turned immigration into a meta issue, in which immigrantsbecame the symbols of an overstretched welfare state and highunemployment. According to Faist, the CDU-CSU began to use anti-immigrant sentiments togain votes in the early 1980s. Party differences were sharpened in 1992, whenthe SPD agreed with the CDU-CSU-FDP coalition government that the Constitutionhad to be amended in order to reduce the influx of asylees. The SPD is nowpushing for dual citizenship, which the CDU-CSU-FDP government opposes. Working paper 13/93, Boundaries of National Welfare States: Immigrantsand Social Rights, includes a useful table comparing the access of variouscategories of immigrants to pensions, welfare, and work-related benefits.Germany generally provides more access to legal immigrants and refugees, butfewer benefits to illegal aliens--in Germany, for example, illegal alienchildren are not entitled to free public education as in the US and, sincechildren born in Germany are not automatically German citizens, they can notlead to welfare benefits for the family, as in the US. Other working papers deal with social and employment policies incomparative perspective. Morse, Ann and Jonathan Dunlap. 1994. America's Newcomers: CommunityRelations and Ethnic Diversity. National Conference of State Legislatures,Issue Paper No. 2. April. Available for $10 from the National Conference ofState Legislatures, 444 N. Capitol Street, NW, Suite 515, Washington, DC20001. This 19-page monograph was produced by the Immigrant Policy Project of theState and Local Coalition on Immigration to address the role of state and localgovernments in the resettlement of refugees and immigrants. The paper contains sections on immigrant characteristics, assimilation, anddiversity, and explains how several communities are attempting to deal withimmigrant diversity. The first issue paper, America's Newcomers: A State andLocal Policymakers' Guide to Immigration and Immigrant Policy, contains a briefbackground on US immigration law and the immigration system, the various legalstatus of immigrants, and the access of immigrants to social services. The Gruter Institute for Law and Behavioral Research has announced it willfocus on three issues: human migration, security and risk, and sex and gender.The Gruter Institute is a small California foundation whose work is motivatedby the belief that rapid advances in the biology of human behavior haveimportant implications for the law and the social sciences. Evolutionary biology is the basis for the Institute's work. Biologydistinguishes between proximate cause--such as how birds stake out territoryfor mating--from ultimate cause--why they stake out territory. The unifyingprinciple is natural selection--the notion that the goal of all livingorganisms is to maximize their Reproductive Success (RS), and that the speciesaround us reflect the differential success of individuals in ReproductiveSuccess. Evolutionary biologists observe the behavior of animals, insects, andhumans, and interpret what they observe under the assumption that each organismis trying to maximize its RS. There is thus a deal of interest in territoryand hierarchy--how each individual and group defines its home space andmaintains order. Cooperation and competition can be observed in the individualand group interactions observed. Some economists believe that evolutionary biology may fill an importantlacuna in economic theory--why do individuals have the tastes that they do?Assuming that social individuals are in competition to achieve RS, but requirecooperation to survive and prosper, they note that society must develop rulesto identify and remove cheaters, especially in heterogeneous societies in whichthere are continuing interactions. Evolutionary biologists believe that their theories can explain complexhuman behavior, but many of their insights about human behavior arise fromanimal observation. RS strategies can be observed in individual and groupinteractions. There is always uncertainty about how another individual will react toaltruism and stinginess, and most species have evolved strategies that avoidmutually disadvantageous behavior. The most common interactive strategy istit-for-tat--favors and cooperation are rewarded by more of the same, anddeception or rejection is followed by the same response. An evolutionary biology approach may help to illuminate why immigration iscontroversial in industrial countries. Some evolutionary biologists considerRS a more fundamental explanation for migration than the familiar trio offamily, safe haven, and economic opportunity. Evolutionary biology would addRS--some consider even more fundamental--to this trio of reasons for migration. Evolutionary biologists note that uncertainty and insecurity among nativescan lead to anti-immigrant behavior. This would imply that those who areunemployed and poor would tend to oppose immigrants more than those who aresecure and affluent, and that anti-immigrant attitudes would be strongest ifthe immigrants are different in appearance or behavior. Perhaps the best summary statement of the RS approach to human behavior isthat "biology matters." However, just as in the long-running debate overwhether fiscal or monetary policy is most effective in spurring economicgrowth, so the effects of nature and nurture interact in human and social andpolitical life. An understanding of the biological imperatives that undergirdhuman behavior should enrich our understanding of complex human behavior,including migration. For further information contact Gruter Institute for Law and BehavioralResearch, 158 Goya Road, Portola Valley, CA 94028. Miller, Mark J.(Ed). 1994. Strategies for Immigration Control: AnInternational Comparison. The Annals of the American Academy of Political andSocial Science. Volume 534 July. Available from Sage Publications, PO Box5084, Thousand Oaks, CA 91359-9924. This issue contains 12 chapters on immigration control efforts around theworld. The chapters include: unwanted migration (Gary Freeman), employersanctions (Rosanna Perotti), IRCA (Philip Martin), minimum wage and employersanctions (David North), Haiti's boat people (Christopher Mitchell),Indochinese refugees in Hong Kong (Ron Skeldon), and keeping migrants home(Roger Bohning). This is an excellence source for a variety of articles aboutimmigration control throughout the world. Winkler, Beate(Ed). 1994. Was heisst denn hier fremd? (What does foreignermean?) Humboldt-Taschenbuchverlag, Munich. Available from Lengsdorfer Hauptstr80, D53127 Bonn. This five-part 160-page book includes addresses the interaction between themedia and attitudes toward foreigners in Germany. Editor Winkler provides ananalysis of how the media treat foreigners, and a summary of the status offoreigners. UNHCR. 1994. Populations of Concern to the UNHCR: A StatisticalOverview. Available from UNHCR, PO Box 2500, CH1211 Geneva 2. Fax4122-739-8742. In December 1993, UNHCR was responsible for the protection and assistanceof 23 million persons in 143 countries, including 16 million refugees, 2.9million internally displaced persons, and 3 million victims of war andreturnees. About 40 percent of these people were in Africa, and 30 percentwere in Asia. WT02-B13-134IA090-000969-B024-204http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/By-Month/MN-Vol-1-94/MN_August_1994.html 128.120.36.171 19970122204039 text/html 77298HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 20:41:08 GMTLast-Modified: Saturday, 15-Apr-95 20:00:11 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 77040MIGRATION NEWS Vol. 1, No. 7 August, 1994 Migration News is a newsletter that summarizes key developments in immigrationand integration issues during the preceding month. Topics are grouped byregion: North America, Europe, Asia, and Other. There are three versions of Migration News. The paper copy is eight pages orabout 6,000 words; the email version is 10,000 to 12,000 words; and the gopherversion is 12,000 to 15,000 words. The purpose of Migration News is to provide monthly summaries of recentimmigration developments that can be read in 60 minutes or less. Each issuealso offers a special report, summaries of current news, abstracts of selectedpapers, and articles and information on recent research publications. Distribution is by email. If you wish to subscribe, send your email addressto: Migration News <migrant@primal.ucdavis.edu>. Current and back issues can be accessed via gopher in the Migration News folderat: dual.ucdavis.edu We welcome your contributions: please fax news items of interest toPhilip Martin at (916) 752-5614, or send them to the email address above.Working papers and other materials to be listed in the RESOURCES section can besent to Philip Martin, Department of Agricultural Economics, University ofCalifornia, Davis, Davis CA 95616 USA. Those who contribute items may requestMigration News by mail if email is unavailable. ___________________________________________ NORTHAMERICA ___________________________________________ HaitianZig-Zags The Clinton administration spent the month of July fine-tuning its policy onHaitian refugees. At the end of July, the US was on the verge of obtaining UNSecurity Council permission to invade Haiti and restore President Aristide topower. Haitians have been leaving their country in small boats for years. Since 1981,Haiti has allowed the US Coast Guard to stop boats in Haitian and internationalwaters to determine whether they were carrying Haitians to the US. The US has followed a zig-zag path on its treatment of "Haitian boat people."On June 16, the US announced that henceforth Haitians picked up at sea andseeking asylum would be eligible to present to US asylum officers on board USships evidence that they face persecution in Haiti. As a result, over 11,627Haitians were picked up by the US Coast Guard by July 6--many hoped that theywould be granted refugee status and allowed to go to the United States. Thoseturned down, about 70 percent of those requesting asylum, continue to bereturned to Haiti. Clinton changed the policy on July 5. After that date, Haitians picked up atsea were sent to the US base at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba to present their case forasylum. If they were deemed in need of safe haven, they were sent to safehaven camps, but not to the US. Most nearby Caribbean nations have refused toprovide safe haven for Haitians. After the Clinton administration stopped shipboard hearings for refugees inmid-July, the number of Haitians picked up by the Coast Guard dramaticallydropped. The week of July 16, not a single Haitian was picked up, compared tothe 1,340 people picked up the previous weekend. The decline was attributed toa number of factors including choppy seas and soccer's World Cup. Anotherfactor was that word was reaching the interior that refugees intercepted at seawill no longer be able to settle in the US. Members of the clergy and relieforganizations also report the Haitian government is attempting to staunch theflow of refugees. The relief workers say that this has meant an increase inrepression, especially in the coastal towns from where the refugees leave. In mid-July, there were 16,500 Haitians at Guantanamo, and a few hundred beganto trickle back to Haiti after they learned that, even if they could prove theyneeded safe haven, they would not be going to the US. Haitians who return toHaiti are interviewed by Haitian immigration authorities and given money toreturn home by the Haitian Red Cross. The Clinton Administration is scrambling to find places to house the Haitianswho have been deemed in need of safe haven. Panama's President Guillermo Endrafirst agreed to allow the United States to admit 10,000 Haitian refugees thenlater rescinded his approval. Panama planned to allow the Haitians to enterPanama on a temporary basis, until a change in the current Haitian governmentor a time period not to exceed one year, but bowed to internal pressure not toallow any Haitians in the country. On July 25, Honduras announced that itwould shelter up to 40,000 Haitians temporarily in exchange for increased USaid. This zig-zagging Haitian policy prompted a spate of critical reviews of USrefugee and asylum policies. Most began with the 22 words in the 1951 GenevaConvention on Refugees--an alien who can prove that he or she faces "awell-founded fear of being persecuted for reasons of race, religion,nationality, membership of a particular social group or political opinion"should enjoy nonrefoulement in a safe country--the right not to bereturned to danger. US law applies this standard to two kinds of persons in danger of persecutionin their country of citizenship. Refugees are outside the US, and they seek toenter because of the dangers they face at home, and asylum seekers or asyleesarrive in the US and ask to stay because of danger at home. The problem, according to critics, is that the US does not apply thesestandards consistently. There are about 19 million refugees worldwide, and theUS establishes a worldwide limit annually on the number it will accept eachyear--121,000 in FY94. The distribution of refugees admitted to the USreflects domestic political considerations rather than the worldwidedistribution of persons needing safety from persecution. In 1993, 41 percentof the refugees admitted to the US were Jews or Evangelical Christians from theformer USSR, and 32 percent were from Vietnam and Laos. Many of these refugeesare admitted after they show that they face a lesser "credible" fear ofpersecution rather than the "well-founded" fear in the Geneva Convention. Once admitted to the US, refugees receive public assistance and health careservices at rates paid by the state in which they live. States are reimbursedfor up to eight months of assistance, even though a majority or e.g., southeastAsian refugees in California, receive public assistance for more than fiveyears. Asylum policy is even more controversial. In 1993, just over 10,000 asylumapplications were filed each month by aliens in the US --113, 290, including 31percent from Guatemala, 13 percent from El Salvador, and 12 percent from China.Each application can be for a family--the number of persons represented bythese applications is almost twice the number of applications. There are over400,000 asylum cases that have not yet been processed, representing some700,000 to 800,000 persons, and US courts routinely order the INS to reconsiderapplications from particular countries because of what the court considers tobe "biases" in the consideration of applications. To apply for asylum, persons fill out an INS form, and then, in most cases,asylum applicants are given work permits and told to keep the INS informed oftheir current address so that they can be called to an INS hearing to prove toan asylum officer that they face persecution at home. The INS has switched toa last-in , first-out policy--deciding current applications first, but thismeans that some asylum applications are more than three years old. Cuba and Haiti represent stark contrasts in US policy. All Cubans who reachthe US can become immigrants. On July 1, 1994, a group of 140 Cubans, thelargest boatload to arrive in a decade, sailed into Miami Beach. Thecontinuing deterioration of the Cuban economy has caused a dramatic increase inarrivals from Cuba. In June 1994, the US Coast Guard rescued 1,173 Cubans, sixtimes more than they rescued in June, 1993. Haiti, by contrast, is the only country for which the US insists that personsfleeing persecution apply within the country of persecution. Since February1992, some 59,000 Haitians filled out preliminary questionnaires for themselvesand/or their families. About 17,000 of them were interviewed in Haiti by USasylum officers, and 4,000 were deemed in danger and admitted to the US. Michael Gordon, "In Policy Shift, US Will Admit No Haitians at Sea,"New York Times, July 6, 1994. Roberto Suro, "Different Strokes for DifferentRefugees," Washington Post Weekly Edition, July 4-10, 1994, 33. "America'sLeast Wanted," The Economist, July 16, 1994, 23-4. "President Endera agreesto US request to accept 10,000 Haitian refugees; states conditions." BBCSummary of World Broadcasts, July 6, 1994. Kieran Murray, "Haitian-US Tensionsrise amid swelling refugee tide," Reuters world service, July 5, 1994. "USnotes big increase in urban refugees," Houston chronicle, July 2, 1994. LarryRohter, "Number of Haitians Fleeing by Sea Drops off Abruptly," New York Times,July 20, 1994. ___________________________________________ CommissionRecommends Better Verification The Commission on Immigration Reform (CIR) is expected to release its firstrecommendations in testimony before the Senate Judiciary's ImmigrationSubcommittee on August 3, 1994, ahead of its scheduled interim report inSeptember. CIR concluded that the employer sanctions system established in1986 by IRCA has failed. The current requirement that newly-hired employeespresent identification that proves their identity and their right to work inthe U.S., and that both the employer and employee sign an I-9 form as evidenceof compliance, has failed, the Commission concluded, because illegal alienworkers are routinely presenting false documents and securing jobs. The CIR recommends "a comprehensive strategy to deter unlawful immigration, inpart through measures designed to make it more difficult for illegal immigrantsto obtain work in the United States." CIR believes that this strategy shouldinclude retaining the existing I-9 system, but issuing all workers acredit-type Social Security card that would also include other personalinformation, such as date of birth and perhaps a fingerprint. Employees wouldhave to present their "Employee Verification Registration" cards when hired,and employers could swipe them through authentication terminals that wouldverify the SSN and permit the employer to ask one or two personal questions todetermine whether the new hire is presenting his card, or call an 800 number toverify the card number and assure that the person was presenting his/hercard. The proposed verification system would be similar to the current SystematicAlien Verification Eligibility (SAVE) system that is used to determine whethernon-U.S. citizens who apply for public assistance are eligible legalimmigrants. However, the SAVE system has a high error rate--in more than fivepercent of the cases, identification numbers submitted for verification arefirst reported to be false when they are in fact valid, in part because of lagsin issuing numbers and entering them in the verification database. To avoidhaving such "false negatives" lead to employers rejecting legal workers,employers could not refuse to hire a worker until a second check confirmed thatthe number was indeed false. In addition to preventing illegal immigration by denying jobs to those whoarrive legally, but then violate the terms of their visas by overstaying and/orworking--the case of the majority of the four million illegal immigrants in theUS, according to INS calculations--the CIR is expected to discuss the access oflegal and illegal immigrants to public services. CIR chair Barbara Jordan hasnoted that, in her opinion, "Illegal immigrants are not entitled to benefits,"and that many of California's immigration problems are due to inadequateenforcement of federal immigration laws. The CIR is aiming at consensusrecommendations from its eight members. The CIR's proposal raised a storm of protest when it was leaked to the press inmid-July. Radio talk show hosts decried it as "Big Brother" authoritarianism,and some of those who favor curbs on illegal immigration suspect that the CIRproposal was "leaked" by their opponents in the Clinton administration todiscredit it. Carol Rasco, Clinton's domestic policy adviser, noted that there is aninteragency group which is also studying what to do about illegal immigration,but that the CIR and interagency group recommendations are expected toreinforce each other. "Tamper-proof ID card sought," San Diego Union-Tribune, July 16, 1994, A16.Myriam Marquez, "Soon, a nation of card-carrying Americans?" San FranciscoExaminer, July 25, 1994, A15. James Bornemeier, "El Paso Plan Deters IllegalImmigrants," Los Angeles Times, July 27, 1994, p. A3. James Bornheimer, "PanelMay Hold the Key to Consensus on Immigration," Los Angeles Times, July 11,1994, A3. Maria Puente, "Big Brother' warning sounds again / Critics fear'evil' in national ID cards," USA Today, July 14, 1994, 5A. "White House BacksNational ID Card", Chicago Sun-Times, July 13, 1994, p. 29. ___________________________________________ Los Angeles Times Calls For A New Bracero Program In a July 18, 1994 editorial, the Los Angeles Times recommended "a treaty tolegalize and then regulate the flow of Mexican workers into--but alsoeventually out of--the United States." The Los Angeles Times acknowledged thatits proposal is likely to be controversial, since the Bracero program, underwhich almost five million Mexican workers entered the United States to dofarmwork between 1942 and 1964, was cursed for hurting US farmworkers andsowing the seeds in Mexico for today's illegal immigration. The editorial has awe've-tried-everything-to-control-illegal-immigration-and-failed-flavor. TheLos Angeles Times recounted the corruption in the Tijuana section of theMexican immigration service--the director and two deputies were dismissed forhelping to smuggle non-Mexicans into the US-- and the widespread support inCalifornia for proposals to deny public benefits to illegal aliens. Accordingto the editorial, a "North American Free Labor Agreement" could deal with 50 to60 percent--the Mexican part-- of the illegal alien influx into the US in aconstructive manner. Columnist Joel Kotkin echoed this call for a guestworker program by arguingthat immigrants in the US can be divided into intending citizen-settler andintending guestworker-sojourner categories. Instead of debating rights andservices for all immigrants, Kotkin argues that "newcomers who ultimately seekto become citizens should be treated differently from those who plan to returnto their homes." Guestworkers should have restricted access to publicservices, and "their residency should be exclusively tied to their employmentstatus." Kotkin's argument is based on avoiding the deepening of what he calls a"parallel society" of non-citizens. He argues that if illegal border crossingcan be curtailed, and if employers who want to hire guestworkers could be madeto pay them decent wages and be "responsible for their medical as well aseducation needs," there would be a built in bias in favor of youngerguestworkers. If such sojourners came to the US without their families, thenthey would make few demands on US public services. The contradiction in these proposals is that they assume on the one hand thatillegal immigration cannot be stopped, so that legal admissions are preferredto illegal status. However, they acknowledge that, before US employers can bepersuaded to hire legal guestworkers and cover the housing and related costs ofthe workers temporary employment in the US, illegal immigration must becontrolled. "Anyone for Adult Solutions to Mexico-US Border Problems," Los Angeles Times,July 18, 1994, B12. Joel Kotkin, "Rethinking Immigration: Intent Must ShapePolicy," Los Angeles Times, July 24, 1994, ___________________________________________ California Update "Save Our State'' Initiative Qualifies California voters will have a chance to vote on the "Save Our State''Initiative--Proposition 187--on November 8, 1994. If approved by voters, noperson -- citizen, legal immigrant or illegal immigrant -- "shall receive anypublic social services to which he or she may otherwise be entitled until thelegal status of that person has been verified." These public services includepublic education, including higher education, and health care, except foremergency health care. Schools and hospitals would have to determine the legalstatus of clients if they expect state reimbursement. If publicly-fundedservice providers suspect that a person requesting services is an illegalalien, they are required to report that person to the Attorney General ofCalifornia and to the INS. In addition, SOS makes it a felony to manufacture, distribute, sell or usefalse citizenship documents, and requires police to report arrests of illegalaliens to the Immigration and Naturalization Service. According to the state's legislative analyst, California could expect to save$200 million in public service costs if SOS were approved, and an additional$1.2 billion in public education costs. However, it may cost $100 million toestablish a system to verify the legal status of schoolchildren and otherbeneficiaries of public services, and up to $15 billion in federalreimbursement for California may be threatened if SOS were implemented withoutmodifying current federal privacy rights granted to schoolchildren and publicservice recipients. The SOS initiative was reportedly begun by a Santa Ana accountant who lost $1million to an illegal alien housing contractor who kept his assets abroad.Two former Immigration and Naturalization Service officials, Alan Nelson andHarold Ezell, led the petition-gathering drive, and got the CaliforniaRepublican Party to endorse the initiative. Governor Pete Wilson announcedthat he will vote for the initiative, and a recent Field Poll indicated that itis favored by 64 to 27 percent by California voters, very similar to the 64-24percent favoring the "three strikes" initiative. However, 63 percent of thesurvey respondents had not heard of SOS; the percentage above is based onopinion after having the ballot summary read to them. Treasurer Kathleen Brown, the Democratic challenger for Governor, blasted SOSas "mean-spirited and dangerous," and the Los Angeles County Board ofSupervisors voted 3-2 against endorsing the SOS initiative. Mexican AmbassadorGorge Montana protested that the California debate over illegal immigration isfostering a stereotype of Mexicans as lazy and criminal. California teacherspersuaded the 2.2 million teacher-members of the National Education Associationto oppose the SOS initiative so that its victory would not serve as anotherProposition 13-type wake-up call to the nation, and they promised $2 million tooppose SOS. Other opponents of SOS range from labor unions to the CaliforniaFarm Bureau. If approved and implemented, SOS would lead to an immediate challenge to Phylavs. Doe, a 1982 U.S. Supreme Court decision that struck down a Texas lawexcluding illegal immigrant children from public schools. Immigration continues to play a prominent role in California campaigns. In theUS Senate race, Democrat Diane Feinstein on July 4 released a campaigncommercial that showed Mexicans crossing illegally into California, with avoice-over reminding listeners that she supported more US Border Patrol agentswhile Republican challenger Michael Huffington did not. Huffingon respondedwith an ad blasting Feinstein for signing an ordinance as mayor that made SanFrancisco a sanctuary city and prohibited spending city funds to assistimmigration enforcement. Several ethnic groups criticized Feinstein for"scapegoating" illegal immigration, but she defended the ads and promised tocontinue to speak out on the issue, reminding interviewers of her call to levya $1 border crossing fee to raise more funds to hire more Border Patrol agents,as necessary steps to deal with illegal immigration. Wilson's Immigration Legacy Many commentators have emphasized that the same California politicians who aretoday calling for tougher immigration enforcement and federal reimbursementtook positions in the mid-1980s that contributed to illegal immigration. Governor Wilson's June 1994 trip to Washington to lobby for federalreimbursement for the state's costs of providing services to illegal aliensrekindled stories of Wilson's mid-1980s role in ensuring California farmers acontinued supply of flexible immigrant workers. The major issue was whether USfarmers would, after immigration reforms dried up the supply of illegalworkers, have to obtain job-by-job US government approval of their need forlegal foreign workers, and provide each worker with a contract, as under theBracero and H-2 programs. California growers preferred programs under which acertain number of "free agent" foreign workers would be admitted to float fromfarm to farm. Current White House Chief of Staff Panetta won the farmers' argument in theHouse in 1984, and Governor Wilson won their argument in the Senate in 1985. There was massive fraud in the Special Agricultural Worker (SAW) ultimatelyincluded in the Immigration Reform and Control Act of 1986. About four timestoo many aliens applied, and three times too many were made legal immigrants.Mostly young and married men--but not their families--were legalized, so somesay that Wilson has been hoisted on his own petard, since as Governor he mustdeal with the costs of the illegal immigration to which his efforts in theSenate contributed. On July 15, 1994, California's bonds were downgraded to among the lowest of allstates. The state's $57.5 billion budget assumes that California will obtain$763 million in federal reimbursement for the costs of illegal immigration in FY94,and $2.8 billion in FY95. Bond-rating agencies were doubtful that thesefederal funds would materialize, so that California may have to borrow morethan the $7 billion it plans to over the next two years. Local Impacts of Immigration A small school district on the US-Mexican border was expected to be ordered torepay $1 million in mid-July for enrolling students who did not live in thedistrict. The staff of a local assemblyman videotaped students who lived inMexico crossing the border every day to board one of six buses the districtsent there daily, and eventually 300 students were expelled because they couldnot prove that they lived in the district. Under state law, students must livewithin the school district's boundaries or receive a waiver if the localdistrict is to receive state payments based on average daily attendance. The controversy over illegal immigration in California can be seen in thedispute over grocery bags in Marin County, one of the nation's richest countiesadjacent to San Francisco. As part of a publicly-funded art project, grocerystore bags were imprinted with stories of children in the community. One ofthe children profiled on the grocery store bags was an illegal alien fourthgrader who recounted how he had used a coyote to be smuggled into the US fromMexico. Customers opposed to illegal immigration threatened to boycott andpicket the store if the bags were not withdrawn, and the store owner promisedto destroy the 40,000 bags. In response to the bag furor, a few residentspromised to establish a college scholarship fund for the child. A recent study found that 67 of California's 456 cities had a Latino majority,according to the 1990 Census of Population, and that 85 percent of these mostlyHispanic cities had Latino mayors. In March 1994, 253 Latinos were serving onthe city councils of 140 California cities, usually in small farmworker townssuch as Orange Cove and Parlier, or in Los Angeles suburbs such as Pomona. Latino mayors and city council members represent 10 percent of all Californiamayors and city council members, even though Latinos are 28 percent of thestate's 32 million population. However, Latinos are only seven percent ofCalifornia voters, a fact attributable to the large number of Latino children,the fact that half the Latino adults are not US citizens, and the tendency ofUS citizens of Latino origin to not register and, if registered, not vote. These data raise the issue of whether Latino political participation wouldincrease if city council members were elected by district rather than at large.Latinos have sued in several cities to replace at large with district voting. Peter Schrag, "Call this the Snoop or Snitch Act," Sacramento Bee, July 14,1994, B12. Brad Hayward, "Coalition vows fight on immigration initiative,"Sacramento Bee, June 23, 1994, A3. Brad Hayward, "Billions at Stake inImmigration Vote?" Sacramento Bee, July 27, 1994, A4. Ken Chavez, "SenateCandidates Clash on Illegal Immigration," Sacramento Bee, July 14, 1994, A3.United Press International, July 15, 1994. Albert Hunt, "Demagoging theImmigration Issue," Wall Street Journal, July 7, 1994, A13. Philip Martin,"Good Intentions Gone Awry: Immigration Reform and US Agriculture," in MarkJ. Miller Ed. 1994. "Strategies for Immigration Control: An InternationalComparison." The Annals of the American Academy of Political and SocialScience. Volume 534 July. "Mountain Empire schools are awaiting state economicpenalties," The San Diego Union-Tribune, July 14, 1994, B-4. Jane MeridithAdams, " Immigrant's grocery bag tale sparks Marin Backlash," Sacramento Bee,July 21, 1994, B7. Immigration Complicates Grocery Art, New York Times, July26, 1994, A10. James Fay and Roy Christman, "Future Looks Bright for state'sLatino Politicians," Sacramento Bee, July 24, 1994, F6. "'SOS' Initiative--TooCostly," San Francisco Chronicle, July 5, 1994. "Teachers Union Opposes 'Saveour State' Initiative," Los Angeles Times, July 5, 1994. ___________________________________________ Illegal Immigrants Diverted to Arizona Some predicted that Operation Hold-the-Line in El Paso, Texas, and a steel wallplus additional Border Patrol agents in San Diego, California, would divertillegal aliens seeking entry into the US to less well guarded portions of theMexico-US border. In Nogales, Arizona, there appears to be such adiversion--apprehensions are up 60 percent in 1994 compared to 1993, and theBorder Patrol reports that Mexican migrants from areas near San Diego aretraveling nearly 400 miles east because they thought their prospects forillegal entry were better in Arizona. The arrival of smugglers and large numbers of illegal immigrants has beenchanging life in the small towns on the border. Many such towns are filledwith retirees who moved for the desert climate, and they lament the burglariesand other crimes that seem to accompany illegal migration. Sonora, across theborder from the city of 20,000 of Nogales, has 250,000 residents with over 100US-owned maquiladora factories. The Border Patrol is replacing a chain linkfence that can be cut with up to four miles of 10 foot military landing matsthat are welded together, and then angled into the US at the top, so thataliens who are in the US cannot make a quick return to Mexico after committinga crime. These military mats have been used to construct a 14-mile fence onthe US-Mexican border south of San Diego. Nancy Cleeland, "Illegal Immigration at Nogales Soars," San DiegoUnion-Tribune, June 26, 1994, A1, 19. ___________________________________________ NewJersey Sues U.S. Government New Jersey on July 15, 1994 became the fifth state to sue the federalgovernment to recover the costs of providing services to illegal immigrants.Suits have been filed by Florida, California, Texas, Arizona--New York andIllinois are "lobbying" Washington, DC for reimbursement. California GovernorPete Wilson charged in last summer that almost 10 percent of the state'sspending went to provide services to legal and illegal immigrants, and thatcontinued illegal immigration represented an "unreimbursed" federal mandate. Most observers predict that, as a result of these lawsuits, the federalgovernment will provide some compensation to the states that host immigrants,and that the federal government will also step up border controls. Since bothresponses are projected to be less-than-perfect solutions, the debate over howmuch compensation to pay and how much tougher border controls should be areexpected to unleash a "100-year" debate on mass migration. Neighboring New York has kept the welcome mat out for immigrants, despite theWorld Trade Center bombing and the Golden Venture's grounding off Queens with300 illegal Chinese aliens. According to local observers, New York GovernorCuomo and Mayor Giuliani have resisted jumping on the anti-immigrationbandwagon because of its historical role as the port of entry for immigrants,because the immigrants arriving in New York are diverse, and because they andother political leaders have stressed the economic benefits of immigrantsrather than their costs. The Senate voted 52-44 on July 22, 1994 to give $ 350-million to border statesto reimburse them for costs of crime committed by illegal aliens, taking themoney away from U.S. peacekeeping dues paid to the United Nations. There are50,000 criminal aliens in American prisons. Neal Pierce, "The Ugly-but Inevitable-Debate," National Journal, July 16, 1994,1700; Sam Walker, "New York's Welcome Mat stays out for immigrants," ChristainScience Monitor, July 1, 1994, 2. ___________________________________________ Immigration and Welfare Reform The Congressional Budget Office (CBO) projected that eliminating welfarebenefits for legal and illegal immigrants would save $22 billion over fiveyears, more than the $10 to $18 billion than President Clinton's welfare reformproposals are expected to cost. In the 1990 Census of Population, 4.7 percentof the foreign-born individuals, and 4.2 percent of the U.S.-born, receivedsome form of public assistance. Two sub-groups of the foreign-born haveespecially high rates of welfare dependency: those who arrived as refugees,and immigrants 65 and older. In the 1990 COP, about 16 percent or 170,000 ofthe refugees received public assistance, and 13 percent or 400,000 of theelderly non-refugee immigrants received Supplemental Security Income (SSI). SSI payments for elderly non-immigrants are projected to cost $600 millionannually through the year 2000. The Clinton administration hopes to reduce SSIpayments by lengthening from three to 10 years the time that (usually) adultchildren of elderly immigrants can be responsible for their parents' support.However, under current court decisions, barring poor and elderly immigrantsfrom SSI may shift the cost of supporting them to states, who are generallyprohibited by the Fourteenth Amendment from discriminating against legal aliensin the provision of many state-funded public assistance programs. Paul Offner, "Solid Non citizens," The New Republic, June 20, 1994, 10-11. ___________________________________________ Immigration and Balkanization Detailed analyses of 1990 Census data are reinforcing earlier suggestions that,as mostly unskilled immigrants move into states and cities, unskilled Americansmove out. This represents an historic change--at the beginning of the 20thcentury, mass immigration led to greater racial and cultural mixing--themelting pot. The mass migration currently underway, by contrast, is producingwhite flight and greater ethnic divisions. Demographer William Frey of the University of Michigan noted that mostimmigrants move to seven states--California, New York, New Jersey, Florida,Texas. Illinois, and Massachusetts-and usually to a few cities within thesestates, such as Los Angeles, New York City, and Miami. All these states,except Florida, experienced a net outflow of poorer and less-educated UScitizens during the late 1980s. As a result, Frey fears that the melting pottheory will not play out well for today's immigrants. Instead, there may beconflicts between older, better-educated, and white US citizens, and younger,unskilled, minority immigrants. Ann Scott Tyson, "Ethnic, Economic Divisions of US Growing," Christian ScienceMonitor, July 7, 1994, 3. Copies of William Frey's research reports94-304--Immigration and Internal Migration "Flight" from US Metro Areas: 1990Census Findings by Race, Poverty and Education--and 94-306--Immigration andInternal Migration "Flight": 1990 Census Findings for California are availablefrom the UM Population Studies Center, 1225 S University, Ann Arbor, MI48109. ___________________________________________ Immigration Corruption in Mexico The directors of Mexico's National Immigration Institute in have been accusedof receiving payoffs from smugglers seeking to sneak Asian and Central Americanimmigrants into the US. According to reports, smugglers who received up to$250,000 weekly shared some of their earnings with Mexican immigrationauthorities. A team of federal agents from Mexico City is in Tijuana to ask migrantsmugglers how they operate, what kind of protection they receive from localimmigration officials, and who they had paid for that protection. They haveallegedly found five safe houses and 20 hotels in Tijuana from which migrantswere smuggled across the US border. In an effort to curb election fraud, Mexico in 1994 issued 44 million photo IDcards to eligible voters that include a thumbprint and othercounterfeit-resistance features. Mexico's presidential election will be heldon August 21. Gregory Katz, "Mexican immigration unit tied to smugglers," Sacramento Bee,July 23, 1994, A14; Gregory Gross, "Mexico targets top migrant smugglers," TheSan Diego Union-Tribune, July 25, 1994, A3 ___________________________________________ Illegal Americans in Mexico According to Mexican officials, 200,000 Americans are living illegally in Mexico, some of the "drybacks" have been attracted to Mexico by the promise ofNAFTA-inspired jobs. There are 150,000 Americans registered with Mexico'sNational Migration Institute as permanent residents, and two million Americansvisit Mexico every year as tourists. Americans entering Mexico receive automatic six-month tourist visas, versus theone-month visas granted to most Latin Americans. These visas can be renewed bycrossing the US border and returning. Most illegal Americans appear to beretirees living in Baja, California, but there are ever more frequent reportsof young and educated Americans arriving in Mexico City to teach English. Under Mexican law, Americans wishing to retire in Mexico must have an income ofat least $ 2,000 a month, and business visitors must prove that they have an association with an established U.S. or Mexican company. Andres Oppenheimer, "U.S. citizens live illegally in Mexico--Drybacks' seekingjobs," Dallas Morning News, July 17, 1994, 1A. Andres Oppenheimer, "Doorbetween Mexico, US Swings Both Ways," Miami Herald, July 5, 1994. ___________________________________________ US Migrants The US has a significant but unknown number of workers who migrate to so-calledboomtowns, where their minimum wage jobs barely cover temporary housing costs.Since 1979, the number of full-time American workers who earn less than thepoverty income of a family of four, $13,091, increased 50 percent The WallStreet Journal recently profiled migrants in the southwestern Missouri town ofBranson, a country music mecca. Tony Horwitz, "Boomtowns lure poor with plenty of work--but not much else,"Wall Street Journal, June 16, 1994, A1. ___________________________________________ Refugee Status Granted In Gender Mutilation Case In what has been termed a landmark ruling, Canada granted refugee status to aSomali woman who argued that if she were returned, her 10-year old daughterwould face ritual genital mutilation. In 1991, France became the first countryto announce that it would grant refugee status on the basis of fears ofgenital mutilation, but Canada is the first nation to actually grant a personrefugee status for this reason. In March, 1994, a US immigration officerannulled an expulsion order against a Nigerian woman who argued that she shouldnot be deported because her daughters faced genital mutilation in Nigeria. In 1993, 22,000 aliens applied for asylum in Canada, down from 30,000 in1992. Clyde Farnsworth, "Canada gives a Somali refuge from Genital Rite," New YorkTimes, July 21, 1994, A5. Clyde Farnsworth, "Mom fearful of mutilation givenasylum," Houston Chronicle, July 22, 1994. ___________________________________________ NineMillion People Enter US Lottery Over nine million people have applied for the "green card" lottery. From June1 to June 30, the special program run by the State Department accepted simpleapplications from foreign nationals residing illegally in the United States andwould-be immigrants living abroad. The lottery program was established byIMMACT in 1990 to "diversify" the pool of incoming US immigrants, a responseto the surge of family-based immigration during the 1980s from Latin Americaand Southeast Asia. Of the 55,000 immigration slots available, 24,549 are earmarked for Europeannationals; 20,200 for African nationals, and 10,251 for Asian and SouthAmerican citizens. The only prerequisite for entering the lottery is thatapplicants must have completed secondary school or have work experience in afield requiring at least two years of study. To apply, applicants write theirname, address, date and place of birth and the names of their spouse andchildren, if any, on a blank sheet of paper. Despite this simple process,immigration lawyers and other advisors were charging aliens $10 to $800 toassist with lottery applications. Nicole Deshayes, "Millions take a chance on US 'green card' lottery," AgenceFrance Presse, July 5, 1994. Sandra Hernandez, "Green Card Lottery StirsHopes-and Con Artists," Los Angeles Time, July 3, 1994. Gren Manuel,"Cardsharp targets green immigrant hopefuls," South China Morning Post, July 2,1994. ___________________________________________ CitizenshipApplicants on the Rise A record number of immigrants are seeking US citizenship; 425,000 immigrantsare expected to become citizens nationwide in 1994. The Los Angeles INSoffice in 1993 surpassed New York as the major city of citizenship-- 500 and600 immigrants filed citizenship papers in Los Angeles ever day, nearly doublethe number in 1992. Contributing to the rising number of aliens seeking citizenship are aggressivecitizenship sign-up drives by immigration advocates, who see the new citizensas potential voters, and the INS, which is promoting citizenship. INSCommissioner Doris Meissner has said that, if more immigrants became UScitizens, it would help the nation to accept newcomers. There are other three reasons why citizenship is on the rise. About threemillion illegal aliens who obtained "amnesty" in 1987-88 become eligible toapply for US citizenship in 1994-95; the number of legal immigrants, who areeligible for citizenship five years after entering the United States, rosedramatically in the late 1980s and early 1990; and some long-term residents whohave not naturalized look at US citizenship as protection against the growinganti-immigrant backlash. Only about 40 percent of all immigrants become US citizens. Asianstraditionally have high naturalization rates. About 60 percent of Filipino,and 58 percent of Chinese immigrants, for instance, apply for US citizenship,according to a study of immigrants who arrived in 1977. In contrast, only 16percent of immigrants from Mexico who immigrated in 1977 sought US citizenshipwithin 15 years. "Nancy Cleveland, "Staggering Numbers Pledge US allegiance" San DiegoUnion-Tribune, July 4, 1994. Patrick McDonnell and Richard Simon,"Anti-Immigrant Mood Helps Fuel Citizenship Rise," Los Angeles Times, July 4,1994. ___________________________________________ CanadaPlans to Attract Business Immigrants Canada has unveiled a ten-year program to attract more business immigrants fromTaiwan to help revitalize the economy. Canada will begin to issue immigrationvisas in Taipei for Taiwan investors by the end of the year. Taiwan businessimmigrants have contributed more than US $370 million to a Canadian immigrationfund in the past few years. About 42 percent of business immigrants to Canada in 1993 were from Taiwan, andanother 42 percent were from Hong Kong. Currently, prospective Taiwan businessimmigrants are required to apply for business immigration visas in a thirdcountry because Taiwan and Canada do not have diplomatic ties. Sophia Wu, "Canada to issue immigration visas in Taipei," Central News Agency,July 5, 1994. "Canada Should Make Better Use of Taiwan Immigrants," CentralNews Agency, July 26, 1994. ___________________________________________ EUROPE ___________________________________________ Germany'sLead on European Immigration On July 1, Germany replaced Greece in the rotating Presidency of the Council ofthe European Union for six months. The European Commission, the permanentcivil service EU body, is the only body that can propose EU-wide asylum andborder control policies, which the Council then considers. The German government plans to use its six months at the helm of the EuropeanUnion to pressure other member states to share the burden of refugees who havebeen concentrated in Germany. Over 425,000 refugees have arrived in Germanyfrom the former Yugoslavia, and although the German government does not expectto be able to get other EU nations to share the burden of caring for theserefugees, they hope to make arrangements with other EU nations to help withfuture influxes of refugees. A draft resolution on immigration cooperation was discussed at the July meetingof the German ministers and a delegation from the EC. The resolution says thatall member states should contribute fairly to solve the refugee crisis byreceiving asylum seekers, participating in humanitarian and peacekeepingsituations, or EU nations can share the burden by helping to finance the costof protecting asylum seekers in safe areas and neighboring countries. Theproposal uses gross national product, population and other factors to determineeach member state's overall target contribution. German Interior Minister Kanther announced that Germany would like to a "morejust" distribution of asylum seekers in Europe--three-fourths of the 572,000asylum seekers in 1992 came to Germany. Britain and other EU members have notsupported burden sharing in the past. This less restrictive approach, plusfears of an influx of refugees from Northern Africa, may help build consensuswithin the EU. Germany also announced that during the second half of 1994, the EU Council willfollow up on a June 20th resolution of the EU Interior and Justice ministers torestrict as much as possible permanent legal immigration, and to permittemporary foreign workers only in exceptional circumstances. The nine EUgovernments that signed the oft-delayed Schengen open border convention haveannounced that the last hurdle, the Schengen Information System (SIS), will beoperating in five countries by mid-October: the Benelux nations, France andGermany. Germany on July 1, 1993 revised its asylum law to preserve a constitutionalright to asylum but to make it difficult for persons who passed through "safecountries" en route to Germany to apply for asylum, and allowed Germany to putthe burden of proof on applicants from "presumably safe countries,". includingRomania, Bulgaria, Gambia, Ghana, and Poland. The German Supreme Court isexpected to rule on the legality of this "presumably safe country" provisionlater in 1994. During the first half of 1994, 62,802 aliens applied for asylumin Germany, one-fourth as many as applied in the first half of 1993. About 10,000 aliens continue to apply for asylum in Germany each month.However, twice as many as before are being returned to their countries oforigin after their applications are rejected, currently about 3,000 per month.A few asylum seekers have committed suicide rather than return. On June 21, the German Bundestag approved an expansion of the number and powerof the Border Police. Their number is to increase to 29,000 by 1996, andpenalties on illegal aliens smugglers have been raised. W. Bosswick and H. Lederer, efms, Bamberg; John Carvel, "Bonn Wants EU to ShareRefugee Load," The Guardian, July 5, 1994. Wall Street Journal, June 30, 1994,p. A1. ___________________________________________ ForeignersStill Under Attack in Germany In his inaugural speech on July 1, 1994, German President Roman Herzog calledon his countryman to welcome foreigners, give citizenship to immigrants'children, and not to get carried away by nationalist pride. In Magdeburg, a city of 300,000 in the former East Germany with 6,000foreigners, German skinheads attacked several foreigners on May 12, 1994. Theforeigners sought refuge in a Turkish restaurant, and the police werecriticized for not preventing the ensuing brawl. Three Germans were jailed forup to three years for their role in the riots. Foreigners CommissionerCornelia Schmalz-Jacobsen said that "a new high" in anti-foreigner violence hadbeen reached. (MN, June , 1994.) The German newsweekly, Der Speigel, interviewed four foreigners who live inMagdeburg, and they described a life of big and small insults, and threats thatencouraged most of them to stay home at night. Most reported few Germanfriends, and described instances of Germans following them with baseball bats,being treated poorly in government offices, assumed to be shoplifters instores, and distrustful that the police would believe their version of attacksand threats. Several noted that, under the East German government, foreignerswere not attacked. However, few of the foreigners living in the former EastGermany wanted to return to their countries of origin. On June 26, 1994, an estimated 50,000 Turks living in Germany, demonstratedpeacefully in Frankfurt against the Turkish government's treatment of Kurds inTurkey. Kurds are 10 to 20 percent of Turkey's 60 million population, and theTurkish group PKK is trying to create an independent Kurdistan in thesoutheastern part of Turkey. Many Turks in Germany are Kurds, and they havedemonstrated in Germany several times in 1994 against the Turkish regime. Der Spiegel, June 20, 1994, pp 54-57. "New Germany President Sworn In,"Courier-Journal, July 2, 1994. "German Police Detain Neo-Nazi Youths,"Reuters, July 23, 1994; Martin G. Berck, "Germans Must Come to Terms WithImmigrants," Newsday, July 21, 1994, A34. ___________________________________________ Immigrants in Italy On December 31, 1993 there were 987,405 foreigners living in Italy. Thelargest percentage were in Italy to work (34 percent), followed by familyreasons (15 percent), and unusual reasons, such as those fleeing civil war whocan work (14 percent). In 1991, about 4,700 foreigners became Italiancitizens--4,300 on the basis of marriage to an Italian. In 1993, 1,646 aliens applied for asylum in Italy; one-third were Romanian.Only 138 or eight percent were recognized as refugees, and one-third of thoserecognized were Iraqis and Iranians. However, there were an additional 26,617nationals of ex-Yugoslavia and Somalia who were working in Italy on temporarywork permits who did not apply for asylum. In a effort to reduce the unemployment rate, currently 11.5 percent, theItalian government in mid-July proposed changes to Italian labor law that wouldallow employers to offer employees fixed period contracts, thus making iteasier to lay off workers. Employers would also be allowed to pay below unionwages in areas of high unemployment. If approved, the government expects thesemeasures to create 150,000 to 200,000 new jobs. Immigration data provided June 30, 1994 by Alessandra Venturini, UniversitaBergamo. ___________________________________________ Russia'sForeign Workers There are 400,000 foreign workers in Russia, but only 200,000 Russians workingabroad, according to the Federal Migration Service. There are up to 500,000additional "transit migrants" in Russia--sometimes referred to in the Russianpress as "illegals"--such as Iraqis, Iranians, etc., who arrived in Russia withtourist or student visas, and nationals of former USSR states as well as theChinese, who could previously enter Russia without visas. Many hope to applyfor asylum in Western Europe, or be smuggled illegally to the US. Russia has concluded "bilateral agreements" with over 60 countries from Germanyand Poland to China and Greece under which Russian workers can go abroad on thebasis of (1) an individual employer-employee contract, (2) anemployer-to-employer agreement (under which the Russians remain Russianemployees while abroad), and (3) an intermediary-Russian worker agreement. Insome cases, it appears that these agreements are with individuals from thesecountries, such as an American who signs an agreement to import Russianworkers, but still has to obtain H-2A or H-2B visas to have them admitted. Anestimated 60 percent of the 200,000 workers abroad are employed underemployer-to-employer agreements, and 20 percent each under the other twomethods of working abroad. Russia screens and maintains a list of workers itconsiders qualified by language or skill to work abroad--the list reportedlyincludes "thousands" of names. About 70 percent of the 400,000 foreign workers in Russia are from the formerUSSR. Russian employers may hire foreign workers--initially for oneyear--after they convince the FMS that Russian workers are unavailable. Thesystem for regulating guestworkers in Russia was "decreed" by President Yeltsinin December, 1993 and April, 1994, and there are as yet no data on employerrequests, approvals, and rejections. However, the Moscow city governmentrecently requested and obtained FMS permission to import 5,000 Ukrainian busdrivers to fill vacancies reportedly caused by long hours and low wages.Employers are still being educated about the sanctions law. Russia is also grappling with transit migrants. There are reported to be atleast 200,000 foreigners in the Moscow region, including 10,000 waiting toreceive refugee status, 25,000 ex-students, 40,000 Vietnamese and Chineseex-guestworkers, and 40,000 so-called "economic refugees" who entered Russiaillegally from countries that range from Nigeria to Afghanistan. In 1994, 55 additional border control centers are to be opened, and personsseeking asylum are to be housed in one of 12 new centers. Decisions onrequests for asylum are to be made within three months, with one to fivepercent likely to be recognized. To reduce transit migrants, Russia has beenimposing visa requirements on formerly free entry countries such as China. Before its breakup, the former USSR had about 285 million people. Russia hasabout 150 million people--Russian and non-Russian--and there are another 25million Russians living in the former USSR republics that are now consideredRussia's "near abroad." Since 1990, some 2 to 4 million Russians andnon-Russians have moved to Russia--sometimes because of discrimination againstthem in newly-independent CIS nations. Some Russian politicians argue that themost important migration problem is the threat of "millions" more migrantsmoving to Russia as a result of "persecution" in the near abroad and becauseMoscow offers comparatively better economic conditions. During President Clinton's visit to Latvia in July, there wereprotests, mostly by Russians, against the what they see as discriminatorycitizenship. Latvia, which regained independence in 1991 from the formerSoviet Union, grants citizenship only to citizens of the Latvian republic,which was annexed by Moscow in 1940, and their descendants. The Latvianpresident last week sent back to Parliament for rewriting a bill which wouldhave restricted the chances of 500,000 Russians in Latvia from becomingcitizens. Latvian nationalists say citizenship restrictions are needed becauseimmigration during the Soviet era means that ethnic Latvians have a tenuousmajority in the republic of 2.6 million people. Non-citizens, about 800,000 inLatvia, carry Soviet passports and, although they have permanent residencyrights, they cannot vote or buy land. Russians are leaving the Baltic nations of Estonia, Lithuania, and Latvia.Some 80,00 of Estonia's 500,000 non-Estonians have left since 1989 (Estonia'spop is 1.5 million). Interview with Vladimir Volokh, Deputy Minister, Federal Migration Service ofRussia, July 4, 1994. Pavel Filippov. "Flophouse for the World," Pravda, June23, 1994, 4. Lisa Trei, "Shut our in the Baltics, Some Russians look to startover in their homeland," Wall Street Journal, July 25, 1994, B9B. "Clintonvisits Baltics, Focus on Russians' rights," Reuters World Service, July 6,1944. Nigel Stephenson, "Latvia's Non-Citizens Seek Clinton's Support,"Reuters, July 5, 1994. ___________________________________________ CzechRepublic: Foreigners Fees Increase The price of residency permits rose on June 1 from 200 korunas ($US7) to 1,000korunas (US$35), and foreign residents who fail to renew their permit face alate fee of US$138 . Those paying 1,000 korunas for residency extension stampsmay have to fork out another 1,000 korunas to receive a new residency card. These fee increases are a signal for foreigners to become legal, says theFinance Ministry. The price jump was also justified to curb immigration,particularly from countries of the former Soviet Union and Yugoslavia. Theprice hikes are only the latest move in a government crackdown on foreignersoverstaying their welcome in the Czech Republic. There are currently 28,000 legal foreign workers in the Czech Republic,according to the director of Employment Services. Most of the workers comefrom Poland (8,900), the former Yugoslavia (1,700), United States (1,200),Russia (1,600), Great Britain (900), and Germany (870)--these data do notinclude an estimated 28,000 Slovaks. The Employment Services Director reports that some experts estimate the numberof illegal workers at about 40,000. He also observed that the foreign workersdo not endanger domestic jobs on the national scale, but they may have someregional impacts. Some private companies, especially in construction, preferto employ foreign workers because they pay them substantially lower wages. Some companies operating in the Czech republic, mostly from the Ukraine, areimporting workers from their home country. The imported workers live in poorconditions. Ukrainians workers reportedly tolerate the poor conditions becausethey can earn up to 50 times more in the Czech Republic than in the Ukraine. In May, passport controls were introduced on the Slovak border after Bratislavafollowed Prague's lead in slapping visa requirements on Bosnian, Montenegrinand Serbian nationals to discourage them from working there illegally. Foreigners must have work and residency permits before they can work legally inthe Czech Republic. Until recently the government ignored this rule, but in1994, more companies are being checked to ascertain whether their foreignemployees" papers are in order. Companies can now be charged for the costs ofdeporting illegal workers. Kathleen Knox, "Foreigners to fork Out More," Warsaw Voice, July 3, 1994."Survey of Czech Press," CTK National News Wire (Czech Republic), July 24,1994. ___________________________________________ SyndicatesSmuggle Chinese to US and Europe The UN Economic Commission for Europe reports that the number of asylum seekersin Europe and North America declined to 720,000 people last year, a drop of100,000 or 13 percent from 1992. The decline is attributed to the tougherasylum laws adopted by many member nations, which comprise Europe, theCommonwealth of Independent States, Israel, Canada, and the United States. Thenumber of asylum seekers declined in Western Europe and Canada, but in somecountries, such as the US, there was an increase. Criminal smuggling syndicates have reportedly organized a labyrinth ofinternational air, sea and land routes for human smuggling that involvesroughly 30 countries. Smuggling people has become so lucrative for criminalgangs that "it has replaced drug trafficking as the enterprise of choice." China's economic growth and openness has spurred an exodus of tens ofthousands, mainly migrants from the coastal regions of South Fujian and EastGuangdong. Poland, Hungary, and the Czech and Slovak republics, are primarilyused as transit areas to smuggle Chinese into Western Europe and the US. Thesyndicates are also using the countries of Guatemala, the Dominican Republic ,Mexico and Belize. According to some estimates, about 100,000 Chinese aresmuggled illegally into the US each year, and another 100,000 to Europe.During the early 1990s, about 500,000 Chinese illegally entered Europe, theformer Soviet Union and North America. In 1993, the Russian Federation had its largest annual increase in migrationsince World War II. Net immigration last year reached 430,000, with 920,000people entering and 500,000 leaving. Stephanie Nebehay, "Criminals Smuggling Chinese to US, Europe", Reuters, July5, 1994. "Human smuggling lucrative," Reuters, July 10, 1994. "GermanyGetting Most Immigrants, UN Says," Chicago Tribune, July 6, 1994; "China deniesit is soft on illegal migrants," Reuters World Service, July 17, 1994 ___________________________________________ ASIA ___________________________________________ China'sGreat Migration According to Chinese authorities, there are 130 million surplus workers in therural areas of China, and their number is projected to increase to 200 millionby the year 2000. Surplus labor in the countryside and jobs at high wages inChina's cities and its southeastern provinces have set in motion an internalmigration believed to involve at least 50 million, and possibly 70 to 100million internal migrants. In Beijing, there are an estimated two million "outsiders" seeking jobs in daylabor markets. If chosen by an employer, workers are often overworked, andsometimes fired without having been paid. The largest number of migrants is believed to be the 10 million in Guangdongprovince, which surrounds Hong Kong, where they help to build and staff thereported 5,000 factories under construction. Rural migrants are drawn to urbanand coastal areas by wages that are two to three times what they couldfarming--the construction, mining, and factory jobs that attract migrants pay$1.25 to $1.75 per day. However, many migrants complain of broken employerpromises and workplace exploitation, and both public authorities and criminalgangs allegedly prey on the migrants, selling the women and children intoprostitution. The remittances sent home by migrants are seen by some as a way to transferwealth from richer to poorer areas of the country. In one county in theinterior province of Sichuan, remittances of $138 million in 1993 exceeded thevalue of locally produced goods, $115 million. Patrick Tyler, "China Migrants: Economic Engine, Social Burden," New YorkTimes, June 29, 1994, A1, 5. Graham Hutchings, "Rural 'army' fuels industrialchange," The Daily Telegraph, July 19, 1994. ___________________________________________ Foreignersand Labor Shortages in Japan The number of foreigners living legally in Japan rose to a record level of 1.3million on December 31, 1993 --up 40 percent since 1988-- making foreigners onepercent of Japan's population. Koreans are 52 percent of the foreigners,followed by Chinese (16 percent), Brazilians (12 percent), and Filipinos (6percent). The Japanese Labor Ministry recently released a report that projected a laborsurplus in the year 2000 if annual economic growth continues at less than threepercent. In Japan's aging society, employment of nurses and related healthoccupations is projected to increase by one million over the next six years. The number of foreign overstayers in Japan was estimated to be 296, 751 onNovember 1, 1993, down slightly from 299,000 on May 1, 1993. As in the past,85 percent of the overstayers were from five countries--37 percent were Thais,followed by Koreans, 14 percent, Chinese and Filipinos, 12 percent each, andMalaysians, 9 percent. "Retraining, Restructuring Needed to Prevent Steep Rise in Unemployment," TheNikkei Weekly, June 20, 1994. Overstayer data from Shoko Sasaki. July 1994. ___________________________________________ Housing Foreign Workers in Malaysia Malaysian employers who hire foreign workers must show proof that they canprovide satisfactory housing for them. If an employer cannot provide proof ofadequate housing for the foreign workers, the Immigration Department will notapprove the employer's application for foreign workers. Also in July, the government decided that foreigners wishing to work legally inMalaysia will have to undergo medical tests in their home countries byMalaysia-sanctioned doctors. The requirement was imposed after it was reportedthat up to 30 percent of the foreign workers in the country have healthproblems, and that doctors in some countries were falsely certifying theworkers to be in good health. The new requirement is an attempt to halt the proliferation of squattersettlements in Malaysia. Estimates of the number of foreign workers inMalaysia range from 1 to 1.5 million in a country with a workforce of 8million. Most are working illegally. On July 8, the Federation of Malaysian Manufactures (FMM) appealed to thegovernment to lift the ban on the hiring of unskilled foreign workers inmanufacturing. FMM reported that labor shortages were disrupting productionand posing financial problems for firms, since they lost contracts due to theirinability to assure delivery times for lack of labor. FMM reported that mostfactories were running at capacity and were unable to expand because of laborshortages. Despite the freeze on hiring unskilled foreign workers, on July 7, Malaysia'sRural Development Minister received Cabinet approval to recruit 17,000 foreignworkers for the rubber and palm oil plantations on a government-to-governmentbasis with countries in the region. Rubber and palm oil plantations arereportedly operating at half capacity because of the labor shortage, so that 30percent of the 1.8 million rubber trees in Malaysia are reportedly untappedbecause of labor shortages, causing a loss of US$192 million. The first legal plantation workers are due from Indonesia. "Employers must show proof of decent living conditions," New Straits Times,July 15, 1994. "Manufacturers Ask for More Foreign Workers," Reuters, July 8,1994. ___________________________________________ HongKong Residents Rush for Foreign Citizenship The residents of Hong Kong made a last-minute rush to obtain foreigncitizenship before China takes back the British colony in 1997. About 42,000people have applied for the last 13,610 passports Britain has made availablefor residents of Hong Kong, the last immigration slots left from the 1990 planto making available 50,000 British passports for key professionals to ensurethat they remained in Hong Kong until 1997. These 50,000 immigrants receive British citizenship if they satisfy criteriaincluding age, skill, English language proficiency, community service, andeducation. Hong Kong residents were initially reluctant to apply because ofharsh criticism from China, and the feeling that anyone who took Britishcitizenship would be penalized in any post -1997 administration. First-round quotas for police, business, managers and serviceprofessionals were not filled. The second round has seen each classoversubscribed. There were 14 times the number of business professionalsseeking British passports as there are spaces. Also oversubscribed are slotsfor social workers, translators, interpreters, architects, planners, surveyors,police and teachers. Twice as many emigrants returned to Hong Kong in 1993 as in 1992, reports theHong Kong Institute of Personnel Management. Experts predict that the numberof returnees will increase until it peaks in 1997 or 1998. The governmentreports that more than 8,000 people returned to Hong Kong in 1992, afterobtaining foreign passports--some 500,000 Hong Kong residents are believed tohave foreign passports. The typical returnee was a professional with a collegedegree. 30 to 39 years old, male, and married with children. Most migrants arereturning from Canada and Australia, which are struggling with recession andunemployment. A recent poll of the returnees found that 80 percent find it"easy to get a job" but encounter problems finding housing. Immigrants from Hong Kong are no longer making Australia their destination ofchoice. Among the reasons Hong Kong residents are staying home is that HongKong businesses are paying high wages for skilled professionals and managerswith language skills. The Australian Bureau of Immigration and PopulationResearch reported that the number of Hong Kong residents arriving in Australiafrom July to December, 1993 dropped from 4,358 to 1,667. The number of Hong Kong people permanently departing Australia is also rising.Departures from July-December, 1993 were 270 compared to 153 for the sameperiod in 1992. The total foreign population in Australia at the end of Maywas 363,000 compared to 320,700 for the same time period in 1993. Eric Ellis, "Last Chance for Citizenship Swamped," Australian Financial Review,July 13,1 994. Keith Wallis, "HK returnees on the increase," South ChinaMorning Post, July 13, 1994. Mary Kwang, "Hongkongers rush to get UKpassports," The Straits Times, July 13, 1994. Darren Goodsir, "Run on Britishpassports," South China Morning Post, July 12, 1994. Scott, "Australia losingout as emigration destination," South China Morning Post, July 14, 1994. ___________________________________________ OTHER ___________________________________________ In an article in the July-August Foreign Affairs, Edward Luttwak argues thatgreat powers will no longer be able to wage wars in which soldiers are likelyto be killed because of low birth rates. According to Luttwak, with familysizes typically one or two, the loss of a son or daughter in war has becomeunacceptable. Edward Luttwak, Foreign Affairs, July-August, 1994. ___________________________________________ RESOURCES ___________________________________________ Visa Bulletin, Department of State publication 9514, available from VisaOffice, DOS, Wash DC 20522-0113. This monthly publication summarizes USimmigration categories and shows the dates on which qualified immigrants had toapply under the various preference categories in order to receive permission toimmigrate during the current month. There are 226,000 family-sponsored immigrant visas available annually. In July1994, for example, those wishing to immigrate as first preference familyunification immigrants--the unmarried (adult) sons and daughters of UScitizens-- could enter the US immediately except for those from Mexico--who hadto apply by June 25, 1993 to be eligible in July 1994--and those from thePhilippines (September 25, 1985). The longest queues were for fourth preference family immigrants--the brothersand sisters of adult US citizens. For most countries, those eligible to enterin July 1994 applied 10 years earlier in 1984--25 years earlier in the case ofthe Philippines. There are 143,000 employment-based visas available annually, and bothfirst-preference priority workers and second-preference professional can enterwithout waiting. Third-preference skilled workers can also enter withoutwaiting, but third-preference other (unskilled) workers must have applied in1988 to enter in July 1994. There are generally no waits forspecial--including religious--workers, and none for investors. Asch, Beth J.(Ed). 1994. Emigration and its effects on the Sending Country.Available from George Vernez, Rand, 1700 Main St, Santa Monica, CA, 90407-2138. This seven-chapter report includes a literature review and chapters on theeffects of emigration on four countries that send large numbers of immigrantsto the US: the Philippines (by Edith Tan), Ireland (Cormac O'Grada and BrendanWalsh), Dominican Republic (Howard Wiarda), and Mexico (Jaime Navarro). The report concludes that young, male, and married men predominate amongemigrants, and that emigrants tend to be better educated than the averageresident of the sending country, with some skills, and employed prior todeparture. However, their skills were in most cases acquired through familyinvestments, so that their emigration does not represent a brain-drain loss togovernment investments in education. The report concludes "that, on net, emigration has a positive effect on thesending country."(xv). In dealing with the 3 R's --recruitment, remittancesand returns--the report notes that emigration relieves unemployment and mayraise the wages of workers who remain behind; that remittances are spentprimarily on current consumption, but the multiplier effects of such spendingexpands demand and creates jobs; and that returning migrants become productiveafter about six months unemployment. Thus , "policies restricting emigrationwould not have a beneficial effect."(xvii). The report is apparently quite old. There are surprisingly few references tothe US Commission for the Study of Migration and Cooperative EconomicDevelopment, and the several volumes of case studies that it commissioned. Thediscussion is also flawed by outdated data, such as using 1975 stock data formigrants in the Middle East. This leads to a surprising table on p 18, whichranks countries by the percentage of their population sent to the US in thelate 1980s. The top 15 countries include the expected Dominican Republic, ElSalvador, and the Philippines, but also Hong Kong, Taiwan, and South Korea.But the list also includes the UK (ahead of Poland), and Germany--thesecountries are included only because immigration pressures in the late 1980sseem to be based on actual immigrants since 1950, and Germany accounted forone-third of the 1950s immigrants. Most US immigration data series stop in1988, before the effects of 2.7 million legalized aliens show up in immigrationdata. Koener, Heiko. 1990. Internationale Mobilitaet der Arbeit. Eine Empirischeund theoretische Analyse der internationalen Wirtschaftsmigration im 19. und20. Jahrhundert. Darmstadt: Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft. Koener sees international migration as a process that accelerates theintegration of the world economy. He observes that thinking about migrationhas evolved, from conceiving of it as mostly a group phenomenon to consideringit mostly a rational choice of individuals and households. In 19th century Western Europe, up to one-third of the population increaseemigrated as a result of push factors in Europe and pull factors abroad. Atransportation revolution--steamships--and a network factor--professionalmigration recruiters--combined with liberal emigration and immigration policiesto produce the Golden Age of Migration. After the two World Wars, emigration push forces in Western Europe diminished,and immigration polices became more selective. In Western Europe, temporaryworkers--guestworkers--were admitted under bilateral agreements, and therotation principle that failed in Europe was adopted and more effectivelyimplemented in the Middle East after 1975. Koener is a development specialist, and his discussion of why emigrationcountries failed to benefit from remittances and returns is instructive. Hefinds that, in most cases, there was too much brain drain and too littleflexibility in emigration country economies to absorb remittances foremigration to prove a short-cut to development. The book concludes that because migration is a dynamic social process, itsoutcomes can never be fully predicted. The key is flexibility on all sides,since the process of migration changes migrants, emigration areas, andimmigration areas. __________________________________________ Editor: Philip Martin Managing Editor: Cecily Sprouse Department of Agricultural Economics, University of California, Davis, DavisCA 95616 Telephone: (916) 752-1530 Fax: (916) 752-5614 email: Phil Martin <migrant@primal.ucdavis.edu> __________________________________________ WT02-B13-135IA090-000969-B024-225http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/By-Month/MN-Vol-1-94/MN_September_1994.html 128.120.36.171 19970122204055 text/html 86014HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 20:41:47 GMTLast-Modified: Saturday, 15-Apr-95 20:11:53 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 85756MIGRATION NEWS Vol. 1, No. 8 September, 1994 Migration News is a newsletter that summarizes key developments in immigrationand integration issues during the preceding month. Topics are grouped byregion: North America, Europe, Asia, and Other. There are three versions of Migration News. The paper copy is ten pages orabout 7,500 words; the email version is 10,000 to 12,000 words; and the gopherversion is 12,000 to 15,000 words. The purpose of Migration News is to provide monthly summaries of recentimmigration developments that can be read in 60 minutes or less. Each issuealso offers a special report, summaries of current news, abstracts of selectedpapers, and articles and information on recent research publications. Distribution is by email. If you wish to subscribe, send your email addressto: Migration News <migrant@primal.ucdavis.edu>. Current and back issues canbe accessed via gopher in the Migration News folder at: dual.ucdavis.edu We welcome your contributions: please fax news items of interest toPhilip Martin at (916) 752-5614, or send them to the email address above.Working papers and other materials to be listed in the RESOURCES section can besent to Philip Martin, Department of Agricultural Economics, University ofCalifornia, Davis, Davis CA 95616 USA. Those who contribute items may requestMigration News by mail if email is unavailable. __________________________________________ ___________________________________________ NORTHAMERICA ___________________________________________ ClintonReverses Policy on Cubans President Clinton on August 19 announced a dramatic change in the 28-year oldUS policy toward Cuban refugees. Henceforth, persons from the island nationheading for the US on rafts and small boats are to be treated as illegalaliens, detained in centers outside the US, and not permitted to enter the USunless they can satisfy the criteria for refugee or immigrant statusindividually. The US policy change was due to the rising number of Cubans arriving on raftsand small boats--about 20,000 in August, including 3,000 per day on August24-25. Talks between Cuba and the United States to stem the exodus began onSeptember 1. Both the US and Cuba have been using migration policy as foreign policyinstruments. The US put an economic embargo on Cuba in 1960 and, under theCuban Refugee Act of 1966, Cubans who arrived in the US were paroled or allowedto remain and work legally, become US immigrants after one year of residence,and apply for US citizenship after five years. The US did not return to Cubaeven Cubans who used violence to escape. As economic conditions worsened in Cuba, Cubans began to slip out despiteCastro's efforts to prevent their emigration. After several ferries werehijacked in August by Cubans bound for the US, Castro accused the US governmentof encouraging Cubans to use violence to escape. In mid-August, Cubaapparently began allowing Cubans to leave freely. Cuba seems to be using the flood of migrants as a lever to get the US tonegotiate an end to the economic embargo. The US response has been to insteadtighten the embargo, which suggests that the US hopes that yet more pressurewill lead to a change of government in Cuba. The US announced that the current"mid-level" talks with Cuba will cover only "orderly legal immigration." Cubaannounced that it would prevent those leaving Cuba from taking children withthem on rafts. After the policy change August 19, some 18,000 Cubans were picked up at sea andtaken to safe haven at the US naval base in Guantanamo Bay, Cuba. There arealready almost 15,000 Haitians at Guantanamo. On August 24, the US announcedplans to expand the tent camps at Guantanamo to hold up to 40,000 Cubans there.Panama and Honduras promised to take up to 15,000 Cubans for up to 6 months. Cubans taken to Guantanamo will not be admitted to the US unless they qualifyindividually for refugee or immigrant status. The US has an interest sectionin Havana that in 1994 granted refugee status to 3,000 Cubans. US authoritiesurged Cubans to seek refugee or immigrant status in Havana rather than risktheir lives setting out to sea. Under a 1984 amendment to US immigration law,the US agreed to allocate up to 20,000 immigrant visas annually to Cubans and,under the 1990 IMMACT, this number rose to 27,845. However, Cubans would have to compete with 3.4 million other foreigners who areawaiting immigrant visas to enter the United States. There is speculationthat, if Cubans were to receive special treatment yet again by receiving ahigher priority in the immigration queue, Asian-Americans may protest. Cubans are attempting to flee in response to the economic crisis in Cuba causedby the sharp decrease in Russian subsidies and a poor sugar crop. In 1994,Australia is expected to replace Cuba as the world's top sugar exporter. In 1980, during the Mariel boat lift, 124,769 Cubans migrated to the US in 159days, usually via private boats that traveled the 90 miles from southernFlorida to the harbor in Mariel, Cuba. The US is seeking to avoid anotherMariel--US Attorney General Reno warned private US boat owners in August thatthey may be arrested and have their boats confiscated if they attempt to travelto Cuba and return with Cubans. However, private boaters are permitted to pickup Cubans at sea who are in danger of drowning. By some estimates, from 1 to 2 million of the 11 million Cubans would migrateto the US if they could. Almost one-third of the 36 million people in theCaribbean live in Cuba, and there are about 1.5 million Cuban-Americans in theUS. "Castro threatens to let Cubans flee to America," Associated Press, August 5,1994; William Booth, "Castro warned by US," Washington Post, August 7, 1994,A1; Jose de Cordoba, "Cuba Near Crisis as Opposition Grows," Wall StreetJournal, August 11, 1994, A10. Steven Greenhouse, "US Considers Mainland Sitesfor the Cubans," New York Times, August 24, 1994, A1, A8; McNeil-Lehrer NewsHour, August 24, 1994; R.W. Apple, "Castro vs. Clinton," New York Times, August26, 1994, A1, A6. Roberto Suro, "With Legal Immigration Out, Rafts are In,"Washington Post Weekly Edition, August 29, 1994, 17. Mireya Navarro,Successive Waves of Cuban Exodus Define Response to Shift by Clinton," August23, 1994, p.C18. Steven Greenhouse, "US Will Propose Reducing Barriers to CubaMigrants," New York Times, August 30, 1994, A1, A4. ___________________________________________ CommissionRecommends That States Test Employee Verification The bipartisan Commission on Immigration Reform (CIR) on August 3, 1994recommended unanimously in testimony to the Senate Judiciary's ImmigrationSubcommittee that a national registry of the names and social security numbersof all persons authorized to work in the US be established to deter illegalaliens from obtaining US jobs. CIR Chair Barbara Jordan urged that theregistry be established immediately, and be used on a trial basis to checknewly hired workers in the states of California, Florida, Illinois, New York,and Texas. These states include 35 percent of the US population, and 80percent of the estimated 4 million illegal immigrants in the US. The federal registry would include data from the Social Security Administrationand the INS. Illegal aliens would be deterred in test states by registry data,plus counterfeit-resistant drivers licenses, secure Social Security cards, andtelephone verification systems. Implementing these immigration controlmeasures may require federal and state legislation. The CIR's proposal to tighten employee verification systems was praised by INSCommissioner Doris Meissner and by senators such as Diane Feinstein(D-California), who believe that illegal immigration must be brought undercontrol. Press reaction was generally favorable; the CIR's proposals weredescribed in major papers as "logical steps" to regain control over illegalimmigration. The registry proposal was denounced by ethnic and civil rightsgroups such as La Raza and the American Immigration Lawyers Association as anational ID system. The CIR also endorsed more border control efforts, such as OperationHold-the-Line in El Paso, Texas. By flooding the border with agents, the INShas sharply reduced attempted illegal entries in El Paso, and also reduced thecrime associated with youthful illegal entrants. According to a report by ateam headed by Frank Bean of the University of Texas, long-distance illegalmigrants continue to attempt entry to the US, but not at El Paso. The popularity of Operation Hold-the-Line prompted Governor Wilson to proposethat a similar operation should be mounted on the San Diego-Tijuana border.There is speculation that such an operation may be mounted by the ClintonAdministration to deflect support for Governor Wilson and the Save our Stateillegal immigration initiative on the November ballot. The CIR asserted that illegal aliens should receive no benefits except forhealth care in emergencies and public education for illegal alien children.Public education typically accounts for more than half of the state and localcosts associated with illegal immigration, and state and local governments arerequired to provide free public education under the 1982 Phyler vs. Doe U.S.Supreme Court decision. CIR Chair Jordan acknowledged the legitimate concernsover the costs of illegal immigration in high immigration states such asCalifornia, but denounced Wilson and the SOS initiative as unnecessarilyinflaming tensions over illegal immigration. The CIR is expected to issue its interim report on controlling back-doorillegal immigration by September 30, 1994, and then tackle issues related tofront-door legal immigration. Among the issues to be addressed are immigrantentrepreneurship---how many new jobs do immigrant businesses create, for whom,and with what impacts on their communities--and immigrant family and civicstructures--do immigrant families strengthen "family values?" Robert Pear, "Federal Panel Proposes Register to Curb Hiring ofIllegal Aliens," New York Times, August 4, 1993, A1-7. Frank Bean, et. al.,"Illegal Mexican Migration and the United States/Mexico Border: The Effects ofOperation Hole-the-Line on El Paso/Juarez, Population Research Center,University of Texas at Austin, July 15, 1994. Michael Teitelbaum, "HelpWanted: A Fraud-Resistant Registry," Newsday, August 24, 1994. Editorial,"Sensible Steps to Control, and Preserve, Immigration," Courier-Journal, August15, 1994. "Texas Border Operation to Add More Agents," August 15, 1994,Reuters. Editorial, Registration without discrimination," Atlanta Journal andConstitution, August 14, 1994. ___________________________________________ HaitiansBegin To Return Home On July 31, 1994, the UN Security Council approved the use of force to restorePresident Aristide to power in Haiti. Troops from several neighboringCaribbean islands have been training with US troops for an invasion and, by theend of August, an invasion appeared imminent. The number of Haitian boat people dwindled after they learned that they wouldnot be given entry to the US, and in early August the US announced that the16,500 Haitians in Guantanamo would stay there rather than be moved to safehavens in nearby nations such as Suriname, Panama and Honduras, which hadoffered to permit the US construction of safe havens for Haitians in theirterritory in exchange for increased US assistance. The US has spent over $160million in 1994 on camps and processing for Haitians. More Haitians began to leave the tent city set up for them in the US'sGuatanamo Bay Naval Base than arrived by mid-August. In the three weekspreceding August 15, for example, over 1,000 Haitians returned, while the USCoast Guard picked up only 300 Haitians fleeing their country in small boats.Between mid-June and mid-August, over 5,000 Haitians returned to Haiti. The Haitian crisis has inspired calls for open borders. On the editorial pageof the Wall Street Journal, a newspaper that has endorsed an amendment to theUS Constitution that the US should have open borders, a Manhattan Instituteaffiliate asserted that "Haitians make great Americans" by increasingproductivity and holding down the US cost of living. Even though today'sHaitians include many single men without family ties, "the long-standingHaitian-American commitment to self-improvement" provides sufficient assurancethat they will successfully integrate. However, in New York City, where half of the adult Haitians have some collegeeducation, seven percent of the Haitian immigrants-- and 25 percent ofsecond-generation Haitians--are on welfare. Eric Schmitt, "US Shelves Plan to Send Haitians to Third Countries," New YorkTimes, August 3, 1994, A7. John Miller, "One Answer to Haitian Crisis: Letthem In," Wall Street Journal, August 2, 1994. "More Haitians returning homethan fleeing by sea," Sacramento Bee, August 13, 1994. ___________________________________________ Immigration and Politics in California The debate over immigration in California is rekindling interest in the role ofLatino voters in statewide campaigns. Latinos are between 25 and 30 percent ofCalifornia's 32 million people, but they are only 12 percent of California'sregistered voters, and they accounted for only about seven percent of thevoters in the June 1994 primary elections. Latino State Senator Art Torres isrunning for Insurance Commissioner, and the SOS initiative will be on theNovember 7 ballot, so some hope that the Latino vote could decide closeraces. Why are there as many Black as Latino voters in California, even though thereare four times more Latinos than Blacks? Half of the adult Latinos are not UScitizens; a smaller-than-average-percentage are eligible to register and votethan do so; there is a much-discussed lack of "charismatic ethnic leadership;"and Latinos are not monolithic Democratic voters--typically 55 to 60 percentvote for Democrats. Governor Pete Wilson has said he is likely to vote for the SOSinitiative--Proposition 187 on the November 8 ballot--but he has not yetformally endorsed it, nor has he actively campaigned for its passage. Wilsonhas mentioned his support for the SOS provision that would deny free publiceducation to illegal alien children. He has said that, if SOS is approved, hewould welcome a California lawsuit to challenged the 1982 US Supreme Courtdecision that required states to provide free public education for illegalalien children. Wilson has reportedly been more concerned with eliminating federal mandatesthat require states provide services to aliens, and with getting the federalgovernment to reimburse states for the costs of providing those services, thandenying aliens services such as health care, as SOS would do. SOS opponentscounter that Wilson's attacks on illegal immigrants created the atmosphere inwhich SOS could be put on the ballot, and that he is now trying to look"responsible" by using anti-immigrant rhetoric but not endorsing an "extremist"initiative. On August 25, 1994, Wilson had a full page ad in the New York Times assertingCalifornia had done what it could to deal with illegal immigration--requiringproof of legal status to get a driver's license, prohibiting local governmentsfrom enacting sanctuary laws, and sending the National Guard to provide supportservices for the Border Patrol. Wilson appealed to President Clinton to orderthe Border Patrol to implement an Operation Hold-the-Line in San Diego, to havethe federal government take custody of illegal aliens convicted of crimes inCalifornia, and to implement the tamper-proof national registry system proposedby the CIR in California (see related story). For the first time since employer sanctions went into effect in 1987, theformer manager of a Los Angeles medical clinic was indicted on charges that sherepeatedly accepted false documents from illegal alien workers. Leticia Ruizde la Cruz, 40, was charged with knowingly accepting false Social Security andGreen Cards from illegal workers hired to work in the clinics. A disgruntledformer employee turned clinic documents over to the INS. In San Francisco, a state appeals court on August 15 ruled that unauthorizedaliens who are eligible for emergency medical services and pregnancy care maybe required to confirm their illegal status when they seek such care. IRCAmade unauthorized aliens eligible for such medical services, and California hasestimated that the cost of providing mandated health services to 317,500 aliensis $395 million annually, or $1250 each. The court ruled that the California rule requiring applicants for medicalservices to declare their legal status does not conflict with federal law,because even after they are identified as illegal aliens, they receiveservices. However, if SOS were approved and implemented, all governmentemployees would be required to inform INS of unauthorized aliens. In San Diego County, the Board of Supervisors voted 4-0 to cross check voterregistration lists with INS records to determine if non-US citizens haveregistered to vote. Under US law, persons registering to vote do not have toshow proof of citizenship; they need only sign an affidavit that they arecitizens. Non-citizens who register can be prosecuted for perjury. In a July 12-17 Field Poll, illegal immigration was the 15th most importantissue for California voters, but it was more important to older voters, men,and was the third most important issue for Republicans. On August 5, 1994, the US District Court in San Francisco ruled that a Chinesecitizen Seventh-Day Adventist who had lived in Hong Kong for 12 years beforeimmigrating to the US could not apply for asylum here because he was "firmlyresettled" in Hong Kong. Mr. Chan applied for asylum in the US because hefeared religious persecution after the Chinese assume control of Hong Kong in1997. The INS denied his application because he had "firmly resettled" in athird country prior to coming to the United States. The court upheld the INSdenial, noting that Chan and his wife owned property in Hong Kong. The District Court found that the INS has broad rule-making authority pursuantto the Refugee Act of 1980. The court said that since the INS could use itsdiscretionary authority to consider resettlement as a factor in evaluating themerits of asylum applications during litigation, then it could also make a rulebased on that factor. Dan Walters, "Latino Politics at Pivotal Point," Sacramento Bee, August 7,1994, A3; Ruth McKinnie, "Foreign Voters Search Urged," San Diego UnionTribune, August 3, 1994; Brad Hayward, "Migrant Initiative puts Wilson on theSpot," Sacramento Bee, August 15, 1994, A3; Robert Lopez, ""86 Immigrant HiringBan Used in LA Case," Los Angeles Times, August 9, 1994, A1, 18. Chan v.Immigration and Naturalization Service, 1994 WL 411723 (N.D. Cal.) ___________________________________________ CourtDecisions Changes INS Policies As a result of a court decision, the INS will now take custody of aliens whostowaway in ships or airplanes, and permit them to remain in the US while theirrequests for asylum are considered. Unlike illegal aliens apprehended in theUS, stowaways detected at air and sea ports are legally considered not to be inthe US, and the air or shipping company on which they arrived was responsiblefor holding them until the INS decided whether they could remain or should bereturned at the carriers expense. A shipping company sued the government forthe costs it incurred while holding Romanian stowaways for almost two months,and a federal court of appeals ruled that the old INS policy of requiringtransportation companies to cover the costs of holding stowaways had not beproperly adopted. Under the new rules, the INS will permit stowaways to e.g., apply for asylum,and then release them on their own recognizance. If their applications arerejected, the transportation company that brought them to the US is responsiblefor the cost of transporting them home. In the closely-watched Golden Venture case, in which a Chinese freighter wasgrounded off New York City in 1993, a Manhattan federal judge ruled thatXin-Chang Zhang can claim asylum because of China's one-child policy. Thejudge ruled that executive orders during the Bush administration which sayChina's one-child policy is a basis for US asylum overrides other court rulingsthat conclude it is not. The INS is likely to appeal the decision. Another ruling is likely to have more of an impact. The judge ruled that theimmigration courts improperly interpreted when an immigrant has legally enteredthe United States. Zhang's rights were curtailed because he was on US soilwhen he was arrested. The judge ruled that as soon as immigrants enter USterritorial waters, they have the same rights as an alien in the US, a rulingthat may affect US policies toward Haitian refugees. The INS is expected toappeal the decision. The Clinton administration has decided to give refugee status to Chineseimmigrants who claim they will be punished for opposing abortion in theirhomeland. This would halt the deportation of many Chinese immigrants who saythey would be persecuted for resisting abortions or mandatory sterilization. Journal of Commerce, August 5, 1994; Joseph Sullivan, "Immigration ServicesShifts its Policy on Stowaways," New York Times, August 5, 1994, A10. TracyConnor, "NY asylum ruling could be far-reaching," UPI, August 10, 1994."Anti-Abortion Stance of Chinese to Become Grounds for US Asylum," Los AngelesTimes, August 5, 1994. ___________________________________________ TexasSues over Costs of Illegal Immigration Texas joined Florida, Arizona, California, and New Jersey on August 3 in suingthe federal government for the costs state and local governments incur as aresult of providing services to illegal immigrants. Except for the costsassociated with imprisoning and deporting criminal illegal aliens, the federalgovernment has resisted providing such reimbursement, saying that the stateshave not been able to justify adequately the amount of reimbursement they areseeking. There was a wave of similar suits in the mid-1980s, before IRCA was enacted andstates were eligible for SLIAG moneys to cover the costs of providing servicesto newly-legalized aliens. The US Supreme Court in 1985 ruled against statereimbursement suits; it suggested that the states use the political process tosecure federal funds to cover the costs of immigration. However, in a 1992case involving New York, the US Supreme Court indicated that it was willing tohave federal courts play a role in the argument over federal reimbursement. "Texas Sues US Over Illegal Immigrant Costs," Reuters, August 3, 1994. LouisFreedberg, "Texas is Latest to Sue US for Cost of Illegals," San FranciscoChronicle, August 6, 1994. ___________________________________________ EUROPE ___________________________________________ Five-year Low in German Asylum Seekers Since 1990, 1,209,965 foreigners have applied for asylum in Germany, including438,191 in 1992 and 322,599 in 1993. On July 1, 1993, Germany's asylum law wasamended to require that applicants from "safe countries" apply and then returnto their country of origin, and applicants who passed through safe countries enroute to Germany to apply for asylum there. Some 161,492 foreigners applied for asylum between July 1, 1993 and June 30,1994, but in July 1994, the number of applicants reached a five year low of8,730. There were 71,532 asylum seekers in the first seven months of 1994 and,in July 1994, 7.6 percent of the 27,681 asylum applications considered wereapproved. The German Office for the Recognition of Refugees is beingstreamlined to deal with a projected 25,000 asylum seekers annually. There is a remarkable optimism that the 1993 asylum reform has "worked":applications are down, and most cases are heard within three or four days.With less than 10 percent of the applicants recognized as refugees during thesespeedy proceedings, the word is getting out that it is not easy to obtainasylum in Germany. The almost 9,000 people monthly who continue to enter Germany and seek asylumusually present no travel documents or written proof that they face persecutionat home. Typical is a 32 year-old Iranian man who crossed the Iranian-Turkishborder on foot, traveled by car across Turkey, and then used a false passportto fly from Istanbul to Frankfurt. The passport was taken by the smuggler, andthis man entered Germany--if he had applied for asylum without documentsat the airport, he would have remained in an airport camp while the applicationwas decided. This man allegedly faced persecution in Iran because of hiswife's support for dissidents there. Most such applications are rejected as "apparently unfounded." Applicantsreceiving such decisions are expected to leave Germany within one week--if theydo not, they can be deported--20,000 were in 1992, and 37,000 were in 1993.However, many manage to delay their departure. First, those without papersmust order new passports--and pay appropriate fees for them if they have money-- from their countries' German embassies. Some countries do not easily orquickly issue replacement passports, and some asylum applicants allege thatapplying to their country's German embassy or consulate subjects them topersecution at home. Second, those who arrived over land borders must admit to, e.g., crossing thePolish-German border before Poland is obliged to take them back--few have beenreturned so far to neighboring "safe countries." Third, many of those whoseapplications are rejected are nonetheless allowed to remain in Germany,especially if there is a civil war in their country of origin. For thisreason, applicants often purchase and present Bosnian or Somalian passports,since applicants from these countries are often "tolerated" with TemporaryProtected Status. Human rights organizations complain that applicants have only one to two hoursto tell their story, that "deciders" must make an average two decisions daily,that rejected applicants have only one week to appeal a rejection, and thecourts just one more week to consider the appeal, and that applicants can bereturned in a step-by-step fashion to the country of origin they fled, e.g. anapplicant from Iran being returned first to Turkey and then to Iran. Interior Minister Manfred Kanther in mid-August reported that the number ofaliens apprehended on Germany's borders fell by half compared to 1993 to20,000. Most attempt to slip over the Czech and Polish borders, where Germanyhas 4,400 Border Patrol agents. The German Border Patrol has an annual budgetof DM 2.5 billion, or $1.6 billion. According to a television network ZDF poll, one-fourth of the West Germans, and11 percent of the East Germans, considered asylum seekers and foreigners to bethe top priority in Germany in July 1994. By comparison, 56 percent of theWest Germans, and 76 percent of the East Germans, considered unemployment to bethe top priority. German's population rose in 1993 by 363,000 or 0.4 percent to 81.3 million.There were 76,000 more deaths than births; the net immigration of foreignerswas 277,000 in 1993, versus 593,000 in 1992. There continue to be more Germans----including ethnic Germans from the formerUSSR--moving to Germany than emigrating. In 1992, net "German" immigration was195,000, and in 1993 it was 194,000. Since 219,000 ethnic Germans arrived,this indicates that 87,000 Germans emigrated. In addition, there are expectedto be 20,000 illegal immigrants settling in Germany in 1994, versus 50,000 in1993. In Buchenwald (in the eastern German state of Thuringia), 22 neo-Nazis stormedthrough the concentration camp memorial in July. Foreigners' CommissionerCornelia Schmalz-Jacobson joined the criticism of police and prosecutors intheir handling of the case. According to government data, 82 identifiedneo-Nazi groups were blamed for 2,232 acts of reported violence in 1993,including 1,609 against foreigners. However, Schmalz-Jacobson said that in1993 there were 6,016 racist attacks. For the first time since 1989, the number of crimes recorded in Germanydeclined, from 2.6 to 2.5 million. The number of foreigners suspected ofcommitting crimes fell by 10 percent between the first half of 1993 and thefirst half of 1994., British construction workers in Berlin have accused neo-Nazis of attacking themon their Saturday afternoon sweeps of building sites. Gangs armed withbaseball bats go from construction site to site looking for foreign workers.British construction workers reportedly earn between $12 and $17 hourly. In 1992, Germany and Vietnam negotiated an agreement to have German funds payto reintegrate the Vietnamese who had been recruited to work in the former EastGermany. However, 40,000 Vietnamese remain in Germany, and many have appliedfor asylum there. Germany is trying to negotiate an agreement with Vietnam sothat Vietnam will accept Vietnamese who "voluntarily" return. Over half of theVietnamese who applied for asylum in Germany have had their applicationsrejected. The Economist magazine warned that Europe was sliding down a slippery slope ofcreating an underclass because of long-term unemployment--40 percent of the 17million unemployed in the European Union have been out of work for at least ayear; including a third who have never worked at all. Many of the unemployedare immigrants or their children-- in the former West Berlin, the number ofunemployed foreigners nearly doubled between 1989 and 1993, while theunemployment rate for ethnic Germans rose by less than one third. In early August, fundamentalists in Algeria killed five French citizens, andFrance accused Germany of not being strict with Algerian fundamentalists wholive there. Rabah Kebir, a fundamentalist Algerian FIS leader who was grantedasylum in Germany, was thought to have violated the terms of his stay inGermany by making political statements and by illegal traveling to France. OnJuly 24, 18 Algerian and other North African asylum seekers being held in acamp in Kassel took several guards hostage. Algeria has refused to accept itsnationals who have had their applications for asylum in Germany rejected. Data from efms, Bamberg and Inter Press Service, August 1, 1994; DeutschePresse-Agentur, August 1, 1994; Jochen Buchsteiner and Martin Klingst, "EinAbschreckender Erfolg," Die Zeit, July 1, 1994, 9-12; The Economist, July 30,1994, 19; Sueddeutsche Zeitung, July 27, 28, 1994; Construction News August 11,1994 Deutsche Press Agentur, July 11, 1994. "Refugees in Germany Drop toFive-Year Low," Reuters, August 4, 1994. Sueddeutsche Zeitung, August 17,1994 ___________________________________________ Declinein Illegal Immigration to Czech Republic The Czech Republic reports that the number of illegal immigrants apprehended onits borders has fallen from 5,000 in January to less than 1,000 in June. Thedecline was attributed to new visa requirements for nationals of the formerYugoslavia, Bosnia-Hercegovina, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Georgia and Tajikistan,and stricter measures implemented by Germany. Over 88 percent of thoseapprehended were Europeans. More than 35,738 people have been denied entry to the Czech Republic in 1994because of incomplete travel documents. There is organized smuggling ofaliens by Czechs, Slovaks and Yugoslavs along the Czech-German border, usuallyinvolving men of working age. The Czech Republic is hoping to sign an agreement that would require Germanofficials to return illegal migrants within 72 hours of crossing, instead ofthe current seven days. The Czech Republic also hopes to receive financial aidfrom Germany to improve its border control capabilities, such as improvedcommunications and vehicles. "Illegal immigration down to Czech Rep.," UPI, August 19, 1994. "IllegalBorder Crossings Down: Smuggling of Immigrants Up," CTK News Agency, August 19,1994. ___________________________________________ Greeceto Beef Up Border Patrol Greece plans to move 5,000 border police to the Greek-Albanian border in aneffort to halt illegal immigration. Relations between Greece and Albania havebeen strained after six ethnic Greeks were charged with espionage in Tirana. According to Greek Public Order Minister Stelios Papathemelis, border patrolsequipped with radar and night vision glasses will be "welcoming committees" forAlbanians. Albanians will be taken to "welcoming centers" for medical checksand an opportunity to apply for six-month work visas. Meanwhile, Albanian TVreports that 2,000 Albanian refugees were repatriated between August 17-20,while Greek radio said that the Albanians were illegal immigrants who wereexpelled after their capture. Over the past three years, an estimated 560,000 illegal immigrants have enteredGreece from Albania. Despinka Kyvridosaiou, "Greece to move 5,000 police to border," UPI, August 4,1994. "Diplomatic Solution Needed for Greco-Albanian Problems," Albanian TV,August 20, 1994. "Authorities Arrest and Expel "Illegal" Albanian Immigrants,"ER Radio, August 17, 1994. ___________________________________________ EU Immigration Proposals Worry House of Lords The All-Party Committee of Peers has called for stronger immigration controlsat the borders of the European Union. Meanwhile, the upper house of theBritish Parliament asked for a revision of plans for an EU-wide visa law,warning that the EU law might restrict the travel rights of many Commonwealthcitizens. The House of Lords Select Committee on European Affairs said a proposed list ofcitizens who will require visas to enter the EU is too long and includes manynations of the Commonwealth, such as India, Barbados, and Grenada, many of whomdo not currently require visas for short stays in Britain. The Lords arguethat the EU has no power to require mutual recognition of visas by memberstates, or list countries whose nationals are required or not required to havevisas to travel to the EU. The draft proposal on a common EU visa policy is considered by some to beanother step toward "Fortress Europe," and by others to be the first steptoward a border-free Europe for all those inside EU nationals. Police arguethat identification checks with a common database and compatible computersystems are necessary to stop drugs, car thieves and terrorism. Island nations such as the UK and Ireland have traditionally controlled entrywith tight border controls, while continental nations such as Germany andBelgium with land borders have supplemented border controls with internalregistry systems. Patricia Wynn Davies, "Peers back tight immigration controls," The Independent,August 1, 1994. Julian Samboma and Debra Percival, "Rejects EU Migrant Laws,Cites Commonwealth Rights, InterPress Service, August 1, 1994. "Open to us,closed to them," The Economist, August 13, 1994. ___________________________________________ FrenchInterior Minister Popular with Immigration Stand In a profile of French Interior Minister Charles Pasqua, it was noted that thelaw-and-order minister's efforts to "protect France from illegal immigration"is making him just as popular with the French public as he was during his firststint as interior minister between 1986 and 1988. There is some speculationthat Pasqua may run for the presidency next year. Pasqua is credited with stopping an "invasion" of Third World immigrants byleading the effort to limit access to asylum, to make it more difficult forimmigrants to unify their families in France or to become French citizensthrough marriage, and for changing a rule and requiring French-born children offoreigners to apply for French citizenship at 18 rather than acquire itautomatically. Alan Riding, "French Rightist is Riding High," New York Times, August 3, 1994,A4. John Ridding, "Capture of Carlos makes Pasqua's summer: France's bluffinterior minister is emerging as a force to be reckoned with," Financial Times,August 20, 1994. ___________________________________________ Belarusand Ukraine Promote Export of Workers Belarussian officials have encouraged the export of workers to easeunemployment pressures in their own country, and have received over $1 billionremittances. Both Belarus and Ukraine have sent workers abroad, estimates arethat hundreds of thousands have left. In Belarus, there are 30 firms that assist workers to get employment incountries like Poland, Hungary and Greece. Some workers go East, towardRussia, looking for jobs as farm workers and bus drivers. The average monthlywage in Belarus and Ukraine is about $25 for professionals such as doctors andengineers-- about one-quarter the $100 monthly wage for professionals inRussia. Larisa Sayenko, "Belarus, Ukraine Welcome Migration of Workers," Reuters,August 18, 1994. "Relations with Former Soviet States: Ukraine ClarifiesAgreement with Russia on Border Issues," Radio Ukraine World Service, August12, 1994. ___________________________________________ Attacks on Foreigners in Italy There are 1 million non-EU foreigners living in Italy, and 160,000 EUnationals. Most of the non-EU foreigners are Africans, and this summer Italianyouths in the Rome area have attacked them. The attacks on foreigners arepartially attributed to the installation of Rightists in the Italian governmentfollowing March's elections. Over 70 percent of Italy's immigrants live inRome . Sueddeutsche Zeitung, August 26, 1994. Claudia Parsons, Rome Labelled Racistafter Attacks on Foreigners," Reuters, August 28, 1994. ___________________________________________ ASIA ___________________________________________ ForeignWorker Fees in Taiwan There are 140,000 foreign workers in Taiwan, but employers have applied for andbeen granted permission to import 200,000 to 300,000. About 100,000 are Thaisemployed in factories and in construction, and 25,000 are Filipino maids andnurses. Foreign workers can remain in Taiwan for two years, and specialistsfor three--the government plans to extend maximum stays to three and fouryears. The Council of Labor Affairs announced in August, 1994 that it was thawing therecruitment freeze imposed in April, but also planning to increase the feecharged to employers to import foreign workers--currently NT$2,000 or $77-- inorder to reduce their reliance on foreign workers. For the first time,households with children under six or persons over 75 would be able to employforeigners as domestics. Private employers have been permitted to recruit foreign workers since 1991.Under the current program, Taiwanese employers must pay at least basic monthlysalary-currently NT$ 13,350 ($515), pay a deposit of NT$26,000 that is refundedafter the foreign worker leaves in two years, and pay a monthly "employment stabilization fee" fee that is meant to protect the interests ofTaiwanese workers--in manufacturing, this fee is currently NT$1,300 per month.Employers must enroll foreign workers in the labor insurance and healthinsurance programs. Employers must also pay recruitment and transportationcosts, and bring the workers into Taiwan within six months of being grantedapproval. The Chinese National Federation of Industries protested the plan to raise theCLA fee, arguing that, with all theses costs, additional fees and lowerproductivity would make foreign workers too costly. Instead, they asked for anadditional 11,000 foreign workers to fill so called 3-D jobs--dangerous,difficult, or dirty, a relaxation of the minimum monthly wage, and an extensionfrom two to three years for the workers stay in Taiwan. Industries seekingforeign workers include tires, rubber and rubber products, and construction. A survey of Taiwanese workers found that 82 percent agree that foreign workersare needed under certain conditions, but two-thirds oppose the importation ofmainland Chinese workers. However, 42 percent of those surveyed fear thatforeign workers may threaten their jobs. Taiwanese fishing companies havereceived permission to import up to 10,000 mainland workers. Taiwaneseemployers must notify labor unions about their hiring of foreigners, and theycannot fire local workers and replace them with foreigners. Foreign workers headed for Taiwan must attend classes on their rights andobligations under Taiwan's labor laws, as well as on Taiwan's culture. Whilein Taiwan, they are required to have physical examinations every six months.The most common violation of labor laws occurs when Taiwanese employersencourage excessive overtime work, reflecting the employers' desire to userelatively cheap foreign workers as much as possible and the workers' desire tomaximize their savings. The foreign workers' most serious problem is exploitation by labor brokers.Foreign factory workers can earn NT$ 16,000 to NT$ 20,000--$700--per month, or$20,000 over the two-year stay permitted in Taiwan. Competition among foreignworkers to be selected for jobs in Taiwan is very keen, and workers are willingto pay NT$ 70,000 to NT$ 80,000 --equivalent to four to five months wages--toobtain a work permit. Most workers sign IOUs and have this "recruitment fee"deducted from their wages in Taiwan. To escape from these recruitment fees, or to earn a higher wage, some foreignworkers abandon their designated job. They thus become illegal alien workers.The Taiwanese government is considering a proposal to amend the EmploymentService Law to establish penalties of imprisonment of up to five years and afine of up to NT$ 1.5 million for the collection of "excessive" brokerage feesor the illegal employment and abusive treatment of foreign workers. Thegovernment is also establishing foreign worker assistance centers . "Industries Concerned By CLA Plan To Hike Foreign Labor Fees," China EconomicNews Service August 17, 1994; China Economic News Service, July 28, 1994;Business Taiwan July 18, 1994. ___________________________________________ JapanCracks Down on Illegal Foreigners The Japanese Justice Ministry's Immigration Bureau reports that 2,893foreigners--over 60 percent of them men-- were repatriated in May and June,1994. Koreans were 21 per cent of the total, followed by Thais--17 percent,Chinese--15 percent, and Filipinos--13 percent. The crackdown targeted foreignprostitutes and those with forged passports in Tokyo, Nagoya and Osaka. Almost92 percent of those captured were working illegally. In what was billed as a "massive" case, 20 illegal Thais and Peruvians werearrested August 22, along with a manager of the housing materials manufacturing company that employed them and the labor broker who arranged fortheir entry and employment. Japanese Yakuza criminal gangs have beenimplicated in the smuggling of Chinese workers into Japan as illegal aliensworkers. Also in August, three crew members of an Indonesian freighter were sentenced to10-month jail terms for smuggling 81 illegal Chinese immigrants into Japan inMay. Philippine Olympic Committee considered but then drop the idea ofrequiring Filipino athletes heading for the Asian Games in Hiroshima in Octoberto take out a bond to ensure their return to the Philippines. Many Filipinosapparently asked to have their names included on the list of persons competingin or helping with the games in order to get visas for Japan. "2,900 illegal immigrants repatriated in May, June," Japan Economic Newswire,August 6, 1994; Japan Economic Newswire, August 12, 23, 1994; Japan EconomicNewswire, July 25, 1994. ___________________________________________ Developmentand Migration in Asia Does freer trade increase, decrease, or have no effect on unwanted migration?The U.S. Commission for the Study of International Migration and CooperativeEconomic Development established by IRCA in 1986 to deal with the"root causes" of illegal immigration to the United States concluded that,although free trade and investment were the best mutually beneficial policiesthat emigration and immigration countries could adopt to accelerate theirdevelopment and eventually reduce unwanted immigration, such migration wouldnot be reduced quickly, and may even increase temporarily. The prospect of anunwanted "migration hump" in the wake of the "correct" economic policies toaccelerate stay-at-home development leads to a paradox--the same policies thatmake immigration controls less necessary in the long-run make such controlsmore necessary in the short-run, especially if one reason why immigrationcountries implement free trade policies is to slow unwanted immigration. The OECD's Development Center held a seminar in July 1994 to discuss themigration hump in successful (Korea, Taiwan) and failed (Philippines, Pakistan)cases of economic development. The successful cases were defined as those inwhich previous net emigration countries became net immigration destinationswithin a decade. Most were in East Asia, and the "East Asian Miracle" of rapideconomic and employment growth that also reversed net migration flows wasattributed to the fostering of labor-intensive manufacturing industries thatcreated jobs and exported ever more sophisticated goods. The absence ofsegmented labor markets permitted the benefits of this export-led growth to beshared, even by those not employed in manufacturing. Rising manufacturingwages also pulled up farm wages and incomes, there was less rural-urbanmigration, less crowded urban labor markets, and less overseas migration. This seminar was significant because it represents one of the first attempts toderive migration lessons from Asian Newly Industrialized Countries (NICs). TheWorld Bank's recent study--The East Asian Miracle--demonstrates that Asian NICsoffer important lessons in how to manage developing economies in a manner thatpromotes fast and equitable growth--they may also offer important lessons inhow to promote stay-at-home development. Labor Migration in Asia Asia, home to almost 60 percent of the world's population, has so farnot experienced the large-scale labor migrations that have moved immigrationand integration toward the top of the socio-political agenda in North Americaand Western Europe. However, uneven population and economic growth in theregion, combined with the recruitment of both professional and unskilledmigrant workers, the growth of tourism and labor smuggling, the toleration ofillegal workers, and rising expectations in job-short nations combine tosuggest that labor migration could change the face of Asia over the nextseveral decades. Japan, Korea, and Taiwan--the region's three major economic successstories--are likely to become more dependent on foreign workers in the 1990s.During pre-1980s economic booms, these countries were able to fillnewly-created jobs with baby boom workforce entrants, ex-farmers, and womenentering the labor force. Today these reservoirs of additional domestic laborhave dried up, and foreign workers are becoming the workforce "shock absorbers"for these economies in the 1990s. All three countries are attempting to managegrowing numbers of foreign workers in a manner that prevents theirsettlement. In Japan, Korea, and Taiwan, many foreign workers are employed in smallmanufacturing firms--operations with less than 50 workers employ two-thirds ormore of the manufacturing workers. These firms tend to offer 3-Djobs--difficult, dirty, and dangerous--and, even though the small firms inwhich many of these jobs are found in some cases pay wages comparable to largefirms, they often do not have the capital or the capacity to automate at homeor relocate production overseas. Thus, the combination of a near emptyreservoir of flexible domestic workers, a still-significant small-scalemanufacturing sector, and constraints on the firms' flexibility combine tocreate a demand for foreign workers. In Tokyo in 1990, a survey found that 11percent of all small manufacturing firms employed some foreign workers. Japan is in the midst of its second period of labor shortage. In thefirst--from 1965 to 1973--labor shortages were met through rural-urbanmigration, automation, and investment overseas, and wage differentials betweenlarge and small manufacturing firms narrowed. During the second period oflabor shortages between 1986 and 1991, small manufacturing firms that hadalready closed the wage gap with large firms, and could not longer findex-farmers to fill the 3-D jobs they offered, began to turn increasingly tosidedoor and backdoor foreign workers. There are estimated to be 1.2 million foreign workers in Japan, including400,000 illegal workers. The type of foreign worker employed tends to varywith firm size. The largest firms tend to favor legal immigrants, such asethnic Japanese Nikkei from Brazil and Peru. Mid-sized firms often look totrainees--foreigners who mostly work and sometimes learn in Japan. Thesmallest firms--often subcontractors with fewer than 10 workers--are most aptto employ illegal alien workers. There seem to be few alternatives, in theview of some, to importing foreign workers during today's labor shortages topreserve the small firms that give Japan's manufacturing sector itsflexibility. Taiwan and Malaysia represent interesting cases in which managing migration isa challenge produced by rapid economic growth--in other words, most countrieswould much prefer to enjoy economic success and have to manage migration thanto stagnate and not worry about illegal immigration. In Taiwan, export-ledmanufacturing growth has improved conditions for the average worker, a clearcase of the Asian miracle, but left in its wake labor shortages that are beingfilled by migrant workers, especially in construction and as householdmaids. In mid-1994, there were almost 200,000 foreign workers inTaiwan, making foreigners two percent of the country's workforce. Malaysia is the first Muslim country to industrialize, and the demand forforeign workers there reflects both rapid economic growth and the slowness ofsome economic sectors to restructure. The Malaysian migrant worker dilemmaillustrates the challenge facing many fast-growing Asian nations. As theseeconomies grow rapidly, productivity increases and wage growth vary by sector.Manufacturing tends to generate the fastest growth in output and wages perworker, and so the workforce--especially young women with some secondaryeducation-- "naturally" redistributes itself toward manufacturing. Manufacturing miracles may lead to labor shortages in agriculture andconstruction, unless employers there raise wages. But the wage increasesnecessary to balance labor supply and demand in such traditional sectors may beso high that commodity production may shrink, or the costs ofgovernment-financed construction projects rise, so there is pressure to admit"temporary" foreign workers--in Malaysia's case foreign workers are believed tobe at least one-third of the hired workers in agriculture, and two-thirds ofthe workers employed in construction. Thailand represents a confused case of segmentation that permitted thebest-educated urban residents to reap many of the benefits of export-ledmanufacturing growth. Because manufacturing jobs are prized, and rural wagesare very low, Thai employers--unlike their counterparts in Malaysia-- can anddo demand that the young women they employ have more than a primary schooleducation, even if the jobs they fill do not seem to require this mucheducation. Since 80 percent of all Thai workers have only a primary schooleducation, most are locked out of manufacturing jobs. Labor-intensivemanufacturing growth in Thailand seems to be a case of concentrated benefits,so that the distribution of income has become more unequal despite rapidgrowth. Conclusions Asia presents the world with examples of rapid economic development,simultaneous economic and employment growth, and ever-increasing internationallabor flows. The "Asian model" of export-led manufacturing growth is seen bysome as a beacon for developing countries elsewhere--if they adopt the Asianmodel, they too, the reasoning goes, could expect average incomes to doublewithin a decade. It is hard to argue with success, but some participants felt that the Asianmodel is not universally applicable. Even within Asia, there are cases ofdevelopment failures as well as successes. However, the Asian successes doseem to argue for economic democracy--for spreading, first via jobs and laterrising wages, the benefits of one sector's growth throughout the economy andlabor force. The migration management lessons from Asia are less clear, largely becausethere are not yet any generally recognized success stories. Instead, Asiancountries so far seem to be making the same mistakes that were made earlier inNorth America and Europe--opening sectors selectively to foreign workers, andchanging migrant worker policies frequently as the relative power of domestic"let them in" and "keep them out" camps ebbs and flows. The Asian economic miracle has been recognized. Asian migration remains anunfinished story, with few clairvoyants willing to predict how it willultimately turn out. A longer version of this report will be published in the Asian and PacificMigration Journal, available from Scalabrini Migration Center, PO Box 10541,Broadway Centrum, 1113 Quezon City, Philippines. ___________________________________________ MalaysiaProposes Fines for Employers Hiring Illegal Workers Under the proposed Recruitment of Foreign Workers Act, employers could be finedup to RM 50,000 for each illegal worker employed, imprisoned for five years, orboth. Currently, the Human Resources Ministry has no power to sanctionemployers who hire illegal immigrant workers; when the Labor Department learnsof illegal workers, they are referred to the Immigration Department. There are an estimated to be over 1 million illegal immigrants in Malaysia,including 800,000 Indonesians, 100,000 Filipinos, and 100,000 Bangladeshis.Between July 1992 and June 1994, 104,920 illegals were apprehended in Malaysia.Most are housed in one of eight detention centers--at a cost estimated atRM500,000 (US$200,000) monthly--and eventually deported. One company has proposed handling, for a fee, all aspects of the recruitment offoreign workers, replacing the 822 licensed recruitment companies--300 of whichare currently active. Some in government think that a single employment agencywould reduce illegal immigration by fraudulent employment agencies. A senior plantation leader lamented the alleged labor shortages on Malaysianplantations, and argued that increasing their dependence on foreign workerscannot solve the industry's problems because "foreign workers do not have thededication or the discipline." Instead, he complained that plantations arebeing used only as an entry point for foreign workers who want to enterMalaysia's booming manufacturing sector. However, the rubber manufacturers' association acknowledged that 25 percent ofits unskilled workers are foreigners, and 11 percent of its skilled workers,and asked the government to clarify its foreign workers policy for factories. Malaysia's largest company, Sime, has established the nation's first housingestate for foreign workers in Subang Jaya. At two workers per room, there willbe housing for 1,443 workers, who will pay RM 5.10 ($2) daily. The housing isfenced and has 10 security guards on duty 24 hours a day. Identification cardsare needed to enter the housing. Among the amenities are electricity from 7pmto 7am daily and tap water 24 hours a day. In August, immigration police arrested several Chinese workers who had come toMalaysia as tourists and then gone to work in a furniture factory. Roziana Hamsawi, Dhaka's Help Sought To Resolve Problem, Business Times(Malaysia) August 19, 1994; David Ong-Yeoh, "RM50,000 Fine for Bosses HiringIllegal Alien Workers," Business Times (Malaysia), August 9, 1994. BusinessTimes (Malaysia) August 1, 1994; Business Times (Malaysia) July 28, 1994, 20;Business Times (Malaysia) August 24, 1994. ___________________________________________ DomesticWorkers in Hong Kong There are almost 130,000 foreign domestic workers in Hong Kong, a sharpincrease from the 24,600 of 10 years ago. Most are Filipinos--they arepreferred because they speak English--the others come from Indonesia, Thailandand Sri Lanka. There are many complaints of physical and sexual abuse. Five organizationshave combined to form the Coalition to Combat Violence Against Migrant Workers,to demand protections for migrants and government investigations of abuseagainst migrant workers. The coalition has also called for employment agenciesto be blacklisted if they send maids to employers known to be abusive. Residents of Hong Kong depend upon domestic workers for cleaning and childcare. Domestic workers are vulnerable because, if they leave their employer,they have only two weeks to find another employer and sign a contract or facedeportation. Hong Kong is planning to import another 3,300 workers to work in retail storesand restaurants. There are 11,000 workers approved for 28 types of industries;most have two-year contracts. However, 10,177 employers have filedapplications requesting permission to import a total of 100,490 workers. Unions have protested plans to increase in the number of foreign workers,arguing that displaced manufacturing workers would be unable to find servicejobs because of the foreign workers. The Hong Kong government has proposes that foreign workers and their employerseach contribute into a pension fund, even though few foreign workers areexpected to qualify for benefits. Margaret Harris, "Hong Kong's Damaged Domestic Workers Unite Against EmployerAbuse," Sydney Morning Herald, August 6, 1994. NG Kang-Chung, "Unions AttackLabour Import Schemes," South China Morning Post, August 16, 1994, p. 2; SouthChina Morning Post, August 25, 1994. ___________________________________________ MoreForeign Workers in Korea On late July, the South Korean government announced that an additional 15,000to 20,000 foreign workers could be employed in labor-short textile and footwearfactories by the end of 1994. The first 20,000 foreign workers to be employedunder the current short-term vocational training program are expected to arriveby September, 1994. There are reported to be 140,000 foreign workers currentlyin Korea, including an estimated 52,000 illegal alien workers. Thailand has protested the low wages offered to the foreign worker trainees inKorea--$300 monthly plus room and board. The Overseas EmploymentAdministration Office in Thailand announced that they will delay sending 300workers to South Korea for the training program until the wage issue has beenresolved. The Korean government introduced a bill that would extend the health protectionplan available for low-income Koreans to foreign workers. Six hospitals haveannounced that they will set aside beds for foreign workers. Foreign workerswill also be allowed to live in certain apartments for a rent of 9800 won ($12)monthly. Korea Economic Daily, August 13, 16, 1994. "Low Wages Delay Labour Exports,"Bangkok Post, August 11, 1994. ___________________________________________ NoForeign Workers in Singapore Retail The Singapore Labour Ministry has rejected a request by retailers to allowforeign workers to fill service jobs. The ministry said that allowing foreignworkers to be clerks would lead to more non-traditional source (NTS) workers inthe manufacturing and hotel industries. A similar request by the SingaporeRetailers Association was rejected last year. A Labour Ministry spokesperson said that a rise in NTS workers would increasesocial problems and suppress the wages of Singaporeans in these sectors.Retailers claim they face a shortage of around 4,000 workers. Firms in theservice sector are only allowed to employ foreign workers from Malaysia, butthey are not allowed to exceed 20 percent of the firm's total workforce.Foreigners from non-traditional sources are only allowed to work in industriessuch as construction, marine industries, and as domestic workers. Dr. Tilak Abeysinghe of the National University of Singapore said the wage gapbetween department managers and blue-collar workers, which is higher inSingapore than in 10 other major Asian cities, may be caused by the country'shigh proportion of foreign workers. According to a 1991 Union Bank ofSwitzerland study, a Singaporean department manager earned nine times more thana construction worker, eight times more than a female textile workers and fivetimes more than a bus driver. In Hong Kong, a department manager earned four times more than a constructionworker, four times more than a female construction worker and three times morethan a bus driver. Hong Kong rated second to Singapore in the wage gap.Dependence upon foreign workers will continue, according to Abeysinghe, becauseSingaporean workers are upgrading their skills, leaving low-skilled tasks toforeign workers. Skilled non-professional workers are continuing to emigrateto Australia and Canada, leaving another gap to be filled by foreign workers. Rav Dhaliwal, "Retailers can't hire foreigners other than Malaysians," TheStraits Times (Singapore) , August 4, 1994. "Wage Gap Between Professionalsand Blue Collar Workers Widest in Singapore, Says Survey," Business Times,August 19, 1994. ___________________________________________ CambodianImmigration Law Under Consideration A law which would provide for the deportation and expulsion of aliens iscurrently being considered by the National Assembly in Phnom Penh. The lawallows the Interior Ministry to confiscate the papers of resident aliens,making it possible to expel them without the right to a hearing by a court. Human rights organizations worry that should the law pass, it could lead to arepeat of human rights violations that occurred under the Lon Nol and Pol Potgovernments. The human rights organization, Asia Watch, said that the ethnicVietnamese residents of Cambodia are the targets of the law, which does notinclude a definition of nationality. Asia Watch reports that the InteriorMinistry has already taken some steps, including ordering reports on non-Khmerinhabitants and confiscating Cambodian identity documents from non-Khmerspeaking people trying to enter the country, which they think indicates plansto expel the ethnic Vietnamese. There are claims by the Khmer that as many asfour million Vietnamese are living in Cambodia. "Rights Group Raps Khmer Draft Bill," Bangkok Post, August 17, 1994."Cambodian immigration law under fire, "UPI, August 16, 1994. "Immigration LawWorries Human Rights Advocates," International Intelligence Report, August 4,1994. ___________________________________________ IllegalImmigration To and Through Thailand The Thai police bureau commissioner reports that approximately 500,000 illegalaliens currently live in Thailand. Most are believed to be Burmese employed infishing and agriculture. Rising Thai rubber production has led to an increasein illegal Burmese workers in Thailand. Employment Department Director-GeneralSinchai Riantrakul said 21,500 illegal aliens were arrested in Thailand in 1992and 12,000 in 1993, while 750 have already been arrested in the firstsix months of this year. There are estimated to be 100,000 Indians living in Bangkok, including 20,000to 30,000 from Gorakpur in eastern Uttar Pradesh. Most are traders, or takejobs that Thais shun, and most earn Baht 3,000 to 4,000 ($120 to $160) monthly.Most do not have work visas, so they travel to Laos every few months to renewtourist visas. US immigration officials are working with their Thai counterparts to crack downon foreigners using Thailand as a jumping off point for illegal entry to theUS. US immigration authorities report that Chinese nationals are traveling tothe US from Thailand, often through Singapore, Eastern Europe and Russia. Manyof the Chinese are members of gangs. Some operate forgery rings which producefake passports for Chinese immigrants. "US, Thais Look at Ways to Block Illegal Migrants," Bangkok Post, August 15,1994. "500,000 illegal aliens live in Thailand," August 12, 1994, Xinhua NewsAgency. Bangkok Post, July 30, 1994, P6. Far Eastern Economic Review,September 1, 1994, 55. ___________________________________________ OTHER ___________________________________________ Refugees and UNHCR The number of refugees worldwide has more than doubled over the past 10 years,from 10.5 million in 1984 to 23 million in 1994. In addition, there are anestimated 26 million people displaced from their homes inside their countriesof citizenship. The United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees was established in 1951--forthree years-- to help those fleeing Communist regimes. It continues to berenewed every five years, and raises its $1.3 billion annual budget byappealing to governments for help with specific refugee situations. With the end of the Cold War, the agency's job has grown rather than shrunk.As millions of people flee across borders--like the two million who have fledRwanda over the past two months--UNHCR and other relief agencies rush in toprovide humanitarian relief, and then slowly refugees are resettled or returnedto their homes. Today the conflicts that produce refugees are less controllable by the world'smajor powers. In some conflicts, ethnic and religious groups are attacked inorder to cause mass panic and flight and "ethnically cleanse" an area. Incountries such as Somalia, there is no central government power, and competingwarlords sometimes use food as a weapon against civilians in rebel areas. John Darnton, "Rwanda Exodus only tip of world refugee crisis," New YorkTimes, August 8, 1994, A1. ___________________________________________ Australia'sRefugee Costs According to the Australian Department of Immigration, it cost nearly $66million last year to keep 400 boat people in detention and to process refugeeapplications. These costs included $23 million to decide on individualapplications, and $21 million for the Asylum Seeker Assistance Scheme. "Boat People Bill a $65M," The Age (Melbourne), August 6, 1994. BradNorington, "$65M to Detain Refugees," Sydney Morning Herald, August 6, 1994. ___________________________________________ TheKuwaiti Minority After the 1990-91 Gulf War, Kuwaiti leaders announced that they would neveragain allow Kuwaitis to become a minority in their own country. But recentlypublished data indicate that the 671,256 Kuwaitis are just 38 percent of thecountry's 1.8 million population. Kuwait's population was 2.2 million beforethe Gulf War in 1990, and Kuwaitis were 27 percent of the population. Foreign workers in Kuwait are mostly single men from Asia and Egypt. About 69percent of the 1.1 million foreigners are men. There are also an estimated100,000 stateless persons in Kuwaiti. Nearby Saudi Arabia has 1 million Indians, 800,000 Pakistanis, and 600,000Filipinos. About 75 percent of the United Arab Emirates 2.3 million residentsare foreigners. Beginning in September 1994, foreigners must earn at least4,000 dirhams ($1,089) monthly in order to obtain visas for their families tojoin them in the UAE if their employer provides them with housing, and 5,000dirhams ($ 1,362) if they arrange their own housing.. Reuter News Service, Middle East August 11, 1994; South China Morning Post,August 25, 1994 ___________________________________________ RESOURCES ___________________________________________ Global Migration: People on the Move is a wall map available from PopulationAction International, 1120-19th St NW, Washington DC, 20036, that uses arrowsof various thicknesses to illustrate migration flows between 1980 and 1989.The map illustrates only legal migration, and this explains why there are onlytwo flows pictured that involved more than 200,000 migrants annually--LatinAmerica and southeast Asia to the United States. The text that accompanies the map provides brief summaries of the economic andnon-economic factors that explain why migration occurs, the economic impacts ofmigration, and the prospects for future flows. Charts illustrate widening gapin per capita incomes between the richest and poorest countries, and the factthat the industrial countries workforce is expected to stabilize at its currentlevel of 500 million, while the developing countries' labor force is expectedto grow from 2 billion today to 2.5 billion in 1010. The Spring 1994 issue of the Urban Age, Vol 2, No 3, includes 10 short articlesdevoted to international migration and cities. The overview by Stephen Castlesand Mark Miller notes that international migration is a consequence but not asolution to the North-South gap, and that there are four global trends--thetendency of all industrial nations to become immigration destinations; largernumbers of migrants; different streams; and more women flowing across borders.Available from World Bank, Room S4-031, 1818 H St NW, Washington, DC, 20433 Suro, Roberto. 1994. Remembering the American Dream: Hispanic Immigrationand National Policy. Available from the Twentieth Century Fund, 41 East 70thSt, New York, NY 10021. 1-800-275-1447. This three-part book explains that the US was a country of mass immigration atthe beginning of the 20th century, and is once again receiving 1 millionimmigrants annually at the end of the 20th century. According to the TwentiethCentury Fund's President, "Suro's central message is that the real challenge ofimmigration is not control of entry but rather what to do about the immigrantswho succeed in reaching the United States."(pvi). In 13 short chapters, Suro notes that immigration is the visible face of socialchange, and that the US played an important role in initiating role today'smass immigration. Most of the chapters emphasize the similarities anddifferences between the immigration of Latinos today and the immigration of theEnglish, Irish, and other groups in the past. Suro focuses on the secondgeneration, asserting that their prospects for success are the key to whethertoday's immigration will be considered by future generations to have been aninvestment in growth or decline. In order to assure the success of today's immigrants, Suro calls for a newintegration policy--a "contract between the receiving nations and thenewcomers." (p106). Traditionally, immigrants fulfill a US need, and have abuilt-in support system in the form of family and friends. But illegal aliens,refugees and asylum-seekers, and the minority status of many newcomers haschallenged traditional integration assumptions. Suro notes that, in some cases, membership in US civic society seems so haveshifted from President Kennedy's "Ask not" to today's "ask what I am entitledto" and, while he does not necessarily oppose restricting the right of somenewcomers to some public services, he thinks that any such restrictions shouldapply only to future immigrants, not to those who already here. Furthermore,Suro argues that such restrictions are doomed to fail, since "no nation canconduct large-scale immigration successfully based on degrees ofexclusions."(p112). Suro ends by arguing that border and interior immigration controls are bound tofail, and that the best hope to deal with unwanted immigration is to make "adetermined assault of jobs that fail to meet the standards of decentemployment."(p113). However, he does not explain how "indecent" jobs will beeliminated by the market or enforcement of labor laws if large numbers ofimmigrants continue to arrive. The Summer 1994 issue of the National Forum--the Phi Kappa Phi Journal-- Vol74, No 3, includes 8 short articles devoted to immigration and the changingface of America. Doris Meissner, INS Commissioner, repeated her goals--toimprove INS professionalism, to achieve control with compassion, and to havethe INS be the leader in making immigration policy. Meissner said that the USis a nation of immigrants and should remain one. Susan Martin, Executive Director of the Commission on Immigration Reform,discusses the need to take historical and future concerns into account whenconsidering immigration policies for the 21st century, and to balance competinginterests in formulating an immigration policy. Demetriou Papademtrios repeatsan earlier article that concludes that there is no definitive analysis of theeffects of immigrants on the US economy and labor market. Philip Martin discusses the endless debate over US agriculture's need forforeign workers, noting that the farm labor market continues to serve as one ofthe easiest ports of entry for Latinos into the US labor market. SidneyWeintraub reviews the arguments over the likely effects of NAFTA on migrationto the US, notes that NAFTA alone will not reduce unwanted Mexican immigration,but pleads that the US avoid taking drastic steps to curb illegal immigrationthat might interfere with NAFTA-inspired closer economic ties. Terresa Sullivan argues that women, who are over half of all immigrants, arewrongly ignored because they are seen as tied to the men who initiatemigration. If some family unification visas were shifted to employment visas,she thinks that more educated women may immigrate--30 percent of all femaledoctors in the US are foreign -born. Richard Schauffler notes that old modesof assimilation and integration may not have been appropriate for their time,and may not be appropriate for today's immigrants. Cassen, Robert. Ed. 1994. Population and Development: Old Debates, NewConclusions. Washington, DC: Overseas Development Council. This book presents nine perspectives on the question of how population growthaffects development. Cassen notes that the industrial and developing nationshave changed their perspectives on the relationship between population anddevelopment--in 1974, the industrial countries urged developing nations toadopt policies to slow population growth, and India and China countered thatlimiting population growth was not necessary. By 1984, developing nations suchas India and China changed their positions to favor efforts to restrictpopulation growth, but so did the US, which argued against abortion and familyplanning programs. As the world prepares to meet in Cairo in September 1994,the US is once again backing efforts to give women reproductive rights, butthis time the Vatican and some Islamic countries are arguing that populationprograms are not necessary or wrong. In a very qualified conclusion, Cassen says that most researchers agree thatrapid population growth in poor countries makes it harder to achieve rapiddevelopment. He notes that the evidence for the negative effects of rapidpopulation growth is most apparent at the individual and household levels.Furthermore, even cash-strapped finance ministers in developing nations canfairly quickly recoup in lower education and health budgets the costs of familyplanning programs. Chapter 8 by Teitelbaum and Russell deals with migration and development. Theynote that there were an estimated 100 million international migrants of alltypes in the mid-1980s, and that there number is higher today. If combinedinto a single country, this "nation of migrants" would be the world's tenthlargest nation. Second, they conclude that it is very hard to generalize about the "complex andindirect" relationship between fertility, migration, and development--manyemigration nations see exporting labor as a source of jobs and remittances,while many immigration countries are alarmed by migrant unemployment and thepossibility of an ethnic underclass. Third, they emphasize that the surestlong-run solution for emigration pressures--sustained economic growth--can havethe seemingly perverse effect of increasing emigration in the short to mediumterm. This chapter also notes that most international migrants move from one highfertility developing country to another--i.e., between countries with similarpopulation structures--but 40 to 45 percent of the migrants move from highfertility developing to low fertility industrial nations. But the facts do notsuggest that international migration is smoothing population differentials.Economic gaps between industrial and developing nations widened in the 1980s,but emigration pressures were often strongest in some of the fastest growingnations, such as China and Mexico. Remittance flows from migrants abroad tofamilies at home total over $71 billion annually, and over $31 billion fromindustrial to developing countries, or equivalent to almost two-thirds of theofficial aid provided to accelerate development. Bouvier, Leon and Lindsey Grant. 1994. How Many Americans? Population,Immigration and the Environment. Available for $18 from Sierra Club Books, 730Polk St, San Francisco, CA 94109. This five-chapter book is based on the assumption that population growthexacerbates problems, and that immigration is a major reason for US populationgrowth. Unless population growth is slowed, which would require lessimmigration, the authors assert, the US will pose a threat to the worldecosystem. The usual formula for discussing the effects of population on the environmentis Impact=People x their Consumption x Technology--which means that the totalenvironmental impact of is the impact of each person times the number ofpeople. But this formulation makes the effects of population ambiguous--bothpopulation growth and higher incomes (consumption) can have environmentalimpacts. Most economists argue that the environmental impacts of populationgrowth are greatest in situations where there are too few markets to generateprices and incentives to treat common resources as scarce commodities. Forexample, if no one "owns" the fishery or the forest, poor families may haveincentives to have additional children so they can capture a bigger share ofthe fish or wood for themselves. The book takes a macro view in discussing the current impact of people,consumption, and technology on five areas: cities, energy, forests,agriculture, and biodiveristy--and finds that severe problems will in each casebe aggravated by population growth. Next is a discussion of the determinantsof population growth, and a review of the probable effects of a largerpopulation on cities, energy, forests, agriculture, and biodiveristy. Bouvier and Grant review alternative demographic futures, and emphasize thatthe population growth "juggernaut" will be very hard to slow down. But theyargue that, if it is slowed, everything from the cities to the forests willbenefit. The book ends with a call to arms, a plea for readers to get involvedwith in shaping the future population of the US. US Department of Labor and INS. 1994. An Evaluation of the Pilot Program ofOff-Campus Work Authorization for Foreign Students (F-1 Non-immigrants).August 10. The 1990 IMMACT included a three-year program under which employers in collegetowns could attest to DOL that they had tried to recruit for a vacant job forat least 60 days, and that they were offering at least the prevailing wage, andthen, to fill the job, employers could hire foreign students for up to 20 hoursweekly during the school year, and full time in summer. An estimated 5,000foreign students participated in the program in FY 1991-92, a small fraction ofthe over 400,000 foreign students in the US. The pilot program was supposed to be employer driven--employers would seekforeign students after their unfilled jobs persisted at least 60 days. But inpractice, foreign students contacted employers, and in some cases offered towork for lower wages--or make some other concession-- that may violate employerassertions in the attestation but that would be hard to detect. And onceforeign students got hired, there was some evidence that their network wouldtake over supplying workers to these low-wage employers, so that Americanworkers no longer seek or obtain such jobs. There was evidence of such networkhiring in software firms in or near some college towns. The report noted that F-1 students are required to sign an affidavit assertingthat they have the resources to support themselves while studying in the US.There are nonetheless other options for foreign students to obtain USemployment, including on-campus employment upon their arrival, off-campus workauthorization in the event of serious economic hardship, and work/studyprograms that are part of the student's educational program. __________________________________________ Editor: Philip Martin Managing Editor: Cecily Sprouse Department of Agricultural Economics, University of California, Davis, DavisCA 95616 Telephone: (916) 752-1530 Fax: (916) 752-5614 email: Phil Martin <migrant@primal.ucdavis.edu> Migration News is produced with the support of the University of California,Berkeley Center for German and European Studies __________________________________________ WT02-B13-136IA090-000969-B024-253http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/By-Month/MN-Vol-1-94/MN_October_1994.html 128.120.36.171 19970122204113 text/html 94605HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 20:42:01 GMTLast-Modified: Saturday, 15-Apr-95 20:22:20 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 94347MIGRATION NEWS Vol. 1, No. 9 October, 1994 * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * If you wish to continue receiving Migration News, please complete thereadership survey to make this newsletter more useful to you. The Editors. * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * Readership Survey This is the ninth issue of Migration News, a newsletter designed toprovide readers with concise summaries of current immigration and integrationdevelopments. If you wish to continue receiving Migration News, please take a minute tocomplete this survey and return it by October 31, 1994. You may email it tomigrant@primal.ecdavis.edu, fax it to 916-752-5614, or send it to MigrationNews, 1004 Eagle Place, Davis, CA 95616. Your comments will be keptconfidential. 1. How many Migration News items do you read? Check the appropriatebox. All stories_______ Over half the stories_____ A few stories_____ None_____ 2. How much time do you spend reading Migration News? Less than 15 minutes_____ 15 to 30 minutes______ 30 to 60 minutes____ One hour or more_____ 3. How many others read your copy of Migration News? None____ One___ Two___ Three____ Four____ Five or more_____ 4. Migration News has four sections: North America, Europe, Asia, andResources. Please indicate, with the numbers 1 to 4, with 1 being the mostuseful, which section is most useful to you. North America_______ Europe_____ Asia_____ Resources_____ 5. What types of stories are most useful to you? Please indicate with thenumbers 1 to 3, with 1 being the most useful, your rankings. Current Events_______ Analysis______ Reviews of Books and Reports____ 6. If you receive Migration News via email: Do you print it out ? Yes_______ No_______ Can you read tables and graphics sent to you via email? Yes____ No_______ Have you ever used gopher to access back issues? Yes_____ No______ COMMENTS:___________________________________________________ ____________________________________________________________ _____________________________________________________________ PLEASE MAKE ANY CORRECTIONS TO YOUR EMAIL ADDRESS AND RETURN THE SURVEY BYOCTOBER 31, 1994.Migration News summarizes key developments in immigration andintegration issues during the preceding month. Topics are grouped by region:North America, Europe, Asia, and Other. There are three versions of Migration News. The paper copy is eight pagesor about 6,000 words; the email version is 10,000 to 12,000 words; and thegopher version is 12,000 to 15,000 words. The purpose of Migration News is to provide monthly summaries of recentimmigration developments that can be read in 60 minutes or less. Each issuealso offers a special report, summaries of current news, abstracts of selectedpapers, and articles and information on recent research publications. Distribution is by email. If you wish to subscribe, send your emailaddress to: Migration News <migrant@primal.ucdavis.edu>. Current and back issuescan be accessed via gopher in the Migration News folder at:dual.ucdavis.edu We welcome your contributions: please fax news items of interest toPhilip Martin at (916) 752-5614, or send them to the email address above.Working papers and other materials to be listed in the RESOURCES section can besent to Philip Martin, Department of Agricultural Economics, University ofCalifornia, Davis, Davis California 95616 USA. Those who contribute items mayrequest Migration News by mail if email is unavailable. __________________________________________ __________________________________________ NORTHAMERICA __________________________________________ Immigration and the California Election California Governor Pete Wilson declared an "immigration emergency" onSeptember 21 and argued in a third lawsuit against the federal government thatthe "foreign invasion" of California requires federal reimbursement foreducating, incarcerating, and providing emergency health care to undocumentedimmigrants who arrived since 1986. Wilson cited the Tenth Amendment, whichguarantees states protection against invasion. According to the suit: "Themassive and unlawful migration of foreign nationals...constitutes an invasionof the state of California against which the United States is obligated toprotect California..." Florida made a similar argument in its suit demandingfederal reimbursement for the costs of illegal immigrant. Democratic gubernatorial candidate Kathleen Brown on September 13 calledfor a doubling of the number of Border Patrol agents along the US-Mexicanborder, to be accomplished by closing the inland checkpoints and moving agentstoward the border and raising additional funds for 400 additional agents byimposing a $1 border crossing fee. On September 17, US Attorney General Reno announced that the 300 agents nowstationed at the interior California highway checkpoints would be transferredto the border as part of the a new border control plan called OperationGatekeeper. California politicians have been calling for an OperationHold-the-Line in San Diego, after the El Paso INS achieved 90 percent localapproval for an operation that kept 400 Border Patrol agents on the borderaround the clock. On the San Diego-Tijuana border, the INS built a 14-mile fence, 10-foothigh fence that, with bright lights, has encouraged aliens attempting illegalentry to try to cross by overwhelming the INS with numerous small groups, sothat some groups can elude the INS. Under a plan announced by PresidentClinton, there will be 1,600 Border Patrol agents on the San Diego border in1995, double the 814 agents in 1991. Apprehensions in the San Diego area aredown--from an average 45,000 monthly between 1991 and 1993, to about 36,000monthly so far in 1994. Reno announced that a second part of "Operation Gatekeeper" is tohave the federal government reimburse states for the costs of incarceratingcriminal illegal aliens. The "Crime Bill" signed by President Clinton onSeptember 13, 1994 includes $1.8 billion over six years to cover the cost ofimprisoning illegal immigrants convicted of committing crimes, including $130million in FY 95. California , expected to get 70 percent of these funds, willreceive its first payment on December 31, 1994. On September 15, 1994,California Governor Wilson called a press conference to ask US Attorney GeneralReno to take custody of 19,000 unauthorized aliens in California prisons or toreimburse California for the costs--estimated to be $474 million-- ofincarcerating them. On September 29, Reno joined the criticism of Governor Wilson by assertingthat he, while a US Senator from 1983-1991, "fostered some of the illegalimmigration that we're trying to deal with." California farmers in the early1980s wanted a non-contractual temporary worker program through which theycould get foreign farmworkers without having the US Department of Labor certifythat Americans were not available to fill each vacant job. With the help ofTony Coehlo and Leon Panetta, farmers won such a free agent program in theHouse in 1984, and Wilson successfully got a similar provision included in theSenate version of what became IRCA in 1985, albeit with a cap of 350,000 suchfloating foreign farmworkers. The compromise included in IRCA in 1986 substituted an easy-to-defraud SAWlegalization program for these free agent foreign worker programs; the USpermitted over 1.1 million illegal aliens to become legal immigrants throughthe SAW program. This fraud and ineffective border and interior enforcementhave produced in the fields about the same levels of illegal immigration asexisted before IRCA--20 to 40 percent of the peak workforces are believed to beso-called "documented illegals." The US Housing and Urban Development Department announced on September 16that it was going to begin enforcing a federal ban on illegal aliens receivinghousing subsidies that was enacted in 1980. Some 1.4 million poor Americanhouseholds live in public housing, and another 1.3 million households receiveassistance to live in private housing, and unknown number of the estimated fourmillion illegal aliens in the US in October 1994 are among those getting thesehousing subsidies. One complication in enforcing housing subsides rules is the reality ofmixed families, especially US citizen children with illegal alien parents,often a result of children being born to such parents here. Such mixedfamilies will be eligible for partial housing assistance. Marcus Stern, "US to beef up Mexico Border Patrol, Sacramento Bee,September 17, 1994 A7. Jim Specht, "House Votes to Pay States for JailingIllegal Aliens," Gannett News Service, August 18, 1994. 'Pending Crime Bill,"Los Angeles Times, August 18, 1994. Anh Bui, "Reno: US to help states pay forjailed illegal immigrants," Sacramento Bee, September 18, 1994, p. A5. DanBernstein, "Wilson Suit Claims Immigrant 'invasion,'" Sacramento Bee, September23, 1994; Herbert Sample, "Wilson, Reno Sued on immigration," Sacramento Bee,September 30, 1994, A12. __________________________________________ US Sets Quota for Cuban Immigrants The US and Cuba negotiated an agreement on September 9 in New York whichcalls for the US to accept a minimum 20,000 Cubans annually, and on September13 Cuba began to prevent the exit of those trying to leave Cuba. By September15, when it was reported that the exodus of Cubans had been virtually stopped,some 30,000 Cubans were being held in detention camps at the US base inGuantanamo Bay, Panama and elsewhere. This policy change can be seen as the continuation or the end of specialtreatment of Cubans in immigration matters. Since 1965, all Cubans who arrivedin the US were eligible for US immigrant status--Cuba was the one country forwhich there were no numerical immigration limitations. Under the newagreement, there will be an annual limit on Cuban immigration, but only Cubawill be guaranteed an annual minimum number of immigration slots. Because the US has agreed to accept at least 20,000 Cubans annually, the USwill likely have to bend the usual entry rules for Cubans. The two major frontdoors for immigrants to the US are for family unification and because a USemployer identifies a foreigner with a special skill to fill a vacant job.There are long queues for Cuban immigrants wanting to enter as relatives, sothe US plans to use a combination of a lottery and an expanded definition ofrefugee to ensure that the 20,000 quota is fulfilled. Cuba wanted a comprehensive solution, including a lifting of the US tradeembargo, but the US succeeded in confining the talks to immigration. Byrefusing to discuss the trade embargo, the only concession that the US couldoffer in exchange for Cuban help to stop the exodus was at least 20,000 minimumimmigration slots annually. The Clinton Administration agreed to the negotiations because its August 19change of policy failed to stem the exodus. On August 19, the US announcedthat it would no longer admit automatically to the US Cubans who arrived; thosefound at sea would be detained outside the US, and would have to qualify foradmission individually. Cuba believed that the US committed itself to accept 20,000 Cubans annuallyin 1984, the maximum number of "quota immigrants" from any country (raised to27,845 by IMMACT in 1990). The US asserted that there was no firm commitmentto take a certain number of Cubans in any year; about 11,000 Cubans haveemigrated to the US since 1984, including 2,700 in the past 12 months endingJuly 31, 1994. All Cubans who wish to migrate to the US will be processed at US facilitiesin Cuba. For most Cubans, the only choices for entry are as the adult brothersand sisters of US citizens, or as refugees. The US will first clear thebacklog of 4,000 to 6,000 Cubans on the brothers and sisters list, and then useboth a lottery and a relaxed definition of refugee to satisfy its commitment totake 20,000 Cubans annually. Some Cubans may be paroled into the US to wait for their names to get tothe top of the immigration queue. About one-third of all legal immigrants"admitted" each year have to leave the US to present themselves at a USconsulate abroad and show that they are eligible to immigrate. It is believedthat two-thirds of the immigrants "admitted" from Mexico are in the US whenthey are called for interviews. The only way Cubans held in camps such as those at Guantanamo Bay and inPanama can apply for US immigration status is to return to Cuba and applythere. There is speculation about the fate of the 30,000 Cubans now being heldin these camps--will they voluntarily repatriate to Cuba, and apply for exitpermits there, or will they remain as a costly and perhaps troublesome reminderof past US immigration policies? Steven Greenhouse, "US and Cuba Talk at UN on Solving the Refugee Crisis,"New York Times, September 2, 1994, A1, A4; National Public Radio, September 9,1994. Steven Greenhouse, "Freewheeling Ways Pay Off for the White House," NewYork Times, September 11, 1994, A8; The Economist, September 10, 1994, 26-7;Steven Greenhouse, "US Planning to Hold a Lottery to Pick Some CubanImmigrants," New York Times, September 29, 1994. __________________________________________ NoHaitian Invasion On September 15, President Clinton announced that the US would lead aninvasion of Haiti if necessary to restore elected President Aristide to poweraccording to the terms of UN Security Council Resolution 940. Throughout thespeech, Clinton stressed the need to restore democracy in Haiti, and theself-interest of Americans in preventing costly refugee flows, as a reason toinvade. On September 18, with American planes in the air, Haitian leadersresigned, and the invasion was called off. According to Clinton, 21,000 Haitians were picked up at sea by US shipssince the beginning of the year. Some 14,000 Haitians are being held inGuantanamo, at a cost to the US of $200 million to date. Since the US Armyarrival in Haiti, 221 Haitians have returned to their country. Another 300,000 Haitians are reportedly in hiding, ready to flee theircountry if they can. This "threat of a mass exodus of refugees and itsconstant threat to stability in our regions and control of our borders" was amajor justification for American action. Speeches by President Bill Clinton, September 15 and 18 1994, re-printed inNew York Times, September 16, 1994, A16. _________________________________________ INSMismanagement The New York Times, in a series of articles September 11-16, criticized theImmigration and Naturalization Service as an agency that is mismanaged anddemoralized, unable to perform its functions of welcoming wanted immigrants andnon-immigrants, and deporting and keeping out those that are not wanted. The September 11 article describes "mismanagement" at the 19,000 employee,$1.6 billion INS--one third of the INS's budget is collected as fees frompersons requesting INS services. Telephones are often not answered, and mailis sometimes not opened, while INS inspectors, and sometime their families,take Caribbean cruises to check passenger travel documents on board in order tospeed up their return. The agency's budget has tripled and its work force has grown by 50 percentsince 1986. Doris Meissner, head of what she terms a "dysfunctional" agency,has an aggressive strategy to change the agency, but the problems of thedecentralized INS appear daunting. The INS, for example, does not aggressively collect from all airlines the$6 each passengers is charged upon arrival in the US, thereby losing about $23million per year. Bonds posted by immigrants who do not show up for theirhearings can be forfeited to the INS, but the INS often fails to collect thisforfeited bond money--some $38 million over the past six years. The September 12 story focused on corruption in the INS, detailing how afew INS employees in Arlington, Virginia--one of 32 INS district offices-- hadsold work authorization to 4,000 aliens, and immigrant status to 1,000. TheINS has for years offered low pay and inadequate support services to employeeswho have enormous discretion to provide or withhold documents for whichimmigrants are willing to pay huge sums. The September 13 story used an example of a Mexican national living inGilroy, California to show how hard it is to deport criminal aliens. There areabout 200,000 convicted criminal aliens in the US, and about 20,000 weredeported in 1993. Federal and state prisons hold about 90,000 foreign-borninmates, and most are deportable after they serve their sentences. In manycases, the INS sends letters to aliens ordering them to show up at an INSoffice for deportation, but 90,000 are fugitives, and the INS tracks downrelatively few of them. On September 14, Operation Hold-the-Line was profiled. This INS operationin El Paso, Texas successfully stopped the types of immigration that most localresidents disliked--teenagers committing crimes and peddlers. However, it wasnot clear that INS leadership in Washington supported the El Paso approach ofpreventing aliens from entering the US, rather than the usual practice ofcatching and returning them, especially when Mexico complained that the INS wassouring relations in the middle of the NAFTA debate. The September 15 concluding story focused on the "cold, rude, andinsensitive" INS by highlighting stories of the INS not answering its phones,making mistakes that force immigrants to sometimes wait years for visas andwork authorizations to which they are entitled, and for which they paid fees of$576 million in 1994. There seem to be three major reasons why the INS has such a poor reputationfor providing efficient and humane services. First, the INS has the sometimescompeting missions of keeping out illegal aliens and providing services tolegal aliens, and the law-and- order side of the agency has tended to dominateits culture. Second, aliens are generally powerless to complain if they getpoor service, so there is relatively less client pressure for improvedservices. Third, the INS budget has been inadequate, and there has been a traditionof considerable autonomy in various regions and districts, so that there was nostrong central pressure for e.g. a centralized computer system. It has beenalleged that some in Congress kept the INS underfunded in order to haveconstituents turn to their representatives in despair, and thereby win theconstituent's loyalty for helping them through the immigrationlabyrinth. In a harbinger of the troubles that may befall the national registryproposed by the Commission on Immigration Reform (MN, August), it was reportedthat in 1993, California sent for verification to the SAVE system theimmigration numbers of 3.6 million aliens who had applied for benefits. Eventhough 18 percent were not in the INS computers, nearly all were in the USlegally. A July 1994 poll by ABC News found that 74 percent of those polled agreedwith the statement that "the US government is allowing too many immigrants toenter this country." Joel Brinkley, "At Immigration, Disarray and Defeat," New York Times,September 11, 1994. Stephen Engelberg, "In Immigration Labyrinth, Corruptioncomes Easily, New York Times, September 12, 1994, A1. Deborah Sontag, "PorousDeportation System Gives Criminals Little to Fear," New York Times, September13, 1994, A1. Joel Brinkley, "A Success at the boarder Earned Only a Shrug,"New York Times, September 14, 1994, A1. National Journal, September 3, 1994,2050. __________________________________________ Immigrationand Farmworker Unions The United Farm Workers (UFW) union held its twelfth constitutionalconvention in Fresno, California on September 3-4, 1994. Perhaps more than anyother US union, the UFW's fortunes mirror illegal immigration. The UFW burstonto the national scene with a grape boycott in the late 1960s, after theBracero Program was terminated and before illegal immigration surged--212,000illegal aliens were apprehended in 1969. By 1970, the UFW had contracts withmost of the major producers of table grapes, and in 1975, California enacted afarm labor relations law that granted organizing and bargaining rights toCalifornia farmworkers. The UFW won 200 elections on California farms in the fall of 1975, and by1978 had over 100 contracts. The number of contracts slid to about 60 in 1982,and has remained at 25 to 30 since 1983. There were four types of arguments advanced for why the UFW failed tobecome one of the nation's largest unions by organizing most of California's900,000 farmworkers. First, it was argued that UFW leadership and strategychanges led the union to quit organizing and to isolate itself fromfarmworkers. Second, it was alleged that Republican governors have since 1982failed to properly enforce the farm labor relations law. Third, it has been noted that the structure of farm employment ischanging--farming companies only lease land, and rely on farm labor contractorswho can "control" their workers or custom harvesters who are employers in theirown right and have thereby insulated themselves from union activities. Fourth,there is more illegal immigration than ever before, especially after the SAWprogram permitted about one sixth of the adult men in rural Mexico to becomelegal US immigrants. Journalists tend to blame the UFW's troubles on UFW leaders, and they seenew hope now that Cesar Chavez's son-in-law has become UFW president. The UFWblames Republican governors for making anti-UFW appointments to the state'sAgricultural Labor Relations Board, and is campaigning vigorously forDemocratic candidate Kathleen Brown. If personalities or politics explain the rise and fall of the UFW, thenthere should be a UFW resurgence that may be accelerated after the November1994 elections. But economists have downplayed these reasons for the UFW'sdemise; which means a continuation of the pattern that fewer than 10 percentof the state's farmworkers will be covered by collective bargainingagreements--unless farm employment patterns change or illegal immigration isreduced sharply. The UFW's most significant victory during the summer of 1994 was withDole's Fresh Vegetable Oceanview Produce Company division. Employing as manyas 25,000 farmworkers during a typical year, it is California's largestagricultural employer. Dole employs 800 farmworkers to work in strawberry andvegetable fields during the spring and summer in Oxnard, north of Los Angeles.The UFW won the May 12, 1994 election, but Oceanview announced in August thatit would stop growing labor-intensive strawberries, eliminating 450 of thesejobs. Dole could easily do this because all of its 2,000 acres of farmland inthe area is leased rather than owned. The UFW has threatened a boycott of Doleproducts if the company in fact eliminates strawberry production. Farmworker wages have been falling since the early 1980s, when the UFW'sstatewide influence on farm wages became only local as growers with contractswent out of business or did not re-negotiate agreements. The rise of laborcontracting has also hurt farmworkers, since more of them live off the farm,and must pay for housing and transportation to work. Workers are receptive tounion organizers, but the changing structure of farm employment and continuingillegal immigration promise to keep the quest for a unionized farm workforce anelusive one. Philip Martin at the Twelfth UFW Constitutional Convention, Fresno,California, September 3, 1994. "United Farm Workers Organizers List Gains,"Los Angeles Times, September 5, 1994. __________________________________________ Immigration and Welfare in Canada Ontario has 40 percent of Canada's 29 million people, but 50 percent ofCanada's welfare recipients and costs. Most of the welfare recipients areCanadians, but there several immigration smuggling-welfare rings have recentlybeen uncovered, including one that charged $18,000 to $20,000 for each aliensmuggled to Canada, and then collected half of the welfare payments received.Half of the 28,000 refugees in Ontario are on welfare, including Somali warlordAdid's second wife. It has been alleged that some sponsors of family unification immigrantstake two or three jobs to prove that they can cover the costs of the immigrantsthey seek to bring into Canada, but then lose their jobs or renege on theirsponsorship agreements. There are reportedly 16,000 cases in which Canadiansponsors of immigrants have reneged on their sponsorship agreements. A Gallup Poll conducted in Canada in August found that 35 percent ofCanadians feel that refugees use more than their share of health and socialservices, and that only 46 percent feel that refugees are interested in givingsomething back to Canada. Forty-seven percent feel that accepting SoutheastAsians more than a decade ago has cost taxpayers too much money. However, a study of Southeast Asians admitted between 1979 and 1981 by theClarke Institute of Psychiatry and the University of Toronto found that onlyeight percent of the refugees from Vietnam, China, Laos and Cambodia wereunemployed in 1991, when unemployment in Canada was 10.3 percent. One in fiveformer refugees has started a business, often employing Canadians. W. Bilal Syeed, "Welcome to Ontario, Welfare Heaven," Wall Street Journal,September 9, 1994, A15. Moira Farrow, "Vietnamese Found to be 'Hard Working,'"Vancouver Sun, September 27, 1994. Moira Farrow, "Paper denied access to Somalifraud reports," Vancouver Sun, September 6, 1994. __________________________________________ Immigrantsand the US Labor Market Economists disagree about the effects of immigrants on jobs and wages, andpartisans tend to exaggerate their effects. Economic theory and history areclear: immigrants should reduce wages or increase joblessness among similarAmerican workers, and increase the wages and profits of skilled and wealthyAmericans. The disputed issue is how much. Studies of the effects of a large number of immigrants entering a locallabor market, such as the 125,000 Cubans into Miami's labor market in the early1980s, typically find little wage depression and labor displacement. This ledmany to conclude that there were no such effects. But now the evidence seemsto suggest that the wage depression and labor displacement predicted byeconomic theory were real, and the problem was one of measuring these effects.For example, it has been suggested that the mobile and unskilled American laborforce moves out of areas in which there are large numbers of immigrants, ordoes not move to such areas. Some argue that the increased number of immigrants in low-wage jobs in the1980s contributed to the economic recovery after the 1990-91 recession. Thedemand for low-wage workers has grown, in this view, as the economy has shiftedfrom manufacturing to services. Robert Reich, Secretary Labor, says that he is as not concerned aboutimmigrants displacing Americans from jobs as he is about the tendency ofimmigrants to lower the quality of US jobs, as employers look to them as theultimate flexible workers. Employers prefer these flexible work situations,and "at times[such jobs] result in the avoidance of social security taxes,workers' compensation, unemployment insurance and benefits such as healthinsurance and pensions." For the immigrants, these casual jobs are still astep up from their native countries. At a September 20 hearing of the US Civil Rights Commission on racial andethnic tensions in American communities, a Chinese-American labor union leadertestified that the employer sanctions provision of IRCA is known in New YorkCity's Chinatown as the "slave law," because it pushed low-wage workers intoillegal sweatshops. The labor union representative said that employersanctions left only the most exploitative employers, who bring in thousands ofChinese aboard "slave ships" such as the Golden Venture, which ran agroundoutside of New York City last year. The New York INS office reported that,since IRCA was enacted, there had been 605 completed cases that proposed finesof $12 million against employers and collected $4 million. On September 9, Reich announced that the Labor Department will be steppingup its investigations of illegal sweatshops. Reich said there is evidence thatthe problem of sweatshops in the United States is growing more serious. A DOLsurvey of garment manufacturers in California found the more than half of thefirms were paying below the minimum wage of $4.25 per hour and 68 percent wereviolating federal overtime requirements. DOL has the authority, not used sincethe 1940s, to prohibit the shipment of clothing that was produced in violationof minimum wage and overtime laws. In five cases during the past year, DOL hasprohibited the shipment of clothing until workers were paid backwages. How does immigration affect America's "competitiveness." DOL SecretaryReich defined competitiveness as rising living standards for MOST Americans,linking economic growth with economic equality. In 1978, a white male collegegraduate earned 49 percent more than a white man with only a high schooldiploma, yet both were considered middle class. Today, this gap has widened,so that the college graduate earned 82 percent more in 1992, and the relativelylower incomes of high school graduates puts them at risk of falling out of themiddle class. Indeed, Business Week asserted in a recent cover story that "youcan all but forget about joining the middle class unless you go to college"(p.78). Current immigration patterns accentuate growing earnings inequality, sinceimmigrants tend to be bunched at the extremes of the education distribution,and years of education is the best single predictor of earnings. Iflarge-scale immigration continues, and most newcomers continue to be eithercollege graduates OR high school dropouts, immigration is likely to figure inwhat many are predicting will be the major economic debate of the 1990s: whatto do about economic inequality. The traditional view is that a rising tide lifts all boats, or that generaleconomic growth helps both rich and poor. This did not happen in the 1980s.The richest 25 percent of American families--those with incomes of $64,000 ormore in 1992--get 51 percent of national income, while the poorest 25percent--with incomes of less than $22,000--got six percent. Over three infour children from top-25 percent families get college degrees, versus 1 in 25of bottom-25 percent families. Some economic studies suggest that too much education and earningsinequality can slow economic growth because co-workers do not have the skillsneeded to make the educated with high earnings as productive as they otherwisewould be. In the US, the average hourly earnings of the highest paid 10percent of men in 1992 was almost six times that of the lowest 10percent--e.g., $30 hourly versus $5, twice the average 3 to 1 ratio in WesternEurope and Japan. Immigration is only one of several factors responsible for increasedearnings inequality. A new Economic Policy Institute study attributes thedecline in real wages-- 2.6 percent from 1989 to 1993-- to the expansion oflow-wage service jobs and the increasing globalization of the US economy,reflected in both rising trade and more immigration. Other studies point totechnologies that require more skills, the decline of unions, and tax cuts onthe wealthy. According to EPI calculations, entry level wages declined 8percent for high-school educated men, and 6 percent for college educated men,calling into question the notion that more education always leads to higherearnings. Peter Passell, "A Job-Wage Conundrum" New York Times, September 6, 1994,C1. "IRCA Sanctions Help Create Sweatshops, Union Advocates Tell Rightscommission," Daily Labor Report, September 21, 1994. Robert Suro, "ImmigrantsCrowd Labor's Lowest Rung, Washington Post, September 13, 1994. "Jobs Grow,But Wages Stagnate Even with College Educated, Study Finds," Daily LaborReport, September 6, 1994. "United States Jobs and Wages Lagging BehindRecovery," Interpress Service, September 3, 1994. "Trade Regulation, Riechsays US will Block shipment of Garments produced by Sweatshops," Daily Reportfor Executives, September 12, 1994. __________________________________________ Studies Continue to Dispute Immigration's Benefits and Costs In response to pleas and suits by governors seeking federal reimbursementfor the costs of illegal immigration, the Urban Institute in Washington, DCrecently completed a White House-commissioned study of the taxes paid and thecost of benefits provided to illegal immigrants in seven states--Arizona,California, Florida, Illinois, New Jersey, New York, and Texas. The Urban Institute concluded that illegal immigrants cost the states morein services than they pay to the states in taxes, but that all immigrantscollectively pay $25 to $30 billion more in taxes to all levels of governmentthan they cost in services to all levels of government. Using INS estimates developed by Robert Warren, the Urban Instituteestimated that in October, 1994 there will be about four million illegal aliensin the US, with 85 percent in seven states (MN, May 1994). The number ofillegal immigrants is believed to be increasing by 300,000 annually. In the case of California, Urban Institute calculations for 1992 suggestthat California spent $1.8 billion on prisons, education, and health care forillegal aliens, while California's Department of Finance estimated that $2.4billion was spent on illegal aliens in 1993-94. The Urban Institute estimatedthat illegal aliens paid $732 million in taxes in 1992, while Californiaestimated that they paid $528 to $1.4 billion in taxes. A similar study released on September 22 by the Center for ImmigrationStudies, also in Washington DC, found that in 1992, immigrants produced anational deficit of $29 billion. David Simcox and George High argue that theUrban Institute used a very conservative figure for the number of undocumentedresidents and inflated their tax revenues. The CIS study estimated that thereare 22 million foreign-born residents in 1992, or seven million more than theUrban Institute. This means that costs associated with illegal immigrantswould be substantially higher, which also means that the amount the immigrantscontribute in tax revenues is about $7 billion to high. Deborah Sontag, "Illegal Aliens put uneven load on states, Study finds,"New York Times, September 15, 1994, A8; Herbert Sample, "Clinton, Wilson atodds over immigration's costs," Sacramento Bee, September 15, 1994, A6."Studies conflict over immigration's costs," Sacramento Bee, September 23,1994, B5. __________________________________________ SOS in California Proposition 187, Save Our State, on the November 8 California ballot wouldamend California's constitution to deny benefits such as publiceducation--there are believed to be 300,000 illegal immigrant children inCalifornia schools-- and social services to illegal aliens, require state andlocal government employees to report suspected illegal aliens to the AttorneyGeneral and the INS, and make it a state felony to produce or distribute falsedocuments. Those campaigning for and against SOS are emphasizing its symbolicmessage to the rest of the US--its passage would, they believe, send a signalthat the federal government should get serious and do something to reduceillegal immigration. Proponents of SOS argue that the alternative to SOS is doing nothing,meaning that illegal immigration would continue. Governor Wilson made thisargument on September 15, when he endorsed SOS, and promised to campaign forits passage. According to Wilson, the major benefit of SOS would be togenerate lawsuits that would force the US Supreme Court to re-examine its 1982decision that states must educate illegal alien children in publicschools. Opponents make two arguments. Some acknowledge that though illegalimmigration is a problem, the SOS approach of denying social services tochildren and other illegal residents is not the best way to deal with it.Others argue that illegal immigration has not been proven to be a problem, andthat SOS is a xenophobic reaction to the changing state's demography--shortlyafter the year 2000, a majority of California residents will be non-white,largely because of immigration. Democratic gubernatorial candidate Kathleen Brown on September 13acknowledged that illegal immigration is a fair and legitimate issue facingCalifornia, but she opposes SOS. Mexican Deputy Foreign Minister Rozenthal onSeptember 14 in Los Angeles assured SOS opponents that the Mexican governmentwould "work closely" with them to defeat the initiative. Two recent polls of California voters show that SOS is supported by abouttwo-thirds of the voters. The Field Poll released September 26, 1994 foundthat 57 percent of voters supported the measure and 31 percent did not. A LosAngeles Times poll released on September 14 found that SOS was leading amongregistered voters 62 to 29 percent, and 52 to 42 percent among Hispanicsregistered to vote. One third of those surveyed said that they supported SOSbecause "we've got to do something about illegal immigration." Los Angeles Times Poll director John Brennan warned that many voters remainuninformed about the details of the initiative and that neither side has begunwhat are expected to be intensive campaigns. Brad Hayward, "Foes Sharpen Strategies on Immigration Measure," SacramentoBee, September 3, 1994 A1; Ken Chavez, " Governor endorses Save our State Bid,"September 16, 1994 A1. "Overwhelming Lead for Immigration Prop," AmericanPolitical Network, September 15, 1994. "'Save Our State' nearly 2-1 favorite,"Sacramento Bee, September 27, 1994, p A1. __________________________________________ English-onlyRule Upheld by Supreme Court The US Supreme Court let stand a lower court ruling that English-onlyworkplace rules do not discriminate against Spanish-speaking employees.Employees Garcia and Buitrago sued Spun Steak in San Francisco after the meatand poultry company imposed an English-only rule on its 30 employees in 1990.The district court found that English-only rules violate federal anti-biasrules, but the Court of Appeals reversed the district court, holding that, inthis case, most of the 30 employees were bilingual, so Spun Steak did notviolate their rights when it required them to speak English at work. Such rules may be illegal if the workforce does not speak English. Oneresult of the Garcia v. Spun Steak ruling is that employees have been callingfor employer-subsidized English classes. Some legal scholars argue the English-only workplace rules violate the 1964Civil Rights Act, which prohibits discrimination based on national origin.However, federal appeals court decisions have made proving employmentdiscrimination based on national origin extremely difficult. Many cities and states have considered or adopted English-only rules. InAllentown, Pennsylvania, the City Council passed an ordinance on September 7declaring English as the city's official language. The ordinance made Englishthe official language of all city business, except when federal or state lawrequires otherwise. Allentown's Latinos feel that the action is a "slap totheir community;" Latinos are about 12 percent of the city's 100,000 residents. English was made the official language of Dade County, Florida governmentin the early 1980s. The statute was overturned in 1993, but poll after pollindicates that white voters in FL do not want more immigrants. FloridaGovernor Lawton Chiles is up for re-election, and observers say that hisdeclaration of an immigration emergency and his suits to have the costs ofimmigration reimbursed have helped him. Two bills that are now in the US House of Representatives Labor andEducation Committee would make English the official language of the US andmandate that government business be conducted in English. One of the billswould require the Immigration and Naturalization Service to create standardsof English proficiency that all prospective citizens would have to pass, andeliminate bilingual education and bilingual ballots. Proponents of the billsdeny that they are anti-immigrant or targeted at Hispanics; they argue that thebills encourage immigrants to learn English and promote their integration William Booth, "This Country Can't Take Them All," The Washington Post,August 30, 1994,,p. A01. John D. McKinnon, Federal Judges Give Boosts ToEnglish Only Laws," Miami Herald, June 8, 1994. Robert Moran, "Latinos Saythe Bill is the Town's Way of Making Them Feel Unwelcome," PhiladelphiaInquirer, September 9, 1994. Yolanda Rodriguez, "Language Bill Irks Hispanics:Reps. King and Levy back English Only," Newsday, Wednesday September 7, 1994,p.: A21. "Allentown Council to Vote on English-Only Proposal," The LegalIntelligencer, September 8, 1994. A. Nomani Sr., "Labor Letter, Wall StreetJournal, September 27, 1994. Garcia v. Spun Steak, AFL-CIO News, August 22,1994, 13. __________________________________________ DOL Immigration Policymaking Jack Otero, deputy under secretary who heads the Bureau of InternationalLabor Affairs (ILAB) at the Department of Labor, announced in September 1994 thatDOL was considering a centralization of immigration policymaking in thedepartment. The proposed plan calls for the creation of an agency ofinternational affairs and immigration which would incorporate the functions ofILAB, Employment Standards Administration, and the Employment and TrainingAdministration. DOL is considering proposed changes in the H-1B visa program, which governsthe temporary employment of foreign skilled workers, reducing from six to threeyears the validity of these visas. The H-1B program permits up to 65,000skilled foreign workers to enter the US annually after US employers certifythat their employment will not displace American workers. "Otero Outlines Labor Department's Policy Goals in Immigration Arena,"Daily Labor Report, September 12, 1994. __________________________________________ Unions and Immigration Policy The AFL-CIO Executive Council has called for a re-examination of theemployer sanctions provisions of IRCA and the defeat of the SOS initiative inCalifornia. The AFL-CIO said in a statement that the impacts of illegalimmigration on states and cities have "been grossly exaggerated," and thatimmigrants are being used as a scapegoat for "the general deterioration ofemployment opportunities and wages." According to the Executive Council, sanctions have led in some instances todiscrimination against US citizens and legal immigrants, as employers shunhiring them in order to avoid penalties for hiring illegal workers. Otheremployers prefer to hire unauthorized workers to take advantage of theirillegal status. The AFL-CIO recommended that the Justice Department step up its enforcementof IRCA's anti-discrimination provisions, and that DOL stop checking on theimmigrant status (under current policy, DOL inspectors refer suspectedunauthorized workers to INS as they check for minimum wage and overtimeviolations). The AFL-CIO also recommended that border controls be improved,and that a fraud-proof, non-discriminatory, non-card system [be developed]toenable employers to verify very quickly every new hire's eligibility." In related developments, both the Labor Council for Latin AmericanAdvancement and the Asian Pacific American Labor Alliance pledged to work todefeat SOS on the California ballot. Both labor groups called SOS divisive,meanspirited, and racist." James Parks, "Labor seeks alternative fair immigration policy," AFL-CIONews, August 22, 1994, p. 7. "March Planned Against Immigration Initiative,"Los Angeles Times, September 14, 1994. __________________________________________ Foreign Students in the US In 1992-93, there were 439,000 foreign students in the US, and 71,000Americans studying overseas (1991-92). Over half of the foreign students werefrom Asian countries, led by China, 45,130; Japan, 42,840; Taiwan, 37,340;India, 35,950; and South Korea, 28,520. Almost three-fourths of the Americanstudents were in Europe, led by Britain with 13,890; France, 6,824; Spain,5,958 ; Italy, 4,471, and; Germany, 2,892. Despite the National Security Education program of 1991, which sought toencourage Americans to study Asian languages and in Asia rather than Europe,more than 250,000 college students were learning French in 1991-92, versus46,000 learning Japanese and 19,000 studying Chinese. The number of USstudents in Japan fell sharply in 1992-93 in response to the rising yen, whilethe number of Japanese students jumped as American education gotcheaper. Karl Schoenberger, "We Stay Home as World Enrolls Here," Sacramento Bee,September 11, 1994, F1. __________________________________________ EUROPE __________________________________________ BerlinDeclaration Includes Statement on Illegal Immigration On September 8, the Ministers for Justice and the Interior from the EUissued the Berlin Declaration, which asserts their determination to developguidelines on organized trans-border crime. In addition to drugs and nuclearmatter, the EU and CEEC will tackle extending the power of liaison officers toprevent smuggling people across the border, coordinating statistical data onsmuggling, and drawing up a manual on legislation and administrative practiceapplicable to smuggling in the different European states. Guidelines will also be developed on: improvement of cooperation in visapolicy as well as increased scrutiny upon issuing visas; effective bordercontrols and border surveillance in all countries from or through which peopleare smuggled; effective action against sea and air carriers transporting alienswithout the requisite documents; introduction, if necessary, of penalsanctions against smugglers of illegal aliens; regulations governing theforfeiture of illegal profits from such crimes; and rapid return to their homecountries or countries of origin of illegal aliens. "EU Guidelines of Cooperation Decided by Ministers on Drugs, Trade inNuclear Matter, and Illegal Immigration," Agence Europe, September 10, 1994. __________________________________________________________ Foreignersin France According to INSEE, there are 4.2 million immigrants living in France.About 45 percent are North African or African, 40 percent are European, and 12percent are Asian. Almost 40 percent live in the Paris region. After several terrorists attacks in France by Muslim fundamentalists, thepolice began stopping dark-skinned people to question them, demanded identitypapers, and in some cases, searched them. This has resulted in cries ofdiscrimination from France's 3 to 5 million Muslims, 500,000 of whom are Frenchcitizens. Observes say that the crackdown reflects a deep French antipathytoward Muslims who refuse to assimilate. In September, the French Education Minister banned the wearing of Muslimscarves, chadors, in public schools because it violated the tradition ofsecular education. If educational boards fail to enforce the ban under freedomof speech, as some have done in the past, the government threatened to take theedict to Parliament for passage as law. About 700 Muslim girls wear thescarves to school. Nine Muslim associations joined to denounce the "growingclimate of intolerance against Muslims." News from France, September 9 and 23, 1994. Scott Kraft, "Crackdown byColor in France," Los Angeles Times, September 28, 1994. Irwin Arieff,"Headscarf ban sparks debate over Muslims in France," Reuters, September 27,1994. __________________________________________ RussianImmigration Controls The government of Russia passed two resolutions on September 8 aimed atdeveloping measures to control immigration into the Russian Federation andspelling out the powers and duties of the Federal Migration Service. The resolution said that immigration control is under the purview of theFederal Migration Service: it is responsible for regulating migration,preventing illegal migration, and considering petitions for asylum. TheRussian Federal Migration Service and other government agencies affected bymigration have been given several months to develop proposals on: bilateraland multilateral agreements between Russia, the CIS States, Latvia, Lithuaniaand Estonia to prevent uncontrolled migration by foreign citizens; quotas forthose seeking asylum in Russia; and the establishment of Russian FederalMigration Service offices in the "near and far abroad." The staff of the Foreign Ministry and the Federal Migration Service willbe increased and 12 centers for the temporary housing of immigrations will becreated. All foreign citizens requesting asylum in Russia will be housed intemporary housing centers until a decision on their case has been made. Thedeputy director of the Federal Migration Service announced at an earlySeptember press conference that the FMS will soon be setting up immigrationcontrol posts at border checkpoints. The Federal Migration Service estimates that there are 500,000 illegalimmigrants in Russia, primarily from CIS countries as well as Iraq, Iran,Somalia, Ethiopia, Afghanistan and Sri Lanka. Many of them receive no helpfrom the Russian government. Most fear that any protest on their part willlead to expulsion. Recognizing the problem, the Russian Federal MigrationService wants to impose stricter visa requirements for those from the formerSoviet republics and develop a streamlined procedure for granting refugeestatus. Scams are springing up in Russia as immigration consultants promise to helpthose eager to go West. One consultant charged $8,000 per person for a familyto emigrate, and forced them to sign over their apartment to the smuggler aspayment. The Canadian embassy in Moscow advises those interested in emigratingto never pay more $1,000 for services. But Russians traditionally do not trustthe bureaucracy and can be easy targets for unscrupulous immigrationconsultants. According to the Federal Migration Service , about 104,000 Russiansemigrated in 1990, but only 60,000 to 80,000 per year leave today. Mostemigrants are well-educated, and include Jews, Armenians, ethnic Greeks andGermans, who have immigration rights to Israel, Greece, and Germany. TASS, September 1, 1994. BBC, September 23, 1994. Besik Urigashvili,"Unwanted Ones," Russian Press Digest, September 22, 1994. Olivia Stone,"Here's the Latest Moscow Sting: exploiting those who want to leave," TorontoStar, September 19, 1994. Kremlin News Broadcast, September 14, 1994. __________________________________________ Immigrationand Germany's Elections On October 16, German voters will choose a new Parliament. The ChristianDemocratic Union and its sister Bavarian party, the Christian Social Union,have an election platform that acknowledges the enriching role that foreignersprovide, but states that "Germany is not an immigration country" and will notgrant automatic citizenship to children of foreign parents born on itsterritory, or dual citizenship to foreigners. SDP candidate Ruldof Scharping had carried a gloom and doom message toWashington DC in April, warning that unemployment and the large number offoreigners in the country could lead to a xenophobic backlash in an economicdownturn. But Gross Domestic Product in Germany grew an unexpected 2.3percent; boosting Kohl 18 percentage points to lead Scharping in the polls by 8percent this summer. The SPD asserts that Germany is in fact an immigration country and supportsan immigration law to manage migration. The SPD platform asserts thatforeigners should have the right to vote in local elections. The SPD alsosupports allowing the children of foreigners born in Germany to automaticallyreceive German citizenship. In addition, the SDP would ease naturalizationprocedures and permit dual citizenship. The FDP favors controlled immigration based on an immigration law thatwould establish annual quotas. Like the SPD, the FDP wants to promote theintegration of immigrants, reform the law granting German nationality, andintroduce dual citizenship. The Green Party views Germany as an immigration country and supports a"multicultural society." In order to become integrated, immigrants need legaland political equality; this would include easier naturalization procedures andthe option for dual citizenship. There are also several small right wing parties on the ballot, thestrongest of which is the Republicans. The Republicans do not want anyimmigration, believing that the "German identity" is threatened by immigrantsand foreigners. "FDP on the ropes," Financial Times, September 13, 1994. Andrew Borowiec,"Economic turnaround boost Kohl," Washington Times, September 5, 1994. DasParliament, July 1, 1994. efms, Bamberg __________________________________________ CzechRepublic Releases Report on Permanent Residents A new report released by the Czech government on September 12 says thatthere were 77,688 foreigners with long-term or permanent residence in therepublic last year. About 18,000 more received permanent or long-term residencythe first part of 1994. There were only 5,000 requests for refugee statussince 1990. In the first six months of 1994, 620 refugee requests were made, primarilyfrom citizens of Bulgaria and countries of the former Soviet Union. Only 63were granted refugee status. The Interior Ministry has 14 humanitarian centerswhich accommodated 1,417 people at the end of June, 1994. Half of those withtemporary asylum in the Republic are children under 16 or people over 55. Atotal of 14,350 illegal immigrants were discovered or arrested in the firsthalf of the year. Nearly 90 percent of the illegal immigrants come from theformer Yugoslavia, Bulgaria and Romania. Entrance into the Czech Republic atthe 109 border crossings was denied to 35,738 foreigners. The Czech Interior Minister says that it is vital that a Czech-Germanreadmission agreement be drawn up or the republic "could turn into a rubbishpool for the countries participating in the Schengen Agreement." The agreementis expected to be signed after the October 16th German parliamentary elections.The Czech Republic expects about 60 million marks ($93 million US) over threeyears beginning in 1995, to help mitigate the effects of immigration, improvethe border police's technical equipment, and set up a central data system forthe foreigners' police and asylum department. The Interior Minister says that the accord draws attention to the need fora Pan-European system of returning illegal immigrants to their country oforigin. He adds that historically, Germany has acted as Europe's bufferbecause of its location, but with the signing of the Schengen Agreement, thebuffer moves to the East, toward the Czech Republic and Poland. The Czech government does not expect the number illegal immigrants returnedfrom Germany to be significant. In the first half of 1994, 1,500 werereturned. The first half of 1993 saw 19,000 returned, and 11,000 were returnedin the second half of the year. The agreement between Germany and the Czech Republic will change thereadmission time from the former seven days to six months. That means thatillegal immigrants found further in the interior of Germany can be returned.The Czech Republic would like to sign an agreement with Hungary and Slovakia sothat it can return immigrants to those countries. Germany signed such anagreement in September with Bulgaria. "Report on Immigration for the First Half of 1993," CTK National News Wire,September 12, 1994. "Pan-European Readmission system in Czech Vital Interest,"CTK National News Wire, September 12, 1994. CTK National News Wire, September8, 1994. "Germany Signs Repatriation Agreement with Bulgaria," Reuters,September 9, 1994. __________________________________________ EUCourt on Work Permits The European Court overturned a French government decision, ruling thatMoroccan workers employed by a Belgian firm did not need separate French workpermits to be sent to France by their Belgian employer for a demolition job.According to the ruling, non-European Union workers legally employed within amember states are entitled to work in any EU country where their company iscarrying out contract work. The court cited Article 48 of the Treaty of Romewhich says that there shall be free movement of workers and their families inthe EC. The President of the European Court of Justice said that future pactsbetween European states to control immigration in the EU should be accompaniedby laws giving immigrants and refugees rights to take their cases to theEuropean Court of Justice. Germany has tried to restrict the number of casesthat come before the Court, especially those concerning workers who liveoutside the EU. "European Ruling Opens Way for Foreign Workers," Construction News,September 8, 1994. Immigrants Should be Protected by EU court, Says President,Reuters, September 15, 1994. Daily Mail, August 29, 1994. BBC World Broadcast,September 16, 1994. __________________________________________ CyprusClaims Mass Importation of Turkish Workers The Cypriot government has stated it is illegal to change the demography ofTurkish-occupied Cyprus through "illegal immigration," which it alleges isoccurring with the arrival of immigrants from Turkey. BBC, September 16, 1994. __________________________________________ ASIA __________________________________________ IllegalForeigners Decline in Japan A crackdown on foreigners living illegally in Japan has resulted in adecline in the number of foreigners overstaying their visas. As of May 1,1994., about 1.6 percent, or 4,800, overstayed their visa. The number offoreigners deported for violating immigration laws during the first half of theyear increased by about 100, to 35,408, compared with the same period lastyear. Thais were the largest number, about 50,000, followed by South Koreans at43,400 and Chinese at 39,700. Nearly 80 percent of the illegal foreignersentered Japan on short-term visas. Since 1990, 60 Tokyo police officers eachyear have been studying Persian and Tagalog in order to deal with criminalactivities involving foreigners in Japan. "Illegal foreigners in Japan on the decline," Japan Economic Newswire,September 3, 1994. "Asian languages ousting European languages in business,"Japan Economic Newswire, September 6, 1994 __________________________________________ MalaysiaRecruits 17,000 Indonesian Workers The Development Minister of Malaysia has requested that Indonesia provide17,000 agricultural workers for the oil palm plantations. The DevelopmentMinister said that the Malaysian government would only accept workers withlegal documents and would stop illegal workers from entering the country. The senior director of United Plantations, Datuk Seri B. Bek-Nielsen, saidthat in the future, oil palm production will shift from Malaysia to Indonesia,South and Central America, the Philippines, Papua New Guinea and West Africa,primarily because of labor shortages in Malaysia. The children of plantationworkers no longer remain on the estates; today, they seek manufacturing jobs. The oil palm plantations currently employ several hundred thousand foreignworkers, primarily from Indonesia and Bangladesh. These workers, says thesenior director for United Plantations, are not as disciplined or committed tothe plantation as the Indian workers who remained with an estate forgenerations. Extraction rates in Malaysia are about two percent lower due toworker inefficiency, particularly a lack of harvesting discipline and failureto collect loose fruits. World oil palm production is expected to increase from 14 million tons in1994 to 20 million tons in 2000 and 36 million tons in 2020. Malaysia's palmoil production was 7.4 million tons in 1993, compared with 51,000 tons in 1950. "Malaysia needs 17,000 Indonesian workers," Xinhua News Agency, September8, 1994. Ahirudin Attan, "Future Expansion of Palm oil Lies Elsewhere,"Business Times, September 6, 1994. __________________________________________ SouthKorea Assists Illegal Foreign Workers Illegal foreign workers deported from South Korea without being paid backwages or worker's compensation will be offered government assistance. TheSouth Korean government requested that the governments of the Philippines,Nepal, Bangladesh and other Asian nations compile complaints from theirnationals who were exploited by South Korean employers. After the complaintshave been verified, the Seoul government will compensate the worker. South Korea hopes that these steps will curtail criticism from developingcountries about worker exploitation. There are over 50,000 illegal foreignworkers in South Korea, most of them from other Asian nations. They areprimarily in the 3-D jobs (difficult, dirty and dangerous). "South Korea to provide assistance to illegal foreign workers," Xinhua NewsAgency, September 13, 1994. __________________________________________ TaiwanDeports Filipinos Taiwan announced that 5,000 illegal Filipino workers will be returned atthe end 1994 with the aid of the Philippine government, and that 1,000 youngFilipinos will be allowed to work in Taiwan under a special work and learnprogram. The illegal Filipinos will be encouraged to report themselves to theFilipino Economic and Cultural Office in Taiwan, which will in turn notifyTaiwan's Council of Labor Affairs. Most of the Filipinos went to Taiwan with legal work permits, butdiscovered that they could earn more by illegal switching jobs. About 170,000foreigners have received permission to work in Taiwan. "CLA Expects To Repatriate 5,000 Illegal Filipino Workers, China EconomicNews Service, September 6, 1994. __________________________________________ Migrationin China China has announced that beginning November 1, 1994 Beijing employers willhave to pay the equivalent of $11,600 for residence permits for migrant workersfrom the countryside. In the 1980s, China relaxed controls on internalmigration, spurring a wave of migration that has made about 10 percent ofBeijing's 10.5 million population migrants. Under current policy, migrantscould get permits after they found a job in the city. In an effort to stem unemployment, the Chinese government announced plansto keep unemployment down to three percent by retraining those laid off fromstate firms and by setting up public employment agencies. China predicts that60 million will be unemployed by 1999. Employees in state-run and privateenterprise will contribute to unemployment insurance. Individuals can buy residence permits at a cost of $5,800 for Beijing and$3,500 on its outskirts. Average factory wages are $29 monthly. Associated Press, September 13, 1994. "China moves to stem massunemployment," UPI, September 20, 1994. __________________________________________ OTHER __________________________________________ Cairo Population Conference and Immigration The United States blocked the principal of the "right to familyreunification" at the UN population conference in Cairo, Egypt in September.The United States feared a flood of refugees, especially in light of thecurrent situation with Haiti and Cuba. The paragraph the United States objectsto states: "Governments of receiving countries must insure the protection ofmigrants and their families, and recognize the right to family reunification."Britain and Germany also objected to strongly to the suggestion that familiesof immigrants have the right to be re-united in one country, fearing thatlanguage urging governments to 'recognize the right of family reunification'might be used to challenge immigration laws. More than 30 developing countries demanded that workers be granted the"right" to have their families join them. A compromise, backed by the UnitedStates, Canada, Austria and Australia, finally settled on wording acknowledgingthe "vital importance" of family reunification. Alan Cowell, "Cairo Parley Hits a New Snag on Migrants," New York Times,September 11, 1994 A10. Brown Maddox and Mark Nicholson, "Immigration disputeemerges at population conference," Financial Times, September 9, 1994. LachlanCarmichael, "Population plan adopted over Vatican opposition," Agence FrancePress September 13, 1994. Lachlan Carmichael, "Cairo negotiators finalize planto curb world birthrates," Agence France Press, September 12, 1994. __________________________________________ Tariffsand Foreign Workers Effect Australian Wages A report on the effect of lower tariffs by the Australian Reserve Bankfound that Australian and American workers who remain in import-competingindustries have been forced to accept lower wages in order to be competitivewith foreign workers. Economists Jerome Fahrer and Andrew Pease found that only one industrysatisfied the expectations of theory, that low tariffs, and thus low prices,would lead to the decline of import-competing industries and lower real wagesfor unskilled workers. Clothing and footwear manufacturers, as expected, cutemployment by one-third. Others industries reduced their employment, but not in response to a fallin the price of imports--manufacturing employment fell fastest in industries inwhich foreign competition is not important. Increased productivity has beenthe main cause of job losses in Australian manufacturing in the past decade.Instead of falling wages, Australian manufacturers responded to lower tariffsby raising productivity. Another study by the Center for Population and Urban Research atMelbourne's Monash University, found that Australia's immigration policies arecreating ethnic underclasses of people from non-English speaking backgroundswho cannot find jobs. Ninety-seven percent of a group of Turks were unemployedfor several years after their arrival. Overall, immigrants from non-English speaking countries, who are 14 percentof the potential workforce, accounted for 27 percent of all long-termunemployment in Australia in May. Immigrants from English-speaking countries,who are 11 percent of the labor force, were only eight percent of the long-termunemployed. "Australia: Reform Best Answer for Imports," Australian Financial Review,September 12, 1994. " Australian immigration said creating underclass,"Reuters, September 12, 1994. __________________________________________ VenezuelaSeeks Money for East European Immigrants Venezuela is asking the European Union for funds to help immigrants fromEast European nations settle in Venezuela. The head of the SelectiveImmigration Agency said that Venezuela could absorb 5,000 to 10,000 immigrantsper year from East European states. A 1992 immigration policy speeded up theprocessing of work permits for immigrants from East European nations, but didnot offer financial assistance to move to Venezuela and start a new business. The Venezuelan government is asking the EU to fund projects to help skilledimmigrants to strengthen the agricultural, construction, medical and othersectors. Debra Percival, "Caracas Seeks Funds for East European Migrants,"InterPress Service, September 13, 1994. "Venezuela Seeks Skilled EuropeanWorkers, Reuters, September 13, 1994. __________________________________________ RESOURCES __________________________________________ Martin, Philip and Elizabeth Midgley. 1994. Immigration to the UnitedStates: Journey to an Uncertain Destination, Population Bulletin Vol 49, No 2,September. Available for $8 from the Population Reference Bureau, 1875 ConnAve NW, #520, Washington DC, 20009, tel 800-877-9881. Population Bulletin Vol49, No 2, September This monograph notes that the immigration of one million persons annuallyis making immigration a major issue at the end of the 20th century, as it wasat the beginning. Incoming foreigners differ from native-born Americans inseveral ways, notably in that they are much more likely not to have finishedhigh school, or, alternatively, to have had a graduate school education thanare Americans. They are also ethnically different from the nativepopulation--over 80 percent of all immigrants today are from Latin America andAsia. There are four major categories of newcomers to the US--legal immigrants,legal nonimmigrants, refugees and asylees, and unauthorized migrants. Fourwaves of immigration over the course of US history are described, highlightingthe similarities and differences between the current fourth and earlier waves. The monograph explains how recently created legal categories--entrants,family fairness, and temporary protected status, for example--contribute to oneof the paradoxes of immigration--most "immigrants" are already in the US whenthe US government recognizes them as immigrants. Fourth-wave immigrants areconcentrated in a few states and cities--Los Angeles has replaced New York asthe chief port of entry through which most of today's immigrants begin theirlife in America. Most immigrants come to the US because it offers better economicopportunities than at home. The individuals who come to the US generallybecome better off than those still at home. Their effects on the US economyand labor market are not, however, unambiguously positive. Case studies showthat unskilled immigrants, especially if they are unauthorized, may displacesimilar Americans and depress their wages. Mexican immigrants, for example,now do the work that black janitors used to do in Los Angeles. Econometric studies that tried to measure the effects of immigrants incities such as Los Angeles, however, could find few of the wage depression andjob displacement effects that were apparent in case studies. Initially, it wasbelieved that the failure to measure these effects meant that they did notexist; more recent analyses emphasize that mobile Americans move away fromimmigrant cities or do not move to them. The one point of agreement among economists is that even 10 to 12 millionimmigrant workers have only small economic effects in the 130 million stronglabor force. The US will not get rich and it will not get poor because ofimmigration--or the lack of it. Some of the most contentious questions provoked by immigration arenon-economic: are immigrants learning English fast enough? Is their low rateof naturalization appropriate? Do naturalized citizens vote? As in earlier eras, there are those who worry that newcomers are notintegrating quickly enough into American civic culture, while others point toAmerica's historical experience. Typically, by the third generation, the civicparticipation of immigrant descendants is similar to other Americans. The United States is not alone in worrying about the uncertain destinationto which today's immigration is taking us. Germany, a country with apopulation one-third as big as the US, has also taken one million immigrantsannually over the past few years, making immigration a major political issue.Only 1 in 100 people in Japan are foreigners, but that country too is engagedin a serious debate over how do deal with an aging and slow growing labor forceat home, and workers eager to migrate from nearby nations. _______________ Stalker, Peter. 1994. The Work of Strangers: A Survey of InternationalLabour Migration. Available for 45 Swiss Franks from the International LaborOffice, CH-1211 Geneva 22, or or $36 from the ILO US distribution centerat 40 Sheridan Ave, Albany NY 12210, Tel 518-436-9686x133.. This very ambitious two-part book surveys migration for employment aroundthe world, includes an overview global migration table, and highlights themigration experience of 20 countries. Part 1 provides a history and generaloverview of the issues raised by people crossing borders for jobs, and Part 2highlights the migration experience of 20 countries. The book reflects an admirable survey of the literature, and is especiallyvaluable for pulling together conclusions on everything from the effects ofindentured servants to the costs and benefits of illegal immigrants. However,this breadth can also be a weakness, since an overview may miss importantsubpoints. The book opens with definitions of five major types of border crossers:settlers, contract workers, professionals, illegal immigrants, and refugees andasylum seekers. However, Stauker emphasizes that "migrants are human beings towhom labels need not stick for very long." (p. 3). Most people move to bettertheir economic prospects, and they follow their networks to particulardestinations rather than simply moving to the richest destination, so moreBangladeshis move to Malaysia for employment than to Japan, even though Japan'sper capita GDP was 10 times Malaysia's in 1992. Stalker provides brief reviews of the history of labor migration. ThePortuguese began to enslave Africans in 1442, but it was only after 1550, whenAfrican slaves were first taken to the Caribbean, that the "peculiarinstitution" was established firmly in the new world, to be followed by some 15million African slaves (most scholars estimate that 10 to 11 million slavescrossed the Atlantic, excluding perhaps one million who died en route). Alongside both slaves and indentured workers were European emigrantsdislodged by the agricultural revolution in Europe, but not yet absorbed in thefactories of the industrial revolution. Stalker repeats the hypothesis thatemigration peaked about 30 years after the onset of the industrial revolutionin each of the European countries, and the industrial revolution in turn isdated from when a country had 1,000 km of railroad track. Almost 48 millionEuropeans left between 1846 and 1924, equivalent to about 12 percent ofEurope's 1900 population. Stalker reviews briefly theories of why people move, concluding that thepush-pull-network framework is most useful when applied to individuals andhouseholds. He emphasizes that the income gap between rich and poor countrieswidened over the past three decades, and that there will be strikingdiscrepancies in labor force growth between neighboring regions that differ inwealth. The EU/EFTA labor force, for example, is projected to rise by onepercent in the 1990s, while the labor force of the southern and easternMediterranean is projected to increase by 27 percent (p. 27). Disruptions on the path to successful development can produce migrationhumps, or temporarily more emigration and, according to Stalker, exportprocessing zones are especially prone to stimulate emigration. However,Stalker agrees with the assertion that "virtually all the international laborflows in this century have been deliberately initiated by the industrializedcountries" (p. 29). However, after labor recruitment sets migration in motion, it can take on alife of its own. In the Middle East and Asia, recruitment agents handle mostof the workers going abroad, extracting from them fees that can be as much asone-third of their first year's pay. Stalker then turns to the costs and benefits of labor migration. He notesthat immigration, even on a large scale, cannot make aging populations youngagain, since immigrants tend to be only a bit younger than the median resident.In other words, immigrants are unlikely to ever again have the demographicimpacts on their host areas that they did in 19th century North and SouthAmerica. There are three major economic impacts of temporary and permanent migrantworkers: their effects on jobs and wages, their effects on economic growth andproductivity, and their effects on the distribution of income and wealth.Stalker deals only with the jobs and wages issue, concluding on p. 53-4 thatthere is little or no displacement, at least in the long run, and that there islittle evidence that the wages of citizen workers are depressed. According to Stalker, "there seems in principle to be no reasonwhy...immigrants might take jobs from native workers (p. 51)...nor willbringing in immigrants at the bottom of the ladder necessarily reduce the agesof natives." (p. 53). These are curious conclusions, since economic theorypredicts that additional workers must depress wages or displace workers, atleast in the short run. The important question is how much, and in theevidence reviewed by Stalker, the answer seems to be that there is not muchwage depression or job displacement. Stalker's review of the evidence fairly reflects the literature of the1980s, when there was high immigration and job growth. The 1990s literature,by contrast, has a different tone. Studies of the effects of even large numberof immigrants entering local labor markets, such as the 125,000 Cubans addingseven percent to Miami's labor force in the early 1980s, typically find littlewage depression and labor displacement. This led many, including Stalker, toconclude that there were no such effects. But now the evidence seems to suggest that the wage depression and labordisplacement predicted by economic theory were real, and the problem was one ofmeasuring these effects. For example, it has been suggested that the mobileand unskilled American labor force moves out of areas in which there are largenumbers of immigrants, or does not move to such areas. In other words, thefinal chapter on the effects of immigrants on the labor market has not yet beenwritten. Stalker does not deal with the effects of immigration on productivity orinequality, although most of the recent articles on growing inequality in theUS list large-scale immigration as one of the three or four factors promotinginequality. Stalker deals briefly with what may be the major issue raised by theeconomic impacts of immigrants--should immigration be treated as a way forindividuals to better themselves, or is it seen as a threat to disadvantagednatives and to the ideal of equality. Stalker gives greater weight toimmigrant opportunity when he discusses the foreign maids whose presencepermits better educated women to hold jobs outside the home in industrialcountries (p. 52). Others might give more weight to equality and the avoidanceof the appearance of a class of helots. Stalker deals briefly with the issue of whether immigrants pay more intaxes than they cost in public services. Most of the discussion centers on theUS debate, and Stalker concludes that there is as yet "no clear picture...onthe welfare effect of immigrants." What is clear, however, is that regardlessof the disputed overall balance of taxes paid and costs of services received,in the US fiscal system, immigrant taxes tend to flow to the federalgovernment, while the cost of the services consumed by these mostly youngpeople are borne by state and local governments. Stalker touches at least briefly on most of the issues raised byimmigration, from the two major ways of granting citizenship--jus sanguinis, orthe principle that all persons born whose father, or, in some cases, mother, isa citizen is also a citizen, a system that reportedly evolved from definingmembership in non-immigrant nomadic societies(p63). Jus soli, by contrast,grants citizenship to all persons born in the territory, and is more common inimmigrant societies such as the US, Canada, and Latin America. Similarly, there are two different approaches to naturalizing immigrants.Canada and Sweden, for example, encourage immigrants to become citizens topromote their integration, while Germany and Switzerland tend to see awardingcitizenship as a reward for successful integration. Stalker discusses various approaches to integrating foreigners, fromassimilation to multiculturalism, and concludes that race is the greatestbarrier to any kind of integration--anti-immigrant parties, he asserts, springup when there are "too many" non-white immigrants (p. 75). Mainstreampoliticians then feel compelled to adopt some of the anti-immigrant parties'rhetoric, or find their rhetoric to be a convenient excuse to hint atanti-foreigner sentiments in a more moderate way themselves. Religiousdifferences can add to native-immigrant tension, as Muslim immigrantsreportedly do in Europe. The broad scope of this book is illustrated by its discussion of language,education, and economic mobility. Stalker emphasizes that immigrants begin athe bottom of the job ladder, and they and their children remain there in partbecause of discrimination against them (p. 99). However, in some cases,immigrants become entrepreneurs and discriminate by hiring fellow nationals,aggravating tensions with native residents. Stalker reviews arguments for controlling immigration, and finds neitherpreserving ethnic composition, nor economic worries, nor the cost of resettlingrefugees compelling. He reviews the effects of emigration on sendingcountries, discusses three options for immigration countries: free up trade,increase foreign investment, and redirect aid to promote stay at homedevelopment. Neither is likely to have desired migration-reducing effectsquickly, The country studies begin with the traditional settlement countries of theUS, Canada, and Australia, then turn to Western Europe, Eastern Europe, LatinAmerica, Sub-Saharan Africa, the Gulf states, and Asia. In every case, thereis a review of the number of immigrants, a discussion of immigration policy,and an assessment of the current immigration debate. For example, thediscussion of Malaysia notes that it is simultaneously a labor exporter andimporter, and that indentured worker immigration during British colonial rulegave the country a population that is about 60 percent Malay, 30 percentChinese, and 10 percent Indian. Some Chinese Malaysians emigrated after thegovernment in 1971 launched a program to favor Malays, Stalker concludes bynoting that the widespread illegal immigration of mostly Muslims is apotentially explosive issue in a country in which one requirement for being aMalay is to be a Muslim. The book concludes with a global migration table that lists, for 98countries, whether they send at least two percent and 200,000 of theirnationals abroad, or whenever they receive foreigners, meaning that at leasttwo percent of their populations and 200,000 residents are non-citizens, or atleast one percent of their labor forces and 100,000 workers are non-citizens.Under these criteria, 24 countries are both sending and receiving countries,including most of the former USSR member-states and surprises such as Haiti andJamaica. According to the table, the major country of emigration is Russia,with 25 million nationals abroad. _______________ Matloff, Norman. 1994. "Welfare Use Among Elderly Chinese Immigrants,"mimeo, August 11. Available from Matloff at Department of Computer Science,UC-Davis, Davis, CA 95616. In 1990, 40 percent of the elderly immigrants sponsored by their USresident and often US citizen children were receiving Supplemental SecurityIncome, versus nine percent of the US elderly. SSI is a cash assistanceprogram that typically provides about $400 monthly to the aged, blind, anddisabled; some states, including California, supplement SSI, bringing theaverage monthly payment to $600. There has been a very sharp increase in the percentage of elderlyimmigrants receiving SSI--the number of such recipients quintupled between 1982and 1992. When elderly parents join their US resident children who "sponsor"them, both the sponsoring child and the immigrating parent must sign anaffidavit of support on INS form I-134 stating that the child will support theimmigrating parents and the parents will avoid applying for welfare. However,the courts have ruled that these affidavits are not binding and, after threeyears, elderly immigrants without other assets are eligible for SSI. In thecase of many elderly Asian immigrants, the majority soon apply for SSI. Based on interviews with elderly immigrants and social workers, Matloffdescribes how the children sponsoring their parents plan to get them on SSI assoon as possible. Matloff decries what he considers to be an organizedsubversion of the US immigration and welfare systems by often professionalAsians who have "made it" in America. __________________________________________ Editor: Philip Martin Managing Editor: Cecily Sprouse Associate Editor: Sergio O'Cadiz Department of Agricultural Economics, University of California, Davis,Davis CA 95616 Tel (916) 752-1530 Fax: (916) 752-5614 email: <migrant@primal.ucdavis.edu> Migration News is produced with the support of the University ofCalifornia, Berkeley Center for German and European Studies __________________________________________ WT02-B13-137IA090-000969-B025-21http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/By-Month/MN-Vol-1-94/MN_November_1994.html 128.120.36.171 19970122204131 text/html 101958HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 20:42:26 GMTLast-Modified: Saturday, 15-Apr-95 20:49:48 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 101699MIGRATION NEWS Vol. 1, No.10 November, 1994 Migration News summarizes key developments in immigration and integrationissues during the preceding month. Topics are grouped by region: NorthAmerica, Europe, Asia, and Other. There are three versions of Migration News. The paper copy is eight pages orabout 6,000 words; the email version is 10,000 to 12,000 words; and the gopherversion is 12,000 to 15,000 words. In order to keep costs at a minimum,Migration News produces the print copy only for those who do not have access toelectronic mail. The purpose of Migration News is to provide monthly summaries of recentimmigration developments that can be read in 60 minutes or less. Each issuealso offers a special report, summaries of current news, abstracts of selectedpapers, and articles and information on recent research publications. Distribution is by email. If you wish to subscribe, send your email addressto: Migration News <migrant@primal.ucdavis.edu>. Current and back issues canbe accessed via gopher in the Migration News folder at: dual.ucdavis.edu We welcome your contributions: please fax news items of interest toPhilip Martin at (916) 752-5614, or send them to the email address above.Working papers and other materials to be listed in the RESOURCES section can besent to Philip Martin, Department of Agricultural Economics, University ofCalifornia, Davis, Davis California 95616 USA. Those who contribute items mayrequest Migration News by mail if email is unavailable. ++++++++++++++++++++++++++++ Report to Readers Migration News began in February, 1994 as a six-page, 4,000 word review ofsignificant immigration developments produced for the 50 UC faculty andgraduate students affiliated with the Center for German and European Studies inComparative Immigration and Integration Program (CIIP). Today, Migration Newshas expanded to a four-part, 12,000-word monthly review of immigration andintegration developments in North America, Europe, and Asia . It isdistributed to 425 subscribers monthly--350 via email--and has over 1,000readers. According to 200 responses to an October 1994 survey, 82 percent of thesubscribers read over half of each issue of Migration News, and 26 percent readall of the stories. Most readers spend 30 to 60 minutes with each issue,although 1 in 6 readers reports spending more than 60 minutes per issue. Over70 percent of subscribers report that other people read their Migration News,giving each issue an average of almost three readers each. Most readers placed highest priority on stories about immigration developmentsin their own region, e.g., North Americans were most interested in NorthAmerican stories. Migration News is based on computers: newspapers and magazines in fourcomputer bases are searched monthly, and then students prepare draft stories ofdevelopments that are reported by two or more sources. The managing editoredits these drafts. In addition, Migration News includes occasional originalitems, such as conference reports, and reviews of current resource materials. We encourage all readers who can to take Migration News via email; beginning in1995, we may have to charge for the paper version that is mailed. _________________________________________ _________________________________________ NORTHAMERICA _________________________________________ SOS Dominates California Campaign The "Save Our State'' Initiative--Proposition 187--figured prominently inCalifornia political campaigns in October, and forced many state and nationalpoliticians to take a stand on how to deal with illegal immigration. Virtuallyevery major newspaper included an average two stories daily on SOS and illegalimmigration. There were estimated to be 4 million illegal aliens in the US inOctober 1994, including 1.7 million in California. If approved by voters on November 8, 1994, SOS would amend the Californiaconstitution to provide that no person "shall receive any public socialservices to which he or she may otherwise be entitled until the legal status ofthat person has been verified." This means that all persons seeking publicservices such as public education, including higher education, and health care,except for emergency health care, must prove that they are legal US residents.Schools and hospitals would have to determine the legal status of clients ifthey expect the state to reimburse them for services provided. Ifpublicly-funded service providers suspect that a person requesting services isan illegal alien, they are required to report that person to the AttorneyGeneral of California and to the Immigration and Naturalization Service. In addition, SOS makes it a felony to manufacture, distribute, sell or usefalse citizenship documents, and requires police to report arrests of illegalaliens to the INS. Polls suggest that support for the initiative is declining. A Field Pollreleased October 27 indicated that Proposition 187 was supported by 53 percentof the registered voters and opposed by 39 percent, with 8 percent undecided.Many political analysts believe that Proposition 187 will still pass, but notby the landslide margin predicted a few months ago. SOS had a 37 point lead in July, and a 26 point lead in September, so the 14percent lead represents a much closer vote than anticipated by SOS backers.SOS supporters have done relatively little campaigning: "debates" on SOS oftenfeatured only opponents of the measure. SOS supporters noted that they do notalways participate in forums because they do not want their spokespeople in"combative situations." Newspaper reporters say that the pro-Prop. 187organization has been wary of contacts with the media. SOS supporters raisedless than $500,000, versus $1.4 million by SOS opponents. Politicians take stands SOS is seen by both sides as a watershed issue in which California may indicatethe mood of the US. California played a similar role in 1978, when Proposition13 signaled unhappiness with high taxes, and helped to set the stage for theReagan tax cuts. In 1990, California voters once again signaled theirdiscomfort with environmental protections threatening jobs by rejectingProposition 65 or Big Green, which would have incorporated environmentalprotections into the state's constitution. The two major candidates for governor have lined up on opposite sides of SOS:incumbent Republican Wilson supports it, while challenger Democrat Brownopposes it. In fact, Wilson has identified himself so closely with Prop 187that some political observers speculate that his campaign may falter if supportfor Prop. 187 continues to decline, especially after Wilson on October 26called for an "identity card" that would have to be shown to obtain a job orpublic services. On October 21, 1994, President Clinton announced his opposition to SOS, callingit an "unconstitutional" effort to reduce illegal immigration. Instead, hereminded Americans that he has been working hard to strengthen the BorderPatrol, which launched Operation Gatekeeper on October 1 in San Diego (seebelow), and that the Administration has taken steps to reimburse states for thecosts they incur to imprison criminal aliens. Clinton criticized Wilson as apolitician who worked in 1985 to ensure that farm employers had easy access toMexican workers, and who is now being hypocritical by arguing that the federalgovernment is responsible for illegal immigration and California's fiscalproblems. Democratic incumbent US Senator Diane Feinstein on October 21 announced heropposition to SOS, citing reasons similar to Clinton's--denying publiceducation could "throw 400,000" youngsters into the streets, where they mightbe recruited into gangs and crime. Feinstein said that her alternative--2,100more Border Patrol agents, financed by a $1 per person border crossing fee--anda tamper-proof work permit were better solutions to illegal immigration.Feinstein has also called for new penalties on alien smugglers. Republican challenger Michael Huffington on October 20 endorsed SOS, sayingthat its passage would "send a signal" to Washington that Californians were"fed up" with the federal government's failure to control illegal immigration.He also advocated a constitutional amendment that would end the US practice ofmaking the children of illegal alien parents born in the US automatically UScitizens. On October 27, Huffington confirmed he employed for five years a nanny who wasan illegal alien, and that he had not paid all of the required Social Securitytaxes on the nanny's wages. Feinstein immediately attacked Huffington's"hypocrisy" on the illegal immigration issue, and several commentatorspredicted that Huffington's illegal alien nanny doomed his campaign. [On October 6, 1994, Congress amended US tax laws to require that SocialSecurity taxes be paid only on wages of household help that exceed $1000annually, up from the previous $50 per quarter. This change was set in motionby the revelation in January 1993 that President Clinton's nominee for AttorneyGeneral, Zoey Baird, had failed to pay Social Security taxes for the illegalalien maid she employed. Households that employ maids will pay the tax onceeach year, when they file their own tax returns.] Immigration is usually a bipartisan issue--the Immigration Reform and ControlAct of 1986, for example, was carried largely by a Republican Senator and aDemocratic Representative. SOS is opposed by most Democrats, but it has splitRepublicans. Among the putative Republican contenders for President in 1996,Wilson and Patrick Buchanan have campaigned for the measure, while WilliamBennett and Jack Kemp, both with more libertarian philosophies, oppose SOS forfostering an "anti-immigrant climate." Immigrants, they argue, are likely tobe Republican voters, since they have the "entrepreneurial spirit and selfreliance, hostility to government intervention, strong family values and deeplyrooted religious faith." Kemp reportedly acted to prevent the 1996 Republicanplatform from having a nativist or anti-immigrant plank. On October 27, the Justice Department publicized a legal opinion that assertedthat SOS was not significantly different from a Texas law denying free publiceducation to illegal alien children that the US Supreme Court, by a 5 to 4vote, found to be a violation of the Equal Protection Clause of the 14thamendment to the US constitution in 1982. This opinion marked the latest salvoin a running debate between Attorney General Reno and California GovernorWilson over how to deal with illegal immigration; Reno announced her oppositionto SOS with the statement that "it doesn't make sense to kick kids out ofschool." Conservative commentator George Will endorsed SOS, attacking the 1982 USSupreme Court decision. He noted that two of the dissenters in 1982 remainjustices, but only one supporter, and predicted that if the Supreme Court wereto re-consider the issue, the justices would deny illegal alien children freepublic education. He believes that Proposition 187 is not about what anational immigration policy should be, but what state policy should beregarding violators of the national law. Commission on Immigration Reform Chairperson Barbara Jordan and several othercommissioners also attacked the SOS initiative, which was co-authored by CIRcommissioner Harold Ezell. They asserted that the SOS provision to deny freepublic education to illegal alien children was mean-spirited and not practical.SOS supporters countered that Jordan's criticism was aimed at helpingDemocratic gubernatorial candidate Kathleen Brown, who opposes SOS. Most supporters and opponents of SOS, as well as the CIR, have been careful todraw a line between illegal immigration and legal immigration. The two majorauthors of SOS, former INS officials Alan Nelson and Harold Ezell, have saidthat if the US had effective means to deal with illegal immigration, SOS wouldnot be necessary. Mexican government reactions The Mexican government opposed Proposition 187. After asserting that it doesnot want to interfere in the internal affairs of another country, the Mexicangovernment goes on to argue that it must protect the interests of the Mexicansin the US by working to prevent the passage of SOS. Mexico's Deputy ForeignSecretary Andres Rozental argued that Mexicans in California are being used asa scapegoat for the economic crisis in the state. Mexican President CarlosSalinas called Prop. 187 "unacceptable." On October 28, the Mexican government complained to the US Department of Stateabout the "climate of hostility that prevails in California and the growingincidence of abuse and harassment against Mexican nationals." The weekend of October 29, thousands of Mexicans participated in "OperationDignity" and refused to shop in the US. Organizers said that the protest cutin half the number of shoppers who usually shop in the US on weekends.Protesters burned California Governor Wilson in effigy and held signs that read"Say no to 187, No to Pig Wilson." Local Debates Prop. 187 was the focus of many local school board and civic meetings,extensive coverage of its potential effects, and numerous editorials. Most ofthese meetings, stories, and editorials ended with pleas to vote against SOS.A typical news article noted that, like the work registry proposed by the CIR,if enacted ALL persons seeking services (SOS) or jobs (CIR) would have toverify their legal status. Since SOS provides no funds to California schoolsfor verification, the schools would have to find the funds to verify the statusof 5.2 elementary and secondary pupils, and two million students in collegesand universities. Many school districts held public meetings to discuss estimates of their lostrevenues if SOS were enacted. The Los Angeles Unified School District, thenation's largest, estimated that it would lose $4,200 state dollars for each ofthe estimated 100,000 illegal alien children enrolled. But the big losses inrevenue would come if Los Angeles refused to educate illegal alien children,AND the federal government in retaliation cut off funds for disadvantaged andbilingual US citizen and legal immigrant students. In Los Angeles's case,almost two-thirds of the estimated $1 billion loss in education funds wouldcome from the potential loss of federal funds for US citizen and legalimmigrant students. SOS supporters assert that verification need not be costly. Schools todayrequire that pupils provide proof of age and immunization and a local addressto enroll. SOS supporters assert that most parents today provide birthcertificates to prove their children's ages, so that schools are already in aposition to verify the legal status of most school children. In doubtfulcases, the child could receive schooling while a secondary check is completed.SOS opponents counter that each school would have to be hooked up to the INScomputers so that the legal status of non-US citizens with INS numbers could beverified immediately; such computer hookups would be very expensive. Opponents of SOS asked teachers and other public employees to sign pledgesthat, if Proposition 187 is approved by California voters, they would engage incivil disobedience and continue to provide services to unauthorized aliens.Signers pledge to "continue to provide services to all who request them" and to"refuse to verify immigration status as required by Proposition 187." California's Attorney General announced on October 31 that he had developedforms so that public employees could report suspected illegal aliens to hisoffice, but that his office would not prosecute those who failed to report. Inmost cases, administrative or intake staff, not teachers or doctors, determinewho receives services. Nearly 70,000 people protested against SOS in Los Angeles on October 16. Themarch was billed as one of the largest ever mounted for immigration rights. OnOctober 27, an estimated 8,000 high school students in Southern California leftschool to protest SOS. The anti-SOS campaign has been split between the"responsible" Taxpayers Against 187, which acknowledges that illegalimmigration is a problem, but SOS is not the solution, and Californians UnitedAgainst Prop 187, a coalition of local organizations that e.g., encouraged thestudent walkouts, organized rallies featuring Mexican flags, and heckledpro-SOS speakers at debates. In San Diego County, voters view illegal immigration as the biggest issue inthe state, and a poll conducted October 18-25 by the San Diego Union-Tribune,shows that 62 percent of the county's voters favor Prop. 187, while only 29oppose it. The debate over SOS was conducted largely on emotional grounds. SOS supportersargued that the federal government has demonstrated in the eight years sinceIRCA was enacted that it cannot reduce illegal immigration, forcing Californiavoters to "take a stand." SOS opponents asserted that, if SOS is approved,civil liberties would be at risk, as millions of teachers and nurses wereforced to become "immigration cops" required to report suspected illegalaliens. Most commentaries on both sides agreed that the federal government should domore to reduce illegal immigration, and that states such as California deservefederal reimbursement for the costs of providing services to the unauthorizedaliens who elude government border and interior controls. But proponents ofSOS go further and argue that illegal aliens are coming to California to obtaingovernment services and welfare benefits, so that passage and enforcement ofSOS would lead to an exodus of illegal aliens and less taxpayer costs even ifthe federal government continued to fail in its efforts to control the border. SOS opponents, on the other hand, argue that unauthorized aliens who are deniedservices will not leave the US, but will remain uneducated and a threat topublic health. Furthermore, some argue, unauthorized workers fill vacant jobson farms, in factories, and in hotels, so that, if their entry really werecurbed, California may suffer during economic and labor market adjustments. Expert Analyses A few newspapers used the SOS campaign to try to educate their readers aboutthe economic issues raised by illegal and legal immigration, but the majorconclusion of many such articles is that experts disagree. Instead ofcomparing the effects of immigration to other phenomenon on which there isgeneral agreement on the sign of the effects, but disagreement on themagnitude, and thus room for debate over what should be done, many articlesquoted immigration "experts" as saying that there is NO agreement onanything--e.g., "the best people...threw their hands up in the air" when askedabout the economic effects of immigrants. Such assertions are neither helpful nor true. Just as with minimum wage laws,or the impacts of unions, there is both theory and empirical evidence thathigher minimum wages reduce the number of jobs, and that aggressive unionsraise wages and reduce employment. The disagreement is not over the sign ofthe effect--more immigrant workers MUST, according to theory, have some adverseeffects on the wages or job opportunities of US workers. The debate is overthe magnitude of wage depression and displacement--are the effects significantand, if they are, are the costs of the additional immigration controls neededworthwhile. After over 50 years of minimum wages, there is still no agreement on the exactnumber of jobs lost because most US workers must be paid at least $4.25 hourly.Most Americans seem to agree that the job losses due to minimum wages are areasonable price for society to pay to assure "decent" wages at the bottom ofthe labor market. The economic effects of immigration might best be consideredin a similar light. Two hallmarks of the SOS campaign stand out. First, it is clear thatCalifornians feel strongly about illegal immigration--the issue in most pollsis second only to concern about crime. Second, the debate did little to helpvoters think about the longer-term issues involved in having large numbers ofskilled and unskilled immigrants enter the US at the end of the 20th century. If arrayed by their education or skills, immigrants---both legal andillegal--exhibit an hourglass or barbell distribution. Immigrants are morelikely than the native-born to have more than a college degree and less thaneight years of schooling--means that many debates about the average or typicalimmigrant are no longer instructive. David Johnston, "Reno Aide Believes CA Ballot Plan on Aliens is Illegal," NewYork Times, October 27, 1994, A11. Lisa Lapin, "Huffington announces supportfor Prop 187," Sacramento Bee, October 21, 1994, A3; Lisa Lapin, "FeinsteinSays no on Prop 187, calls stance risky" Sacramento Bee, October 22, 1994, A3.William Bennett and Jack Kemp, "The Fortress Party?" Wall Street Journal,October 21, 1994, A14. Marcus Breton, "Does Immigration Help or Hurt? Expertsdon't agree," Sacramento Bee, October 23, 1994, A1. Bray Hayward, "Prop. 187'slead slipping, poll finds," Sacramento Bee, October 27, p. 1. "Huffingtonemployed illegal immigrant," Sacramento Bee, October 27, 1994, p.1. B.Drummond Ayres, "CA Governor Suggests Requiring Citizenship Cards," New YorkTimes, October 27, 1994, A1. Bray Hayward, "Ardent Activism hurting anti-187effort, some say," Sacramento Bee, October 30, p. 17. Matt Spetalnick,"Nearly 70,000 march to protest immigration measure," San Diego Union-Tribune,October 16, 1994. George Will, "Courts have become legislatures," San DiegoUnion-Tribune, October 30, 1994. John Marelius and Mark Barabak, "GOP'sillegal immigration issue is now biting back," San Diego Union-Tribune, October30, 1994. Gordon Smith, "Support strong for Prop. 187 in county," San DiegoUnion-Tribune, October 30, 1994. Mark Fineman, "Mexico Condemns CaliforniaMeasure," Los Angeles Times, October 30, 1994. Gebe Martinez and PatrickMcDonnell, "Prop. 187 Backers Counting on Message, Not Strategy," Los AngelesTimes, October 30, 1994. Ashley Dunn, "In California, the Numbers Add Up toAnxiety," New York Times, October 30, 1994. Jeff Franks, "California'sgovernor winning no Mexican friends," Reuters, October 30, 1994. "Mexicansboycott US border stores," UPI, October 30, 1994. Fred Alvarez and Maia Davis,"1,500 Students Leave Schools over Prop 187," Los Angeles Times, October 29,1994. Mark Fineman, "Mexico Fights Prop. 187," Los Angeles Times, October 29,1994. _________________________________________ Commissionon Immigration Reform Issues Report The nine-member Commission on Immigration Reform created by IMMACT in 1990issued its interim report on September 30. The CIR recommended unanimouslythat a registry combining data from the INS and the Social SecurityAdministration be tested in the five states with the most illegal aliens toimprove the enforcement of employer sanctions. Even though each verification could be done for an estimated half-cent, so thatverifying the 50 to 60 million new hires annually would cost $25 to 30 million,and the national registry could be established within five years for $250 to$300 million. Estimates of the cost of issuing new identity cards to all USresidents, and clearing up problems in the INS database, could costconsiderably more. The CIR hopes that state tests could yield the best designfor a national registry. The CIR recommended seven steps to deal with illegal and legal immigration.The CIR asserted that legal immigration has been and continues to be beneficialto the U.S., but that the furor over backdoor illegal immigration threatens tolead to pressure to reduce front-door legal immigration. To prevent a backlashagainst legal immigration, unauthorized immigration must be curbed throughimproved border management, meaning there is a need for more efforts to deterillegal entry with operations such as Hold-the-Line in El Paso and Gatekeeperin San Diego, coupled with expedited legal entries so that those who can enterlegally do so; better enforcement of labor laws; and the pilot registry toimprove employee verification. The CIR recommended that legal immigrants remain eligible for welfare benefitson the same basis as U.S. citizens, putting itself on record against recentlaws that have paid for e.g., extended unemployment benefits by denying somenewly-arrived immigrants cash assistance benefits for three to five years.However, the CIR recommended that family members who e.g. sponsor the entry oftheir parents, promising to prevent them from becoming "public charges" in theU.S., be legally obligated to live up to their sponsorship agreements. Thiswould change current practice, since courts have held that sponsorshipagreements are not legally binding. The CIR recommended that criminal aliens in U.S. jails be promptly removed,either to serve their sentences in their countries of origin, or be deported assoon as they complete their US sentences. The CIR has suggested thatstrategies be developed to deal with immigration emergencies, such as thosewith Cuba, and Haiti in 1994. The CIR called for better data be assembled,and that the methodologies underlying state suits for federal reimbursement ofimmigrant costs be assessed. Finally, CIR recommended that the US cooperatewith the migrants' countries of origin to better manage immigration fromthem. The CIR's report was generally praised by editorialists and commentators.Journalist David Broder, for example, asserted that Barbara Jordan's civilrights credentials permit her to speak with a definitive voice on the complexissues raised by immigration. Newspaper editorials generally endorsed theCIR's recommendations with if-we-don't -accept-this,something-more-drastic-is-likely-to-be-enacted. Most of the criticism of the CIR's recommendations came from civil liberty andethnic organizations such as the ACLU and La Raza; 42 House members signed aletter to President Clinton on October 5 opposing the registry on the groundsthat it would decrease labor market discrimination against minorities. TheACLU solicited funds to oppose what they called CIR's call for a national IDcard to separate "them and us." The registry proposal was also denounced by a number of religious and ethnicgroups. Newspapers ran profiles of legal immigrants and citizens who "look andtalk" foreign and who fear that the registry proposal would lead to employers,perhaps mistakenly, refusing to hire them. More serious are the concerns of labor market specialists that the registrymight increase contingent employment. Many employers currently collude withthe unauthorized workers they hire to go through the motions of employmentverification. If a worker provides a Social Security number that the computercannot verify, and that, because of errors in the data base, workers are given30 or 60 days to go to the Social Security office and clear up the matter. Ifthe worker does not visit the Social Security office, the employer would thendismiss him/her, but could then rehire the worker under a new SSN and name, andbegin the process anew. Both INS Commissioner Doris Meissner and Attorney General Janet Reno said thatthey agreed with the CIR that workplace enforcement must be improved, and thatthe administration was carefully studying the CIR's recommendations. But anOffice of Management and Budget official was quoted on September 30 as sayingthat the Clinton Administration opposed the registry idea. Jordan dismissedreports that the Administration was rejecting the CIR's verificationrecommendation; she predicted that the Administration would embrace theregistry test. But on October 3, Deputy White House Press Secretary GinnyTerzano said that the administration would like to improve existing systems andgive them a chance to work more effectively before testing the registry. Jordan was originally scheduled to head a list of witnesses testifyingbefore the Subcommittees on International Law, Immigration, and Refugees of theHouse Judiciary Committee on October 3 on the need for a registry to make moreeffective efforts to prevent illegal aliens from obtaining jobs. Instead, onOctober 5, officials from the Departments of Labor, Health and Human Services,and Justice outlined what they were doing to make sanctions enforcement moreeffective. Instead of endorsing the registry proposal, INS CommissionerMeissner said that the Administration was studying it carefully. Bernard Anderson, Assistant Secretary, Employment Standards Administration,told the subcommittee that "employer sanctions can reach its potential to playan important role in controlling illegal migration if it is substantiallysimplified in operation and enforced firmly. In addition, employers'verification obligations must be implemented in a fair, non- discriminatorymanner and, just as important, employer sanctions must be complemented withexpanded and better targeted labor law enforcement." In his last hearing as chair of the House Immigration Subcommittee, Rep RomanoMazzoli (D-Ky) reminded INS Commissioner Doris Meissner that she promised toimprove the agency's management in 1981, when she was acting commissioner. Hecomplained that INS commissioners have for years promised that the solution tothe agency's management woes were just around the corner. During her testimony, Meissner said that "control with compassion" is one ofthe goals of the INS. She said that it is "the hallmark of thisAdministration's position on immigration policy." She added, "to continue agenerous legal immigration policy, the United States must be effective ingaining control of its borders and deterring illegal immigration and theattendant costs associated with it." Suro, Roberto, "White House rejects registry idea by Immigration panel,officials say," Washington Post, Oct 1, 1994, A8. "The Fire over IllegalImmigrants Starts to Singe Clinton, Owen Ullmann, Business Week, October 10,1994, p. 57. James Bornemeier and Patrick J. McDonnell, "US Panel IssuesSweeping Immigration Reform Plan," Los Angeles Times, October 1, 1994, p. A1.Robert Davis and Sandra Sanchez, "Big hurdle for national registry is INSdisarray," USA Today, October 3, 1994. Michael Briggs, "Worker Registry UnderAttack," Chicago Sun-Times, October 2, 1994. "Administration Won't ApproveComputerized Residency Checks," Chicago Tribune, October 2, 1994,p. 4. DoriMeinert, "Cut illegal-immigrant benefits, panel urges," San DiegoUnion-Tribune, October 1, 1994. Prepared Statement of Bernard Anderson,Assistant Secretary, Department of Labor, before the House Subcommittee onInternational Law, Immigration and Refugees, Federal News Service, October 3,1994. Joel Brinkley, "INS Offers Testimony that Sounds Familiar," New YorkTimes, October 6, 1994, p. A16. Prepared Statement of Doris Meissner, INSCommissioner before the House Subcommittee on International Law, Immigration,and Refugees, October 5, 1994. _________________________________________ OperationGatekeeper in San Diego On October 1, 1994, the US Border Patrol assigned 200 additional agents toguard the 14 miles of border between the US and Mexico south of San Diego. Thegoal of Operation Gatekeeper is to make it impossible for aliens to avoidcapture. Between the port of entry at Highway 5 and the ocean, there is afence, high intensity lights, and three lines of agents, all designed toadvertise to potential illegal entrants that illegal entry will result inapprehension. All those apprehended are fingerprinted electronically, andbetween October 1 and 6, about six percent of the 6,000 aliens apprehended wererecidivists caught for the second or third time. There were about 25,000 apprehensions in the San Diego sector in October 1994,compared with 31,500 in October 1993 and 27,600 in September 1994. The BorderPatrol achieved its goal of pushing aliens seeking to enter the US illegally tothe east--apprehensions in the Imperial Beach sector closest to the oceandropped from 2/3 of the average 1000 apprehensions daily in the first half ofthe month to 40 percent of the average 700 daily apprehensions at the end ofthe month. Apprehensions in the more inland Brown Field area, by contrast,rose from an average 150 daily at the beginning of October to almost 200daily. Alien smugglers have been able to evade some past control efforts--usingcellular phones to know when the Border Patrol checkpoints on Highways 5 and 15are down, for example, to smuggle aliens through, and using juvenile driversand nearly worthless vehicles to cope with smuggling penalties and vehicleseizure. Some speculated that putting more agents on the border at San Diego would notbe as effective as this saturate-the-border strategy was in El Paso becausemany of the aliens entering the US at San Diego had come from the interior ofMexico and were attempting to migrate to Los Angeles. In EL Paso, 70 percentof the illegal entrants were destined for the El Paso area, while over 95percent of those apprehended south of San Diego are headed for destinationsoutside the area, usually to Los Angeles, 120 miles north. This means the reaction to saturating the border with agents is likely to bedifferent--in El Paso, reducing illegal entries and expediting legal entrieswas supported by 90 percent of EL Paso residents. In San Diego, most alienspay smugglers $300 for the trip to Los Angeles, and many have a mindset thatthey must attempt illegal entry repeatedly until they succeed. Some predicted that there would be violence on the border, as desperate aliensand their smugglers clashed with the Border Patrol. This does not seem to bethe case; during the first three weeks of Operation Gatekeeper, there were onlyfive charges that the Border Patrol abused aliens attempting to illegally enterthe US. However, legal services groups on October 24, sent a letter to the INScomplaining about the "rough handling" of apprehended aliens, the lack of foodin "overcrowded" detention facilities, and the "practice" of returning men toMexico about 90 miles east of San Diego in Mexicali, while women and childrenare returned to Tijuana. Some Mexican observers, as well as the president of the Border Patrol agents'union, are skeptical of the effectiveness of Operation Gatekeeper. SeveralMexican critics complained that saturating the border with agents runs counterto NAFTA's goal of free trade. The Border Patrol union would presumably liketo see even more agents assigned to border security. The Border Patrol has budgeted $236 million for safeguarding the US-Mexicanborder in FY95, equivalent to $650,000 daily. The next saturate-the-borderoperation is Operation Safeguard in Arizona. Near Pueblo, Colorado, a federal prison includes inmates from 129 countries,and foreign-born persons, most convicted of drug offenses, are 28 percent ofthe inmates. Nationwide, the cost of keeping foreigners in jail is $1 milliondaily. In an effort to reduce these costs, the US is attempting to returnconvicted foreign felons to their home countries--about 200 have been returnedto Mexico so far. Florida has received permission to try a pilot program for three months inwhich illegal aliens who are accused of misdemeanors and non-violent feloniescould avoid trial in the US by agreeing to be deported. Those deported wouldhave to agree not to return to the US. Jamie Gorelick, Deputy US Attorney General, reviewed Operation Gatekeeper onOctober 13 and reported that it is part of a Clinton Administration plan "toclose the entire border." Sebastian Rotella, "Border patrol launches crackdown near San Diego," LosAngeles Times, October 2, 1994. B. Drummond Ayres, Jr., "US Crackdown atBorder Stems Illegal Crossings," New York Times, October 6, p. A1; "Illegalimmigration: ideas worth trying," Los Angeles Times, Oct 5, 1994, B6; PeterHecht, "Stranglehold at the Border," Sacramento Bee, October 30, 1994,A16-17. _________________________________________ JudgeStops Return of Cubans On October 14, President Clinton announced that Cubans being held at Guantanamowould have to return first to Cuba to apply for U.S. immigrant status or toparticipate in a lottery that will select a total of at least 20,000 Cubanimmigrants each year. On October 24 attorneys filed a class-action suit on behalf of some of theCubans being held in Guantanamo, arguing that the conditions there are sointolerable that the US government is forcing Cubans to return "voluntarily."The suit asked a federal judge to order the administration to permit Cubans inGuantanamo to receive counseling about their rights and to have immigrationhearings there. On October 25, a US district judge blocked the return toHavana of 23 Cubans, pending a resolution of the suit. On October 29, 21 ofthese Cubans signed a letter to the judge asking that they be allowed to returnto Havana. So far, 42 of the 23,699 Cubans at Guantanamo have returned to Cubavoluntarily. Another 8,206 Cubans are housed in Panama. Nearly 20,000 Haitianswere at Guantanamo, and the State Department reported on October 25 that 13,500of them have voluntarily returned home. The Clinton Administration said thatthe elderly and unaccompanied minors among the 27,000 Cubans housed at the U.S.base in Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, would be allowed to enter the U.S. The US and Cuba are continuing talks on their recent migration agreement. TheUS in August prohibited Americans from sending money to relatives in Cuba--$250to $500 million per year--and Cuba would like the ban lifted. Eddie Dominguez, "Cuba refugee repatriation halted at last-minute," SacramentoBee, October 26, 1994. "Cuban refugee repatriation ruling delayed," SacramentoBee, October 27, 1994. Mireya Navarro, "Return of Detainees to Cuba Blocked byUS Court Order," New York Times, October 26, 1994, p.A1. _________________________________________ AgriculturalLabor Shortages On September 27, 1994, the Los Angeles Times reported that "raisin farmers werehit by shortage of workers." The article quoted grower assertions that 50percent of the estimated 50,000 harvest workers who cut bunches of grapes andlay them on paper trays to dry into raisins were unauthorized, that farm laborcontractors who organize the crews to harvest grapes were reporting 15 to 20percent shortages, and that there was a conflict between traditional growersupport for Governor Wilson and his endorsement of the SOS initiative thatwould deny benefits to illegal immigrants. The story ended on a familiarrefrain, quoting a raisin packer asserting that "if you removed every illegalalien from this state tomorrow, you'd see the business--and not just theagricultural business--start to crumble." Growers fear that the passage of Proposition 187 will lead severe laborshortages. They have already met with the INS to discuss what will happen ifthe proposition passes. Some growers are pushing for a guestworker program toallow temporary farm workers to enter the country legally. "Farm labor shortages" were the rallying cry of California and other westernfarmers in the debate preceding IRCA in 1986, and California Congressionalrepresentatives from Representatives Coehlo and Panetta to Senator Wilsonenergetically pushed their colleagues to accept their constituents argumentsthat the "nature of California agriculture" required a unique guestworkerprogram. Such activities prompted President Clinton in October 1994 to notethat 'If the people in California would be fully candid, they would have tosay that leadership decisions made in the past in California have actually facilitated illegal immigration." Farmers won in IRCA, a unique SAW legalization program and insurance that, iftoo many newly-legalized farmworkers left the fields, replenishment immigrantscould be imported. And farmers monitored the labor market closely. In 1987,isolated reports of labor shortages led then-Senator Pete Wilson to write aletter to President Reagan complaining of "burdensome SAW applicationprocedures." In the House, Representative Fazio requested a GAO survey of WestCoast growers to provide "proof" of a farm labor shortage. Fazio won a border-entry legalization program under which alien workers withoutdocuments could come to a US port of entry, assert that they had worked asillegal aliens in 1985-86, and then receive temporary work permits to enter theUS, so that they could work while obtaining documentation of their 1985-86employment, and then apply for legalization. Over 100,000 aliens entered theUS in this manner, helping to end complaints of labor shortages. There were practically no reports of farm labor shortages between 1988 and1993. Indeed, in preparing its final report in 1992, the grower-dominatedCommission on Agricultural Workers concluded that "there is a generaloversupply of farm labor nationwide." (xx), that "employer sanctions have beenineffective at preventing, and have not significantly curtailed, the employmentof unauthorized workers in agriculture," (xxi), and that, "since IRCA, growershave generally been able to make planting decisions and assume that workerswould be available...INDIVIDUAL PRODUCERS...may experience spot labor shortages[that can be remedied with] better systems for recruiting and training workers,transporting them to their jobs, and providing housing."(xxiii, emphasisadded). Raisin harvesting is the single most labor-intensive harvesting activity inNorth America, and fears of farm labor shortages have been part of the industrysince is founding in California in the 1880s--there were almost as many acresof raisin grapes in California in 1920 as there are today. The raisin industryis part of the larger grape industry--about 48 percent of California's 700,000acres of vineyards are planted with varieties that are usually used for wine,40 percent to raisin varieties, and 12 percent for table grape varieties. Butthe major raisin grape variety--Thompson seedless--is versatile--it can be usedfor table grapes, wine, or raisins. The need for raisin harvesters near Fresnodepends on the relative prices of tables grapes, wine grapes, and raisingrapes, as well as whether the raisin industry is engaged in one of itsperiodic don't-pick programs to limit the supply and thus increase the price ofraisins. Raisin harvesting is a relatively short-term and low-paying job. According themost recent definitive study of raisin harvesters, workers prefer jobs thatlast longer than the four- to six-week raisin harvest, such as citrusharvesting, or jobs that enable them to have higher hourly earnings, such asWashington apple harvesting. Although there is a relative lull in workeractivity in early August, growers aiming to maximize the sugar content of theirraisins wait as long as possible to begin harvesting their grapes, whichproduces a perennial labor shortage as growers scramble to get the grapes cutand dried by the sun before the first rain falls. In 1994, there was bumper crop of raisins and a bumper crop of Washingtonapples. Many workers went north to pick apples, resulting in a "shortage" ofraisin harvesters. Some officials estimate that the labor pool shrank by 15percent. Many growers reluctantly raised the raisin piecerate wage from $0.15to $0.16 or even $0.17 for each 25 pounds of green grapes that are cut and laidon a paper tray to dry. Many growers also raised the commission they pay tofarm labor contractors from $0.05 to $0.06, but $0.16 was the average rate paidin 1991. At this rate, 10 percent of the workers earned less than the $4.25minimum wage in 1991. In 1994, rains came with about 25 percent still on the ground. Growerspredicted that the combination of rains and the labor shortage will lower cropestimates between 20,000 to 50,000 tons for a total yield of approximately404,677 tons. However, even though the rain may have ruined some of the raisinsdrying in the sun, the president of the Fresno Cooperative Raisin Growers notedthat "Even if the 25 percent that's out in the field now got totally wiped outby rain, there's still plenty of raisins to take care of supply and demand fora whole year." There will always be labor shortages in the raisin industry--the only questionis how much growers will complain about them. Any industry that offers a shortseason of work, does little to recruit workers, and discards them when theharvest is completed, will be forced to use workers who are trying to findbetter jobs. SOS provides a convenient political target for what in 1994appears to be better job opportunities for workers who might in other yearsfound raisin harvesting to be their best US job option. Mark Arax, "Raisin farmers hit by shortage of workers," Los Angeles TimesSeptember 27, 1994, A3, 22. CAW Final Report, November 1992; "Rain causes someproblems, but no major damage," Ag Alert, October 5, 1994, 4. Louis Freedberg,"Despite Rhetoric, Agriculture Has Long Relied on Immigrants," The SanFrancisco Chronicle, October 25, 1994, A5. Ed Mendell, "Growers fear laborshortages if voters end social services," San Diego Union-Tribune, October 17,1994. Benjamin Seto, "Farming: A job and a lifestyle." Fresno Bee, October 23,1994. Karen Brandon, "Illegal Immigration: A Drain or an Assett?" ChicagoTribune, October 18, 1994. Benjamin Seto, "Farmers Looking for RaisinPickers," Fresno Bee, September 13, 1994. Philip Martin, "Good Intentions GoneAwry: IRCA and US Agriculture," The Annals, July, 1994, Vol. 534, pp 44-57. _________________________________________ ChineseAlien Smuggling Chinese triads obtain an estimated $3 billion per year smuggling 100,000Chinese aliens into the US. They worked in relative anonymity until thegrounding of the Golden Venture off New York City in 1993. Chinese triads alsosmuggle prostitutes and heroin into the US. Chinese smuggling to the US reportedly began in the 1980s, when farmers inFujian, on the southeastern coast of China, lost their land to factories, whichhired mostly young women. Networks soon developed to smuggle people to Taiwan,Southeast Asia and Latin America--more than 90 percent of the 500,000 mainlandChinese reportedly smuggled into the US over the past decade have been fromFuzhou, capital of the Fujian province, and the three adjacent counties. The smuggling routes follow along well-established routes through transitcountries such as Belize, Jamaica, Dominican Republic, Paraguay, Mexico andRussia. Many Chinese trade their passport for a Taiwanese passport, and arethen moved to country such as Dominican Republic, for continuing passage to theUnited States. China's Public Security Bureau estimates that there are a halfmillion Chinese waiting for transit to the West in Moscow, Ho Chi Minh City,Bangkok, Africa, Brazil, Mexico, Romania and Bulgaria. Their finaldestinations, include the US , Australia, Austria, Italy, Germany and the CzechRepublic. According to Willard Myers, director of the Center for the Study of AsianOrganized Crime in Philadelphia, Taiwan-based transportation companiescooperate closely with the Chinese triads. Forty Taiwanese ships have beenidentified by the INS as transporting illegal aliens. The money earned by theillegal smuggling is laundered in Taiwan, where there are safe houses.Immigrants typically pay about $30,000 for a standard air-smuggling package,which includes $500 for a Chinese passport and $250 for an exit visa. An"official government business" passport, which is rarely challenged by the INS,costs an additional $15,000. Government corruption in transit countries is reportedly rife. In Belize, theminister for immigration was fired after he accepted bribes from Chinesesmugglers. In July, the regional chief of the Mexican immigration service inTijuana and two of his deputies were dismissed and charged with corruption. InMay, a Hispanic civil rights leader and three Taiwanese were charged withproviding false documentation to illegal Asian immigrants (see MN, May 1994). Other smuggling rings imitate the Chinese triads. In September, 1994, theowner of an Indian restaurant and 11 others in Seattle were arrested forsmuggling 900 people, charging each $10,000 to $14,000 per person, or anestimated $13 million since 1985. The smugglers brought Indian and Pakistaninationals to the United States via Canada and Mexico. Most were taken toPanama, moved by land to Mexico, and then walked across the Mexican-US.border. Another 100 entered the US from Vancouver via Seattle taxi drivers,many of whom are also from India and Pakistan. In New York City, the US Department of State is investigating several smugglingrings smuggling Albanian immigrants into the US with false passports purchasedin Thailand. Most of the Albanians are arriving in New York from flights thatoriginate in Vienna and Bucharest. The Clinton administration proposed tougher anti-smuggling laws in June 1993.Clinton had recommended increasing penalties for alien smuggling, interdictingboats on the high seas, and expanding investigative efforts. Congress, thoughit finally passed the crime bill, deleted the anti-smuggling proposals,including the power to quickly return illegal immigrants. Marlowe Hood, "The Taiwan connection," Los Angeles Times, October 9, 1994.CNN, July 24, 1994. Stephen Kipp and Marc Powell, "Nine Charged with Smuggling900 Aliens," News Tribune, September 22, 1994. Moira Farrow, "People smugglingpipeline bared," Vancouver Sun, September 23, 1994. Anthony M. DeStefano,"Albanian Smuggling Ring Goes Through Bronx: Fed," Newsday, October 7, 1994. _________________________________________ Immigrant-NativeTensions in Wisconsin On October 16, 1994, the CBS TV-News magazine 60 Minutes describedrefugee-native tensions in Wausau, Wisconsin. This small city was populatedalmost exclusively by the descendants of German and Scandinavian immigrantswhen, during the 1980's, several churches sponsored Hmong refugees. Today,Wausau's 4,000 refugees are 11 percent of the population, and policies adoptedto integrate them have divided the city. About three-fourths of the Hmong are receiving welfare payments, causing someresentment as property taxes go up to build additional schools for the childrenof non-working parents - Hmong are one-fourth of the elementary school class.To promote integration, the Wausau school board began busing school children toachieve a rough balance between Hmong and other children in each school. Inresponse, the school board that endorsed busing was recalled, and today mostlyHmong children are being bussed to achieve ethnic balance. Many of the Hmong have become US citizens, and they sometimes take several jobsin order to sign affidavits that they will be able to support the familymembers whose immigration they are sponsoring. Some Wausau leaders are callingfor a moratorium on immigration into the city. They stress that current Hmongresidents were welcome, but that the community needs "breathing room" tointegrate the Hmong in their midst. The show ended on ano-good-deed-goes-unpunished theme: the beneficence of Wausau churches set inmotion an immigration process that has divided the city. CBS TV-News magazine 60 Minutes, October 16, 1994. _________________________________________ EUROPE _________________________________________ Immigration'sRole in European Elections The Freedom Party's Joerg Haider, who began an unsuccessful signaturecampaign to stop immigration until Austria's housing and employment problemsimprove, received 22 percent of the Austrian vote, an increase of six percentover the previous election. The Freedom Party has called for amoratorium on immigration, and it appealed to young blue-collar voters with an"Austria for Austrians" campaign. For the first time, the Social Democraticparty (SPD) and the Austrian People's Party (OVP) won less than 80 percent ofthe vote. In Belgium, the Flemish Nationalist Party, using the slogan "Our People First,"won nearly one-third of the vote to take control of the City Council inAntwerp, a 10 percent gain over six years ago. Extreme-right partiestypically obtained 20 to 30 percent of the vote in local elections in Octoberwith a simple answer to immigration problems: seal the borders and deportresident immigrants. In both countries, voter frustration with joblessness, crime, and economicinsecurity were blamed for the drift from mainstream parties toward theextremes. Mainstream French political parties held the National Front to 10percent of the vote in European Parliament elections in June. But the sharpest drop in support for anti-foreigner political parties was inGermany. In Germany, the CDU-CSU-FDP coalition retained control of theBundestag and government, with a margin reduced to 12 seats. The FreeDemocrats made dual citizenship for foreigners living in Germany one of theirgoals for the new government, a position opposed by its coalition partners. The Republican Party in Germany, with 17,000 members--down from 25,000 in1992--earned only two percent of the vote, not enough for a seat in theBundestag. The decline in the party's popularity seems to stem from thetightening of asylum laws in 1993 and the subsequent decline in the numbers ofasylum seekers. In another sign of the decline of the anti-foreigner sentient,violence against foreigners has declined in 1994, from 1,654 cases in the firstnine months of 1993 to 1,052 in 1994. Some foreigners in Germany believe that the Christian Democrats tough stands onimmigration in 1992-93 defused the appeal of the right wing parties. Afterfive Turks were killed last year in a Solingen arson fire, Kohl promised tomake naturalization easier, but then backed off for fear of anti-foreignerviolence. According to a recent poll by the Center for Turkey Studies in Essen, Germany,62 percent of the Turks in Germany want German citizenship, but they do notwant to have to give up their Turkish citizenship, which would mean forfeitingany claim to property in Turkey. If they became German citizens, 42 percent ofthe foreigners--Turks, Greeks, Italians and former Yugoslavs--would vote forthe Social Democrats (SDP), and 11 percent for the Greens. Only 11 percentwould vote for Helmut Kohl's Christian Democrats (CDU) which, according to thereport, helped to explain why the CDU does not support dual nationality.Frankfurt, whose population is almost one-third foreigners, has an "Auslander Parliament" that meets monthly and can submit requests to the city's parliamentconsisting of 51 foreigners, as well as an office of Multicultural Affairs. William Drozdiak, "Far-Right's Gains in Belgium and Austria Rattle MainstreamParties," International Herald Tribune, October 11, 1994. "Migrating Votes,"Wall Street Journal Europe, October 11, 1994. Peter Hoffer, "Far Right WeakensAustrian Coalition," Daily Telegraph, October 11, 1994, p.20. MichaelChristie, "Germany's foreigners eye election with resentment," Reuters,October 7, 1994. Craig Whitney, "When Its Tires Go Flat, Europe Veers Right,"New York Times, October 23, 1994. "Germans reject extreme right," DeutschePresse-Aengtur, October 16, 1994. Petra Kaminshky, "Millions of foreignershave no vote in forthcoming German elections," Deutsche presse-Agentur,October 13, 1994. _________________________________________ IdentityChecks in France Under instructions from Interior Minister Charles Pasqua, French police inAugust, 1994 increased identity checks of foreigners and foreign-lookingnationals. Under 1993 legislation aimed at combating terrorism, police arepermitted to "control" persons suspected of being foreigners. In opinionpolls, 57 percent of those surveyed support the identity checks. Some observers believe that the police are targeting dark-skinned immigrantswho refuse to assimilate into French society. France has some of Europe's mostliberal naturalization policies, as well as a tradition of expecting newcomersto "act French" in public. There are about three million Muslims in France, and 500,000 of them are Frenchcitizens. Frequent identity checks, plus the detention of "hundreds" ofMuslims for immigration irregularities, may threaten what some call the"fragile truce" between French society and Muslim immigrants. The crackdown is reportedly motivated by fears of Islamic terrorism and severalwell-publicized incidents of Islamic non-conformity in French schools. Francehas expelled at least 20 Algerian-born immigrants accused of terrorism, and theFrench Education Minister in September 1994 reminded school principals toprohibit girls from wearing "ostentatious" Islamic head scarves to school. Classes were suspended for two weeks at the beginning of the school year in anorthern Paris suburb by demonstrations in support of four girls who appearedon the first day of school wearing head scarves, leading to their suspensionfrom classes--they sit in the library instead of participating in class.Newspapers report that both Islamic extremists and National Front supportersstand outside school gates, waiting to proselytize among the youth who areupset by the debate over head scarves. On October 21, a Muslim cleric from Metz who urged girls to defy the ban andwear head scarves to school was expelled to Morocco under an "absoluteemergency" procedure that bypassed the usual judicial proceedings. This imanallegedly opposed the integration of Muslims into French society. Scott Kraft, "Crackdown by Color in France," L.A. Times, September 28, 1994 Al,10. The Economist, October 8, 1994, 53; Andrew Gumbel, "Covered in Confusion,"The Guardian, October 6, 1994; UPI, October 23, 1994. Peter Webster, "FrenchMinister 'Condoned' Police Shooting of Aliens," The Guardian, October 12, 1994. _________________________________________ Greeceand Albania On September 7, five prominent members of a pro-Greek political movement werearrested, and the Greek government responded by expelling between 30,000 of theestimated 150,000 Albanians working illegally in Greece. The pro-GreekAlbanians were protesting the Albanian government's closure of elementaryschools that taught in Greek, and it is alleged that ethnic Greeks in southernAlbania have been dismissed as army officers. Over the past several months, Greece has expelled approximately 70,000 of theestimated 350,000 Albanians in retribution for the trial of five ethnic GreekAlbanians for espionage and possession of illegal arms. On October 6, Albanianforces stooped an estimated 20,000 young people, many of whom had been deportedfrom Greece, trying to leave Albania by boat for Italy. Remittances from Albanians working in Greece were $330 million in 1993, twicewhat Albania earned from its exports of goods, an estimated 16 percent of itsGDP and up from a few million in 1991. The Economist, September 17, 1994, 59-60. "Albania prevents second exodus,"UP, October 6, 1994. Colin Woodard, "Money from Abroad Helps Albania from Edgeof Anarchy," Christian Science Monitor, October 26, 1994. _________________________________________ Americanson German Immigration Controls The frustration over American failures to control illegal immigration, and theapparent effectiveness of German control efforts, prompted a series of articlesin the American press that explained what Germany does to control illegalimmigration. Typical stories noted that Germany has separate residence andwork ID systems, that illegal aliens are not eligible for public education oremergency health care benefits, and that children born to illegal alien parentsin Germany are not entitled to automatic German citizenship. In 1992, some 438,000 foreigners applied for asylum in Germany. Most arrivedlegally, often as tourists, and then filled out forms asserting that, if theywere returned to their countries of citizenship, they would face politicalpersecution. Most of these asylum applications were rejected, but it took twoto five years for appeals to be exhausted, and during that period, asylumapplicants were entitled to housing, meals, and in some cases, work permits. On July 1, 1993, Germany modified its asylum policies. With more hearingofficers, asylum applications were heard immediately, and the entire processwas reduced to 30 to 60 days. Asylum applicants from "safe" countries couldfile their claims, but then leave Germany while their cases were decided.Applicants who traveled through safe countries en route to Germany werereturned to e.g., Poland, and told to file their claims there. In September, 1993, 10,867 applicants applied for asylum, bringing the totalfor 1993 to 92,731. The two major countries of origin were the formerYugoslavia, accounting for 30 percent of the asylum applicants in 1994, andTurkey, accounting for 14 percent. Germany's labor force is expected to be41.5 million in 2000, not much larger than the 40.6 million in 1990, but highunemployment rates are expected to persist because of rising productivity, moreworking women, and continued immigration. There were 3.5 million unemployed workers in Germany in September, 1994--theunemployment rate was eight percent in the former West Germany, and 14 percentin the former East Germany. Marcus Stern, "Germany Slows Flow of Illegal Immigrants," San Diego UnionTribune, September 27, 1994, A1, 10. This Week in Germany, October 7, 1994. _________________________________________ CanadianImmigration Minister Signs European Agreements During a European trip in early October, Canadian Immigration Minister SergioMarchi signed agreements to help ease immigration problems between thecountries. Effective November 1, 1994, Hungarians became the first EasternEuropeans to travel to Canada without visas. Canada accepts refugees now living in Hungary. Since 1990, about 130,000refugees have come to Hungary, and 2,500 asylum-seekers and another 5,000 to6,000 families are supported by the state. Ten percent of the refugees in theBicske camp, 35 km west of Budapest, have been granted refugee status. About102 refugees left Bicske for Canada and another 75 are expected to leave byNovember. Canada signed an agreement to provide $1.3 million to help Russia improve itsimmigration procedures and border controls. Canada will help the Russiangovernment to draft new citizenship laws, provide technology to improve bordercontrol, and help retrain former Soviet immigration officers. Russia willprovide Canada with access to Russian information on criminals who try to enterCanada. Canada has recently experienced several publicized crimes committed by illegalRussian immigrants. Tightened security, the Canadians hope, will also halt thespread of international crime, especially money laundering and drugtrafficking, from entering Canada. About 12,000 Russians are expected to visitCanada in 1994, and about 1,500 are expected to immigrate legally. Fred Weir, "Marchi Strikes Deal on Border Control," Calgery Herald, October 8,1994. "Visa Abolished for Hungarians to Canada from November 1," MTI Econews,October 10, 1994. "Canadian Minister of Immigration Visits Refugee Camp," MTIEconews, October 9, 1994. _________________________________________ ASIA _________________________________________ TaiwanAllows More Foreign Workers Manufacturing firms in Taiwan have been given the green light by the Council ofLabor Affairs to submit applications to import foreign workers. The Councilhas not set a maximum number of foreign workers who will be allowed to work inTaiwan. Employers wanting to employ foreign workers must meet several criteria,including participation in large-scale public works projects requiring aminimum capital investment of NT $200 million (US$77 million). Foreign workerscan be used in construction and manufacturing, but they must not exceed 50percent of the total workforce in construction or 35 percent of the workforcein manufacturing. Contractors needing workers to build schools and medical facilities can bringin foreign workers if the project exceeds NT$150 million in value. Privateprojects and government sponsored social welfare facilities can use foreignworkers if the investment exceeds NT$100 million. All construction projectsusing foreign workers must last 18 months or more. The Economic Planning and Development Committee of Taiwan estimates that therewill be an annual shortage of 236,000 workers between 1994 and 1996. TheDirectorate-General of Budget, Accounting and Statistics estimates that Taiwanwill need as many as 145,000 additional foreign workers to solve its laborshortage in 1995. The manufacturing sector hired 135,000 foreign workers in1993, an increase of 165 percent over the previous year. Taiwan requires employers of foreign workers to pay an employment stability feein order to bridge the income gap between Taiwan workers and imported foreignworkers. As of November 1, the employment stability fee for employers offoreign workers will be increased by NT$100. The fees range fromNT$1,400(US$54) for foreign workers in manufacturing to NT$600 (US$23) formaids. These foreign worker impact fees are adjusted frequently. On October 21, the Taiwan Executive Yuan approved a revision in the EmploymentService Law to allow white-collar foreign workers to extend their stays beyondthe previous three-year limit. Blue-collar foreign workers can extend theirstay from two years to three and one-half years. Blue-collar foreign workerswill also be required to make deposits with the government to prevent them fromleaving their approved jobs for higher-paying illegal work. Over the past two years, the CLA approved requests for 117,408 Thai workers towork in Taiwan: Thais are about 68 percent of the total foreign labor force inTaiwan. Thais who want to work in Taiwan must pay job brokerage fees in bothThailand and Taiwan that range from 70,000 to 100,000 baht (US$2800 toUS$4000). Many Thai workers leave their construction jobs to work in localfactories at a higher wage, in part to repay their debts to job placementagencies. In May, 1994, over 1,000 Thais were reported to have left theirentry jobs and nearly 4,000 had overstayed their permits. The Taiwan government has asked Thailand to crack down on the job placementagencies, or face the possibility of a ban on Thai workers. As a result, theThai Labour and Social Welfare Ministry began a program to eliminate paymentsto Thais placement firms by directly contracting with Taiwan firms. "CLA to Allow Many More Foreign Workers For Major Projects," China EconomicNews Service, October 8, 1994. "Labor Council Plans to Raise the Cost ofHiring Foreigners," China Economic News Service, October 4, 1994. "ExecutiveYuan OKs Revised Employment and Service Law," China Economic News Service,October 21, 1994. Prapaiparn Rathamarit and Wuth Nontarit, "Governments Urgedto Solve Job Seeking Problems," Bangkok Post, October 19, 1994. _________________________________________ Malaysiato Continue Import of Bangladeshi Workers Malaysia agreed to import 50,000 skilled and semi-skilled workers fromBangladesh each year. There are currently 100,000 Bangladeshi workers inMalaysia. The Bangladeshi prime minister asked Malaysia to accept up to 750,000Bangladeshi workers. Bangladesh receives about $900 million annually inremittances. In January 1994, the Malaysian government announced a freeze on the recruitmentof additional foreign workers until illegal immigration was brought undercontrol. The freeze was relaxed in May 1994, after the Cabinet decided to allowemployers facing labor shortages to apply directly to the government forforeign workers. Malaysia has received $20 billion in foreign investment in manufacturing duringthe past six years, helping to generate an annual 8.6 percent growth rate since1988. Wages in many jobs are rising at a 10 percent annual rate, unemploymentis less than three percent, and managers and engineers can earn $30,000annually. The plants originally opened by foreign investors to produce electroniccomponents today employ high percentages of engineers--one in six of the 2,000workers at Intel's plant in Penang, for example, is an engineer. Somespeculate that American high-skilled jobs may be at risk as product design anddevelopment follow manufacturing to countries such as Malaysia. "Malaysia to Take in More Bangladeshi Workers," Xinhua News Agency, October 11,1994. Bangladesh Prime Minister Arrives in Malaysia," Reuters, October 11,1994. "Job agencies 'exaggerate' shortage of workers, The Straits Times,October 10, 1994. "Police chase nets 200 foreign workers," The Straits Times(Singapore), October 17, 1994; G. Pascal Zachary, "High Tech Firms Shift someskilled work to Asian Countries," Wall Street Journal, September 30, 1994, A1 _________________________________________ Labor Shortages in Asia Some four million Asians work in an Asian country other than their own.Foreign workers are drawn to South Korea, Malaysia, Taiwan, Hong Kong andSingapore by abundant jobs and higher wages. The major labor exporters are thePhilippines, Indonesia, Bangladesh and Thailand. Many countries are both labor exporters and importers-- workers from Burmamigrate to Thailand to fill jobs left vacant by Thais who are searching forhigher wages in Hong Kong. Many Asian migrants work illegally; entering ontourist visas, and using forged papers or expired work permits to obtain jobs.These vulnerable workers are sometimes abused by employers, some of whom treatthe migrants as indentured servants, controlling not only their workingenvironment, but also their personal lives. In fast-growing Asian countries such as Malaysia and Thailand, the salaries ofengineers and skilled technicians are rising sharply in response to thecreation of three new engineering positions for every two engineeringgraduates. As foreign investors continue to create jobs in these countries,they increasingly seek to bring with them Indian, Filipino, and Chineseengineers. Many business leaders are urging governments to relax theirtemporary worker policies until local education systems can catch-up with thedemand for skilled workers. Far Eastern Economic Review, Sept. 29, 199462-69. Marc Levinson, "The GreatAsian Job Hunt," Newsweek (International), October 17, p. 38. Johanna Son,"Labor: For Jobs, Go East," InterPress Service, October 19, 1994. __________________________________________ PhilippineOverseas Workers Between 1990 and 1993, the number of Filipinos abroad has increased from fiveto six million, a 20 percent increase over the previous three-year period. ThePhilippines is, after Mexico, the world's second largest country of emigration.The number of emigrants grew by five percent and contract workers by 56percent, according to the Filipino foreign secretary. The ten most importantdestination countries between 1985 and 1993 were Saudi Arabia, Hong Kong,Kuwait, Japan, the UAE, Singapore, Qatar, Bahrain, Brunei and Oman. During this period, there were a total of 3,692,690 Filipino overseas workers,5.7 percent of the total Philippine population, given the current population of65 million. In addition, there are tens of thousands of undocumented workersand immigrants who left the Philippines without the proper documentation fromeither the Philippines or their country of destination. The foreign secretaryestimated that there are as many as six million Filipinos overseas, withundocumented workers accounting for 30 percent of the total. On October 5, Philippines Foreign Secretary Roberto Romulo called on the UnitedNations to hold an international conference on global migration anddevelopment. He said that the transnational migration of workers is anincreasingly important phenomenon, and that the rights of migrant workers mustbe protected. He urged the UN to ratify or accede to an internationalconvention on the rights of all migrant workers and members of their families. Rodolfo Cestimo, "OCWs on the rise worldwide," Moneyclips, October 6, 1994."Philippines call for global migration conference," Xinhua News Agency, October5, 1994. _________________________________________ Cambodia-No Expulsions of Vietnamese Cambodia continues to insist that a new immigration law effective September 22will not lead to the expulsion of thousands of Vietnamese who live in Cambodia.In a September 19 letter to the UN Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali, theCambodian Prime Minister said that "I can give you every assurance that nodecision intending to massively expel or canton (intern) foreigners will betaken." The main concern of human rights organizations is the absence of language whichdefines Cambodian citizenship, so that any person who is not Khmer could beexpelled. The UN High Commission for Refugees has been approached aboutsetting up internment camps within Cambodia, a move which feeds the fears ofthe Vietnamese. UNHCR refused the request, and has criticized Cambodia'simmigration law. Independent estimates place the number of Vietnamese living in Cambodia at150,000 to 500,000; the Cambodian government reports that there are 100,300.Over half of the Vietnamese arrived in Cambodia after Vietnam's invasion ofCambodia in 1978. The Khmer Rouge believes that more than four millionVietnamese secretly occupy Cambodia, and they are plotting to take over thecountry. Cambodia has a population of nine million, compared with 70 million in Vietnam.Cambodians traditionally fear a Vietnamese takeover. There are about 6,000 Vietnamese living on the Cambodia-Vietnam border.Vietnam refuses to let them re-enter Vietnam, and Cambodian authorities refuseto allow them to return to Cambodian villages, despite the fact that some havelived in Cambodia for generations. Nate Thayer, "Hostile Home: Vietnamese fear expulsion under new law," FarEaster Economic Review, October 13, 1994. "Cambodia says it will not expelVietnamese en masse," Japan Economic Newswire, October 10, 1994. Mark Dodd,"Cambodia's Ranariddh pledges no mass expulsions," Reuters, October 9, 1994.Tom Fawthrop, "Will Immigration Law Lead to Mass Expulsion?" InterPressService, October 19, 1994. __________________________________________ AsianGames Draw Illegal Immigrants to Japan Foreign workers took advantage of relaxed immigration controls during the 12thAsian Games in Hiroshima during the first two weeks of October to illegallyenter the country to look for work. A group of Filipinos posing as thevolleyball team, complete with uniforms, was the first group apprehended tryingto sneak into the country. Immigration authorities were suspicious becauseteam members were short and middle-aged. A call to the Philippines revealedthat there was no Filipino volleyball team competing in the games. Another 15Burmese had false visas and claimed to be their country's soccer cheering club.Finally, a team of "Greek" athletes--none of whom could speak no Greek--wereintercepted and deported to Seoul. By the end of the games, nearly 100 people had been caught trying to sneak intoAsia's richest county. Athletes began to call it "The Great Escape." Despitezealous observation by Japanese officials and appeals from coaches, 15 athletesfrom Pakistan, Sri Lanka, Nepal, and Bangladesh were missing, and presumed tobe working illegally, by the end of the games on October 16. Agence Presse France, October 11, 1994. "Fifteen athletes still missing fromAsian Games," Reuters, October 17, 1994. "Asiad organizers renew call to stopathletes absconding," Japan Economic Newswire, October 14, 1994. _________________________________________ HongKong Prepares to Face Post-1997 Some 400,000 of Hong Kong's six million residents are believed to have foreignpassports, and thousands more could move to another country (such as Singapore)if they wished. The Chinese government has announced that it will not permitHong Kong residents with the right to live overseas to hold top posts in thepost-1997 government. The Hong Kong government also announced that all applications for foreigndomestic workers will be handled by the Hong Kong government, not Britishembassies in the maids countries of origin. The change is expected to bringprocessing delays of up to two years, and to force domestic workers, many ofwhom are from the Philippines, to seek work elsewhere in the region. After1997, job applications will be made to the Special Administrative Regiongovernment, which is expected to restrict the entry of foreign maids, replacingthem with mainland Chinese domestic workers. Far Eastern Economic Review, September 29, 1994 (18-20). Scott McKenzie andJohn Dikkenberg, "Change in maid policy 'may mean hold ups,'" South ChinaMorning Post, October 5, 1994. _________________________________________ SingaporeReviews Need for Foreign Workers The construction industry in Singapore has been allowed a ratio of fiveforeigners to every one local worker. The government has said that ifconstruction continues to grow rapidly, it will review the quota on unskilledforeign workers and perhaps allow more foreign workers. The Labor Ministerreported that unskilled foreign workers are only being used to fill short-termconstruction labor needs. The government policy permits entry of skilled foreign construction workers forthree years. Skilled workers can apply for permanent resident status. "Unskilled foreign workers: Govt to keep limits," The Straits Times(Singapore), October 17, 1994. _________________________________________ Illegalsin Korea South Korea's Justice Ministry announced that there were 50,600 illegal aliensin the country in September, 1994, including 42 percent who were mostly ethnicKoreans from China, 11 percent Filipinos, and five percent each from Nepal andPakistan. Between January and August 1994, 174 illegal aliens were deported,and 43,000 were told to leave Korea. More than 50,000 illegal foreign workers in South Korea, Agence France Presse,October 7, 1994. _________________________________________ ThailandCracks down on Illegal Aliens There are an estimated 600,000 illegal aliens in Thailand, including 480,000Burmese and 100,000 Chinese. Henceforth, illegal aliens who cannot pay fineswill be detained, and some countries nationals who previously could get visasupon their arrival in Thailand will not be able to. "Thailand: Officials To Face Wrath Over Illegal Immigrants," Bangkok PostOctober 9, 1994 __________________________________________ OTHER __________________________________________ IsraelReplaces Palestinians with Guestworkers The Israeli government on October 23, 1994 increased the number of foreignworkers permitted to enter the country from 35,000 to 54,000. The foreignworkers replace the estimated 60,000 Arabs from the West Bank and Gaza who havebeen prohibited from working in Israel after the bus bombing in Tel Aviv inmid-October. Most of Israel's non-Arab guestworkers are from Thailand, China, Romania, andBulgaria. There are currently 34,200 workers, mostly from Romania andThailand, who were brought into Israel during previous closures. Theadditional 19,000 guestworkers include 15,000 construction workers and 4,000agricultural workers. It is expected that when Israel reopens the border, a smaller number ofPalestinians will be permitted to work in Israel. After the border closure inMay 1993, the number of Palestinians working in Israel dropped by an estimated30,000 to 60,000. In Gaza, 50 percent of the 900,000 inhabitants areunemployed, and most live in refugee camps with below poverty-line incomes.Restricting their access to the Israeli labor market will create problems forPalestinian leader Yasar Arafat, since Arab "day workers" who cross into Israelbring back $700,000 each day, according to the World Bank. In a related story, there is a growing movement in Israel to restrict theimmigration of elderly Jews likely to become public charges. Prime MinisterRabin opposes this anti-immigrant movement, arguing that aliyah or immigrationis the raison d'etre of Israel. Israel already discourages elderly RussianJews from immigrating; persons over 65 are 1 in 6 Russian immigrants. Today,10 percent of the Israeli population is 65 or older. In 1993, 76, 410 immigrants moved to Israel, but 29 percent did not declarethemselves to be Jews--their mothers were--and at least a few were quoted assaying that Israel should help everyone regardless of their religion. Membersof so-called "Lost Tribes" in India and Africa have begun to apply to immigrateto Israel, prompting more Israelis to argue that the "law of return" must beended. Clyde Haberman, "Israel Arrests Militants in reaction to Bus Bomb," New YorkTimes, October 24, 1994, A3. "Israeli cabinet approves peace treaty withJordan, anti-Hamas measurers," BBC Summary of World Broadcasts, October 24,1994. Jeffrey Heller, "Israel discloses Hamas arrests before Clinton trip,"Reuters, October 24, 1994. "Closure of Palestinian Territories Could StrangleEconomy," Federal News Service, October 21, 1994. Amy Docker Marcus, "TheUnchosen: As the Sick and Aged Head to Israel, Critics cry 'shut the door'',"Wall Street Journal, October 31, 1994, A1. __________________________________________ SouthAfrica Fights Illegal Immigration One illegal immigrant enters South Africa every 10 minutes, according to theHome Affairs regional director. In order to stem the tide of illegal entrants,South Africa is considering a number of measures, including a US-style "greencard," without which a foreigner could not work. In 1993, South Africa expelled 96,000 illegal aliens to 39 countries, primarilyMozambique, Lesotho and Zimbabwe. But the control immigration officer for theJohannesburg region estimates that his department is apprehending less than 10percent of the illegals. According to some observers, a country with an unemployment rate of nearly 50percent, and a population with high expectations, has much to fear from theestimated two to eight million foreigners in South Africa. There are reportsfrom the northern Transvaal that children as young as 12 are working as farmworkers for 10 pounds (US$6) a month--adults receive about 30 pounds (US$18). Chief Mangosuthu Buthelezi's Inkatha Freedom Party is leading a campaign to"clean" the country of illegal immigrants. It is organizing demonstrations andthreatening direct action if the government does not deal with the issue.Chief Buthelezi is the minister of home affairs, the agency responsible forimmigration. Many of the illegal workers are from Zimbabwe, where two million workers areunemployed. Farm workers, hotel cleaners and miners are now being joined byprofessionals including teachers, doctors, engineers and nurses who findsalaries much higher in South Africa. There are an estimated 300,000Zimbabweans in South Africa, most working legally. South Africa deported nearly 10,000 illegal migrants at the end of September.Over 13,500 Zimbabweans were expelled from Botswana between February andAugust, 1994. The Zimbabwean government fears that these mass deportations ofillegal Zimbabwean workers from Botswana and South Africa will create seriouseconomic problems for their country. The Zimbabwe government is asking SouthAfrica and Botswana to deport the illegal workers in stages, so that thecountry has a better chance to absorb them back into the economy. David Beresford, "The Streets of the City of Gold are Paved with Misery," TheGuardian, October 6, 1994. Byron Pearson, "South Africa in bid to halt floodof illegals," Agence France Presse, October 6, 1994. Li Zengfu, "Round-up:Illegal job seekers create problems in southern Africa. "Xinhua News Agency,October 15, 1994. _________________________________________ Australia'sMulticultural Policy Criticized The state representative of a Sydney suburb that is 55 percent Asian was killedSeptember 5, allegedly by Asian gang members. His murder opened a debate onthe crime that can accompany immigration. Some politicians and academics usedthe murder to argue against Australia's multiculturalism policy, whichencourages immigrants to retain their home cultures in Australia. Australia's Chinese community doubled between 1986 and 1991, to just under78,000, according to a report released by the Bureau of Immigration andPopulation Research. Contributing to the rise is the Australian government'sencouragement of private overseas students in the mid-1980s and the entry ofthousands of Chinese after Tiananmen Square. The report found that China-born Australians over age 15 have substantiallymore education than the general population. An even higher proportion of thesecond-generation Chinese community have post-secondary education. Far Eastern Economic Review, Sept. 29, 1994, p. 23-X. Julie DelVecchio,"Chinese in Australia Double in Five Years," Sydney Morning Herald, October 17,1994. _________________________________________ OmanImposes Income Tax on Foreign Workers Oman is the first oil-rich country to levy an income tax on foreign workers inan effort to increase government revenues. Under new legislation, companieswill be taxed according to the number of foreigners they employ, and Omanicitizens will pay taxes for domestic workers. Foreigners earning between US$2,684 and US$3,159 per year will pay taxesequivalent to six percent of their earnings, and those earning more than US$3,159 will pay seven percent. Companies will pay US$158 per year for eachforeign worker they employ, and employers of foreign maids will pay US$408 forone worker and an additional US$316 for the second worker. A tax of US$526will be levied on each foreign driver. "Oman imposes income tax on foreign workers," Xinhua News Service, October 4,1994. __________________________________________ Lebanese-SyrianMigration Agreement Lebanon and Syria signed the first agreement on the flow of tens of thousandsof Syrian workers into Lebanon. The Syrian workers are employed mainly in theagriculture and construction sector. Exact numbers are difficult to determine,because the Syrian workers are not required to have permits. Under the agreement, Syrian workers will still not be required to have a workpermit to enter Lebanon. The Lebanese Labor Minister estimates that there areabout 150,000 Syrians working in his country, but President Hrawi estimatesthere are closer to 700,000. Talks to increase the workers pay by 88 percentcontinue. Nadim Ladki, "Lebanon, Syria to sign labour agreement-minister," Reuters,October 12, 1994. __________________________________________ RESOURCES ___________________________________________ Spencer, Sarah(Ed). 1994. Immigration as an Economic Asset: The GermanExperience. Staffordshire, UK, Trentham Books. This book features five chapters by Germans explaining the evolution andeconomic impacts of immigrants in Germany. According to the British editor,Britons who participated in the conference at which these papers were presentedwere surprised by the dominant roles played by German unions and employers inestablishing German migration policies, and by the general agreement thatimmigrant economic impacts were positive in Germany. Some Britons wereconvinced that similar economic reasoning would not be persuasive in Britain,where politicians are reluctant to change immigration policies. Some 4.2 million immigrants entered Germany between 1988 and 1992. UrsulaMehrlaender describes the three phases of German immigration--guestworkerrecruitment between 1955 and 1973, then the unification of families in Germany,and after 1985, a dramatic increase in asylum applicants, peaking at 438,000 in1992. Ethnic Germans from the ex-USSR and Eastern Europe are not considered tobe immigrants, and are thus excluded from German data on foreigners. According to Gieseck and his colleagues, German GNP in 1992 was six percenthigher than in would have been without immigration. Since foreigners are abouteight percent of the population, this indicates that foreigners have belowaverage incomes. Because some foreigners still leave Germany when unemploymentrises, Gieseck calculates that the German unemployment rate would have been 0.2percent higher without the flexibility provided by immigrants. Sen emphasizesthat the 1.9 million Turks in Germany have created at least 125,000 jobs inTurkish-owned firms there. According to economic theory, the availability of immigrant workers shouldraise profits and depress wages, at least in the short run. According to KlausZimmermann, in 1992, business profits were 10 percent higher than they wouldhave been without immigration. However, Zimmermann estimates that workersearnings were also raised about five percent by immigration, although he notesthat the presence of young immigrants may make it hard for older German workerswho lose their jobs to find new ones. Ralf Ulrich calculates that in 1984, foreigners received more in unemploymentbenefits than they paid in unemployment taxes--unemployment benefits in Germanyare financed by worker contributions. However, immigrants paid more for healthinsurance than they cost in benefits. Many German academics and policy makers assert that Germany, whose nativepopulation is shrinking--deaths exceed births--will have to actively acceptimmigrants in order to pay its pension obligations. Even if productivityrises, and more women join the labor force, there are estimates that Germanywill need to accept at least 300,000 immigrants annually just to keep pensioncontributions on active workers manageable. Ulrich notes that importing immigrants to provide pension contributions in apay-as-you-go system puts a country on an immigration treadmill, because theimmigrants also age, and thus draw pensions themselves. Even 200,000 youngimmigrants annually, most of whom go to work immediately, will provide only atemporary cushion for the pension system, and they barely make a dent in themedian age of the population. Furthermore, if less-educated immigrants aredisproportionately affected by technological trends that are raising theunemployment rates for such workers, their economic and pension contributionsmay be less than anticipated. Germans disagree on whether immigrants will be needed for economic reasons, andwhether current policies promote immigrant integration. Zimmermann assertsthat immigrant workers are needed in Germany, and that the how many questionfacing all immigration countries should be answered by calculating the marginalcontributions of immigrants, as well as their marginal costs of adaptation, andhalting immigration when costs exceed contributions. He further echoes thecall for a GATT-analog--a General Agreement on Migration Policy, he asserts,could allow European countries to establish immigration quotas for economicmigrants, thereby reducing the number of asylum seekers. Many Germans and foreign observers have noted the contradiction in currentGerman immigration policy--promote the integration of foreigners who wish tostay, but also encourage the return of those who can be persuaded to leave. Inthis context, integration is usually thought of as foreigners accepting andadopting German customs. Sen and many Germans argue that foreigners settled inGermany should be allowed to have dual citizenship, so that they canparticipate in German political life, and be taken seriously by politicians,and not have to appear disloyal to their countries of origin, or give up theright to inherit property or invest on favorable terms there. However, thecurrent Kohl government has expressed opposition to dual citizenship. ____________________________ Borjas, George. 1994. Immigration and Welfare, 1970-1990, NBER Working Paper4872. According to the 1990 Census of Population, foreign-born persons were eightpercent of the US population and 10 percent of the households receiving publicassistance payments, but they received 13 percent of all cash assistancepayments from programs such as AFDC and SSI, reflecting larger immigrantfamilies. The typical household headed by a native-born person on welfarereceived $4,000 in cash benefits in 1989, versus $5,400 by households gettingcash assistance whose heads were foreign-born. The percentage of families receiving cash assistance and headed by aforeign-born person varied by country of origin: it was highest for personsfrom Southeast Asia, about 11 to 12 percent for immigrants from Mexico, and twoto four percent for persons from East Asia. For immigrants from mostcountries, the percentage of families receiving cash assistance has beenrising--about 30 percent of the households headed by immigrants from theDominican Republic are receiving cash assistance even after 10 years in theUS. ____________________________ Clark, Rebecca et.al. 1994. Fiscal Impacts of Undocumented Aliens: SelectedEstimates for Seven States. Available from the Urban Institute, 2100 M St,Washington, DC, 20037. September. This study was conducted at the request of the Office of Management and Budgetand Department of Justice to examine the fiscal effects of unauthorized orillegal aliens in seven states--California, Florida, Texas, New York, Illinois.Arizona, and New Jersy. Estimates were developed for three types of costsincurred to provide services to illegal aliens--incarceration, elementary andsecondary education, and emergency medical services--and the federal, state,and local taxes paid by these aliens. Based on INS estimates (MN, May, 1994), the Urban Institute estimated thatthere were 3.4 million illegal aliens in the US in October 1992, and 86 percentwere in the seven-study states. As of March 1994, the Urban Instituteestimated that 21,395 illegal aliens were incarcerated in the seven states at acost of $471 million per year or an average annual cost to the states of$22,000 each; 641,000 illegal alien pupils enrolled in public schools at a costof $3.1 billion or $4,800 each; and $445 million was spent on Medicaid for apresumed 3.2 million unauthorized aliens in 1993, or $1,400 each--the number ofunauthorized aliens is estimated to increase by 300,000 per year, and 86percent are in these seven states. The taxes paid by unauthorized aliens to state and local governments wereestimated indirectly to be $1.9 billion. These taxes included 59 percent fromsales taxes, 37 percent from property taxes, and five percent from state incometaxes. Other recently-issued Urban Institute Books and Working Papers include: Edmonston, Barry and Jeffrey S. Passel, Eds. 1994. Immigration and Ethnicity:The Integration of America Newest Arrivals. Washington, DC: The UrbanInstitute Press, 2100 M Street, NW, Washington, DC 20037. Duleep, Harriet Orcutt and Seth Sanders. 1994. "Identifying Stable ChildStatus-Work Relationships for Married Women: Insights from RecentImmigrations." Washington DC: The Urban Institute, Research Paper #32 Duleep, Harriet Orcutt and Mark C. Regets. 1994. "Country of Origin andImmigrant Earnings. Washington DC: The Urban Institute, Research Paper #31. Duleep, Harriet Orcutt and Mark C. Regets. 1994. "Admission Criteria andImmigrant Earnings Profiles." Washington DC: The Urban Institute, ResearchPaper #30. Duleep, Harriet Orcutt and Mark C. Regets. 1994. "The Elusive Concept ofImmigrant Quality." Washington DC: The Urban Institute, Research Paper#328. ____________________________ The October 17, 1994 Issue of The Nation includes four immigration articles.David Cole challenges what he asserts are five immigration myths; Leslie Silkoattacks the Border Patrol's interior check points on Southwestern highways;Elizabeth Kadetsky discusses the supporters of California's Proposition 187,asserting that its chief authors, Harold Ezell and Alan Nelson, have distancedthemselves both from the SOS organization and from FAIR; and Peter Kwongreports on a visit to Wenzhou in southeastern China, to explore reasons whyyoung Chinese are willing to pay $1,500 down, and borrow the remaining $30,000necessary to be smuggled to the U.S. and then work in sweatshops to pay offtheir debts - the major reasons seem to be competition and corruption in Chinathat prevent rural industries from being profitable, and knowledge that some ofthose smuggled to the U.S. have been successful, as evidenced by theremittances they send back. ____________________________ Einwanderungspolitik Kanadas und der USA: Beispiele fuer die BundesrepublikDeutschland. 1994. Available from the Friedrich-Ebert Stiftung, GodesbergerAllee 149, D-53175 Bonn, Number 31. This monograph includes four articles on Canada's multiculturalist policies,and an overview of US immigration policies. Some of the German participants inthe seminars at which these papers were presented were surprised to learn thatimmigration and integration are just as hotly debated in classical ortraditional countries of immigration as in the "new" immigration countries ofEurope.