WT02-B15-1IA090-000969-B027-70http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/By-Month/MN-Vol-3-96/MN_May_96.html 128.120.36.171 19970122205021 text/html 131319HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 20:50:58 GMTLast-Modified: Sunday, 29-Oct-95 00:34:30 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 131062 MIGRATIONNEWS  MIGRATION NEWS Vol. 3, No. 5 May, 1996 Migration News summarizes the most important immigration and integrationdevelopments during the preceding month. Topics are grouped by region: North America, Europe, Asia, andOther. There are two versions of Migration News. The paper copy has about 8,000words, and the email version about 15,000 words. The purpose of Migration News is to provide summaries of recentimmigration developments that can be read in 60 minutes or less. Many issuessummaries and reviews of recent research publications. Distribution is by email. If you wish to subscribe, send your emailaddress to: MigrationNews <migrant@primal.ucdavis.edu> Current and back issues may be accessed via Internet on the Migration NewsHome Page--- http://migration.ucdavis.edu There is no charge for an email subscription to Migration News. A papercopy of Migration News is available by mail for $30 domestic and $50 foreign.Make checks payable to UC Regents and send to: Philip Martin, Department ofAgricultural Economics, University of California, Davis California 95616 USA. Migration News is produced with the support of the University ofCalifornia-Berkeley Center for German and European Studies, the German MarshallFund of the United States, and the Pew Charitable Trusts. ISSN 1081-9916 Editor: Philip Martin Managing Editor: Cecily Sprouse Department of Agricultural Economics, University of California, Davis CA95616 Tel (916) 752-1530 Fax: (916) 752-5614 email: <migrant@primal.ucdavis.edu> _______________________________ NORTHAMERICA _______________________________ Senate Tackles IllegalImmigration On May 2, the Senate voted 97-3 to approve a measure (S164) aimed atreducing illegal immigration. A similar House bill approved in March 1996 by avote of 333-87 will be reconciled with the Senate bill in a conferencecommittee. The US Senate took up bills to reform illegal (S 1664) and legal (S 1665)immigration on April 15, 1996. The scheduled three-day debate was halted April16 when Democrats demanded votes on amendments to immigration reformlegislation that would bar the use of Social Security trust funds to balancethe budget, and increase the minimum wage from the current $4.25 hourly to$5.15. On April 24, the Senate resumed debate on the bill to reduce illegalimmigration, with the final vote on May 2. Two issues that came up in the House-approved bill in March 1996 did notcome up in the Senate bill--farmers did not offer an amendment for a guestworker program, and no amendment was offered to deny K-12 education to illegalalien children. Illegal Immigration. To deter illegal immigration, Simpson's billwould double the number of Border Patrol agents to 10,000, speed thedeportation of criminal aliens, and call for a triple-tier, 14-mile-long fencealong the border with Mexico south of San Diego. The Immigration and Naturalization Service would be required to conductpilot programs to test systems that would allow employers to verify the legalstatus of newly hired workers--a provision that many called the "heart andsoul" of US efforts to reduce illegal immigration. An amendment to strike thepilot projects, on the grounds that they will lead to a national identity card,were defeated by a 54-46 vote on May 1. Simpson's bill would also require states to issue birth certificates anddrivers' licenses that include Social Security numbers and meet federalanti-counterfeiting standards, deny welfare and other assistance tounauthorized immigrants, non-immigrants, and PRUCOL residents, and define"public charge" for the purpose of being deportable from the US as receivingwelfare assistance for 12 or more months in any five-year period. Under current law, legal immigrants have limited access to Aid to Familieswith Dependent Children, Food Stamps, and the Supplemental Security Incomeprogram for the disabled. If an immigrant applies for these benefits, and wassponsored by a US relative, then the US sponsor's income is counted or deemedto be available to the immigrant, making many immigrants ineligible. The major fight in the Senate was how long to deem that the income ofsponsors be available to immigrants, and to which assistance programs deemingshould apply. Simpson proposed that deeming continue until an immigrant had 40quarters of employment (10 years) employment in the US; amendments reduced thedeeming period to five years. Amendments to limit deeming to cash assistance programs, or to exempt fromdeeming federal assistance for higher education, or to exempt from deemingapplicants for assistance who were veterans of the US Armed Forces, or pregnantwomen, all failed, mostly by votes of about 55 to 45. The Senate bill, as introduced by Simpson, would have restored theauthority of Border Patrol agents to enter open agricultural fields and checkfor unauthorized workers--until 1986, the Border Patrol routinely drove intofields and attempted to apprehend fleeing aliens. The Senate voted 79-20 tokeep the ban on open field searches on April 24. The House of Representatives did not alter the current requirement that theBorder Patrol must obtain a search warrant to enter open fields. On April 30, the Senate voted 62-37 to allow the 1966 Cuban RefugeeAdjustment Act to remain US law until Cuba has a democratic government. Underthe Act, Cubans apply for permanent resident status after living in the UnitedStates for a year, regardless of whether they arrived legally or illegally.Cubans are the only foreigners granted such automatic US immigrantstatus. Simpson's bill would have permitted INS asylum officers, with approval oftheir supervisors, to exclude asylum applicants who arrive in the US with falsedocuments or no documents, but the Senate approved an amendment by a vote of51-49 to substitute Attorney General discretion for dealing with asylum seekersat ports of entry (see article on terrorism/asylum below). Legal Immigration. "There will be no changes to legal immigrationin 1996." This seemed to be the consensus after the Senate rebuffed by widemargins efforts to restrict legal immigration--the House bill approved in March1996 does not change the legal immigration system. On April 25, Simpson offered an amendment to the illegal immigration billto reduce legal immigration by 10 percent for five years to provide the US with"breathing space" to absorb newcomers--his amendment was defeated by an 80-20vote after six hours of debate. An effort by Senator Feinstein (D-CA) to caplegal family immigration at 480,000 was also defeated by a vote of74-26. The legal immigration bill as introduced by Senator Alan Simpson (R-WY)would have reduced legal immigration by 25 percent by eliminating slots for theadult sons and daughters, and adult brothers and sisters, of US citizens.However, the Senate Judiciary Committee approved the Kennedy-Abraham amendmentthat would restructure the family unification system. Spouses, minor children,and parents of US citizens could continue to enter the US without restriction,but the current 226,000 per year visas available for family unification wouldbe reduced to 175,000. The preferences would change to be 1) the spouses andminor children of legal immigrants; 2) the unmarried adult sons and daughtersof US citizens; 3) the married sons and daughters of US citizens; 4) theunmarried children of permanent immigrants and, finally; 5) the adult brothersand sisters of US citizens. These proposed changes would likely increase rather than decrease familyunification immigration, largely because over 1.3 million spouses and childrenof legal immigrants are currently waiting to immigrate--in many cases they arealready here illegally. They will be able to come in as the immediate familymembers of US citizens as their SAW-eligible fathers become naturalizedcitizens. This means that the "immediate family" backlog for immigrants islikely to be sharply reduced by 1997-98. There were 720,461 legal immigrants in FY95, including 507,000 familyunification immigrants, a sharp drop from 1993 and 1994. The INS was accusedof releasing the FY95 immigration numbers late in March in support of effortsto separate legal and illegal immigration, thus leaving the legal immigrationsystem intact, even though it expected an increase, to 650,000, in the numberof family unification immigrants in FY96. The INS was sharply criticized for implying that legal immigration wouldcontinue to decline when its internal projections showed that legal immigrationwould increase. Senator Simpson also proposed significant changes to systems through whichUS employers secure permanent and temporary immigrants to fill vacant USjobs. Reaction. Several police organizations attacked a provision in theHouse-approved immigration bill that would permit states to deny publiceducation to illegal alien children without cost. President Clinton haspromised to veto any immigration bill that includes the denial of educationprovision. Senator Bob Dole (R-KS) supports the House provision, which mirrors Prop.187's denial of K-12 schooling of illegal alien children. House SpeakerGingrich supported the measure in the House. The Clinton administration hasalso vowed to veto any immigration reform the Prop-187 measure excludingillegal alien children from US public schools. Eric Schmitt, "Senate Bars Plans to Cut Immigration," New York Times, April26, 1996. Marc Lacey, "Senate rejects cutbacks in legal immigration," LosAngeles Times, April 26, 1996. David LaGesse, "Senate rejects effort to reducelegal immigration," Dallas Morning News, April 26, 1996. "Cuts in LegalImmigration Rebuffed as Debate on Reform Bill Continues," Daily Report forExecutives, April 26, 1996. Christi Harlan, "Senate retreats from limitinglegal immigration," Austin American-Statesman, April 26, 1996. Adam Clymer,"Dole Pulls Bill on Immigration Over Side Issues," New York Times, April 17,1996. Diane Targovnik, "Clinton will be asked to veto ban on immigrantschooling," Houston Chronicle, April 16, 1996. Michael Doyle, "Border Patrolrues ban on searches," Sacramento Bee, April 14, 1996. Eric Schmitt, "Policescorn plan to deny schooling to illegal aliens," New York Times, April 9,1996. _____________________________ ImmigrantBeatings, Numbers andNaturalization On April 1, two white Riverside county sheriff's deputies were tapedbeating two unauthorized Mexican aliens who had led them on an 80 milehigh-speed chase after trying to evade an Immigration and NaturalizationService checkpoint in southern California. The aliens who were beaten were inthe cab of a pickup truck that had 18 aliens crammed under a campershell. The INS stopped chasing illegal immigrants attempting to evade them after a1992 chase killed several innocent bystanders by a southern Californiaschool. On April 4, the two immigrants who were beaten filed a $70 million lawsuitagainst Riverside county, and were offered a place to stay by actor MarlonBrando. The lawyer for one of the immigrants said that if the claim wasrejected, he would file suit in federal court alleging violations of the UnitedNations' conventions against torture. Most of the Mexican migrants were from Cheran, an emigration village about30,000 people in Michoacan, half-way between Guadalajara and Mexico City wheredaily wages average $3 to $7. An estimated 7,000 persons born in the villageare now in the US. In another incident, a stolen camper with 26 unauthorized aliens crashed onApril 6 attempting to evade the Border Patrol, killing seven. One of thoseinjured was a Mexican national being paid $200 to guide the illegal aliensaround a Border Patrol checkpoint to Los Angeles. Immigrant rights groups protested the beatings, calling them the "RodneyKing" incident that may wake up the nation to violence against illegalimmigrants in the same way that the 1991 tape of police beating of Kingillustrated police violence against African Americans. Several groups assertedthat hate crimes and police beatings of immigrants have increased since Prop.187 was approved by voters in November 1994. There were several demonstrations in Los Angeles, including a march of6,000 people on April 6, 1996. A counter demonstration in support of law enforcement was organized by manyof the groups that supported Proposition 187. They argued that immigrationrights advocates were trying to use the beatings to discourage Congress fromenacting new measures to curb illegal immigration. A member of the Coalition for Humane Immigrant Rights said that the illegalimmigrants who were beaten had been promised work permits by federalimmigration officials. The INS said that, like the case of the Thai workersheld in slavery conditions, the immigrants may be given work permits if theyare needed as material witnesses in the investigations. The immigrants will beallowed to remain in the country for six months while the investigation isbeing conducted. Mexico took the lead in denouncing the beatings. President Zedillo onApril 16 called the beatings on unauthorized aliens "totally unjustified," andthe protests in the US against the beatings "totally justified." Zedilloannounced that he will ask for an international conference to endorse the humanrights of migrants and their families. Mexico's Congress called for an exhaustive study of "aggressive violationsof human rights" in the US. All four parties in the Mexican Congress passedbinding resolutions requiring the government to publish a detailed list ofhuman rights violations committed against Mexicans in the US over the past fiveyears. The Mexican network Televisa led its newscasts with the beating story theentire first week of April, and several Mexican politicians spoke of a US "war"against Mexicans. Mexican television commentators referred to those beaten notas criminals, but as poverty-stricken people searching for work to care fortheir families. Other Mexicans said that Mexican anger should be directed against theMexican government, because it failed to create an economy that offers enoughjobs in Mexico. On April 10, there was a videotaped police killing of Mexicansin Olmedo, Mexico. A poll taken April 8-9 by the Reforma newspaper found that 61 percent ofthe respondents in Mexico City and Monterry were not satisfied with theresponse of the Mexican government. Almost half of the Mexicans polled do notthink that the US justice system will punish the Riverside County sheriff'sdeputies. The Reforma and El Norte newspapers conducted another poll April 13 to 17,1996 of 465 Mexicans in Mexico who had been apprehended and removed from the USby the INS. The poll found that 51 percent of the Mexicans described theirtreatment by the INS as "good." Another 34 percent said their treatment was"regular;" some said that the INS agents had used abusive or disrespectfullanguage in dealing with them. About 13 percent--one in eight--reported that they had been treated poorly;their complaints included beatings and prolonged detention. The questions wereasked on the Mexican side of the border as the Mexicans were returned from theUS. The survey also asked Mexicans how they got into the US. Most Mexicanstried to enter the US without a smuggler-- 71 percent. Most--67 percent--saidthat they tried to enter the US illegally because they were jobless in Mexico,and 36 percent were going to seek jobs in US agriculture, followed by 25percent seeking jobs in construction. The Mexicans polled as they were being returned from the US, reported thatthey earned an average $278 per week in the US in their last job, versus $31per week in their last Mexican job. Almost all of the Mexicans apprehendedreported that they sent money to their families--they had an average fourdependents in Mexico. The survey respondents reported that 61 percent of their US employerstreated them "well" or "very well," 32 percent said their treatment was"regular," and only two percent reported US employer mistreatment. Most ofthose surveyed felt more comfortable in Mexico than in the US, primarilybecause of their lack of English. The Mexicans apprehended had an average 6.4 years of Mexicaneducation. Representatives from Mexico and the US government agreed on April 14 to aseries of steps aimed at easing tensions at the US-Mexico border, includingreviews of police procedures in towns along the US side of the border, and acontinuation of presentations by Mexican officials to US Border Patrolagents. Enforcement. The INS reported that it had detained 1,176 foreignworkers from 32 countries at more than 100 businesses between March 18 andApril 12 in 19 eastern states. A report by the TransBorder Institute at the University of San Diego foundthat most of the 540 San Diego residents responding to the telephone survey inearly March want to strengthen US border controls. A slight majority of theself-identified Republicans, and a substantial majority of the Democrats, wouldprovide social services to illegal immigrants. Republicans favored employersanctions 8-to-1, while Democrats supported sanctions 3-to-1. In south Texas, the INS reported a ten-fold increase in December 1995 fromthe usual 10 to 15 families each month that attempt illegal entry into the USafter smugglers advised entrants that the INS does not detain families. Sincethe mid-1980s, the INS has released into the US aliens apprehended with minorchildren; even though most such aliens give false names and addresses anddisappear. As word of the INS policy spread, some adults "rented" children to ensurethat if caught by the INS, they would be released. The INS is reporting increasing arrests and deportation from the country'sinterior. In March 1996, some 86 vehicles carrying 1,300 aliens were stoppedin Colorado during "Operation Mountain Pass." As in other operations, the INSstressed that it was going after the "inhumane" and exploitative smugglers, notthe employers where the aliens hoped to get jobs, or the aliensthemselves. Over 1,000 illegal aliens were arrested during a sweep of 100 businesses inthe eastern United States between March 18 and April 12. The Department of Justice inspector general found that of the more thanhalf of the noncriminal illegal aliens apprehended in 1994 were still in the USat the end of the year. Based on a sampling of cases, the Department ofJustice estimates that the INS deported just 11 percent of the immigrants whowere not kept in custody after they were ordered deported. The INS generally sends a letter requesting that the person appear fordeportation, the so-called "run letter." The INS blames its inability to deportnoncriminal aliens to insufficient resources to detain them. The federal government has 41,000 law enforcement personnel, spread over 32agencies, including 6,000 Border Patrol officers. There are about 102,000persons working in federal prisons. Naturalization. The number of foreigners applying to becomenaturalized US citizens increased from 340,000 in 1992 to 592,000 in 1994, andis expected to top one million in 1995 and 1996. The immigration service expects one million applications in 1996. The INSlaunched a pilot program in Chicago in October 1995 to expedite the test thatimmigrants must take to become naturalized US citizens. Exams have multiplechoice questions, and oral interviews last 10 minutes. Applicants are givenfive sample multiple choice tests, a standardized list of 100 possiblequestions, and a list of vocabulary study words. The three million immigrants who became legal residents under theImmigration Reform and Control Act of 1986 became eligible for citizenshipbeginning in 1994. "Mexican deportees report good treatment," UPI, April 21, 1996. MarkFineman, "Zedillo Condemns Violence to Mexicans," Los Angeles Times, April 17,1996. Mark Fineman, "Mexico says steps will ease border tension," Los AngelesTimes, April 15, 1996. Sidney Weintraub, "Why Immigration Is Now a HumanRights Issue," Los Angeles Times, April 14, 1996. Arthur Golden, "Attitudes onMexico not what they seem," San Diego Union-Tribune, April 12, 1996. JimSprecht, "Study: INS failing to remove many illegal aliens ordered deported,"Gannett News Service, April 10, 1996. Mark Fineman, "Mexican Lawmakers TellZedillo to Divulge List of Alleged US Abuses," Los Angeles Times, April 10,1996. Edward Boyer, "INS Reneged on Permits, Group Says," Los Angeles Times,April 9, 1996. "Pursuit of illegals ends in tragedy," Los Angeles Times, April7, 1996; "Immigrants sneaking over the border rent kids to avoid detention,"Associated Press, April 6, 1996. Eric Malnic and Edward Boyar, "Deputies'clubbing of 2 suspects taped," Los Angeles Times, April 2, 1996. ____________________________ DOLReports on TemporaryWorkers The US Department of Labor's inspector general in April released an12-state audit of DOL labor certification activities that concluded that"foreign labor programs [that admit temporary and permanent immigrants to fillvacant US jobs]...do not protect US workers' jobs or wages from foreign labor."The audit recommends that the temporary foreign professionals program, the H-1Bprogram established by IMMACT in 1990, be abolished. The US permits the entry of foreign workers to fill vacant jobs when USworkers are not available. However, many labor economists have noted that itis very difficult for the government to second-guess an employer who assertsthat a foreigner is more qualified to fill a vacancy than a US worker, so thatthe US government typically establishes minimum wage and other criteria that aUS employer requesting foreign workers must satisfy, and then the governmentdepends on US worker complaints to ensure that employers live up to theircommitments. Temporary. The H-1B program came under attack in Congressionalhearings in 1995 (MN, October 1995), and in the DOL inspector general's report.The H-1B program permits up to 65,000 "professionals" in "specialtyoccupations" to enter the US each year for three years, and then their USemployers can request the renewal of H-1B work permits for another three years. US employers open the border gate to H-1B foreign workers by "attesting" ina labor condition application filed with the Department of Labor that they havetried and failed to find US citizens and legal immigrants by offeringprevailing wages. DOL must approve their request for temporary foreign workersunless it is "obviously inaccurate." The purpose of the program is to permit US employers "to meet urgent,short-term demand for highly skilled, unique individuals who are not available"in the US. The jobs that H-1B foreign workers are imported to fill mustrequire professional skills, which is usually interpreted to mean that theindividual filling them must have a BS/BA--it is not enough that the foreignworker has a BS/BA, the job must require such a degree. This leads toconfusion in occupations such as nursing--many Filipinas have BS degrees, butnursing in the US does not require a BS. It is estimated that 40 percent of the new H-1B visa approvals are forhigh-tech jobs such as computer programmers. Enforcement depends largely oncomplaints from competing US workers and businesses. According to the inspector general's report, the H-1B is in reality "aprobationary employment tryout program for illegal aliens, foreign students,and foreign visitors." If the foreigners turn out to be good workers, then theUS employer often sponsors them for permanent immigrant status. In many cases, US employers do not pay the prevailing wages to the H-1Bworkers that they promise in their attestations. One company said that it wasoffering US workers, and paying foreigners, $2,800 per month, but in fact paidthe foreigners it hired only $500 per month. DOL is requiring 14 companies topay $2 million in back wages to 400 foreign physical therapists for wages thatthey did not receive since 1989. About 60,000 H-1B temporary foreign workers are admitted each year and,because each H-1B can remain in the US for up to six years, there can be almost400,000 H-1B workers in the US at any one time. There were 43,000 visas issued by the US Department of State to H-1Bworkers in FY94, and the INS reported that there were 106,000 admissions ofH-1B workers in FY94--an INS admission occurs each time that an H-1B workerwith a multi-year visa enters the US. According to INS data, there were 186,000 temporary workers and traineesadmitted to the US in FY94, plus 43,000 spouses and children of theseworkers. Permanent. The US permits a maximum 140,000 immigrants (includingtheir family members) to come to the US each year for employment/economicreasons. An audit of employers who requested 24,000 permanent immigrationvisas for foreigners to fill vacant jobs in FY93 found that 99 percent of theforeigners were already in the US when the US employer requested the foreignworker, and that 74 percent of the foreigners were already employed by theemployer requesting them, including 16 percent who were employed illegally bytheir sponsoring employer. About 10 percent of the foreigners who became permanent immigrants on thegrounds that no US worker was available to fill the vacant job ever worked forthe US employer who sponsored the foreigner, and 17 percent of those receivingemployment/economic immigration visas worked for less than six months with thesponsoring employer. Some 165,000 US workers applied for these 24,000 jobs when the employeradvertised as required--almost seven US applicants per job--but in virtuallyevery case, the US workers were found not qualified, and the foreigners werehired. The audit also found that although immigrants enter the US attached toa specific job, once in the US, they look for more lucrative jobs competingwith US workers without regard to prevailing wages. The Wall Street Journal profiled George Borjas on April 26, 1996, aHarvard-economist who emigrated from Cuba as a child and now advocates lessunskilled immigration. The story summarized the Chiswick-Borjas debate overwhether immigrants catch up in earnings to similar US workers within 10 to 15years--Chiswick found that those arriving prior to 1970 did catch up, Borjasstresses that those who arrived after 1990 are unlikely to earn as much assimilar US-born residents. Outlook. Senators Simpson (R-WY) and Kennedy (D-MA) agreed with theClinton administration that major changes were needed in the H-1B and permanentimmigration for employment programs during Congressional hearings in 1995, buta coalition of high-tech businesses and immigration advocates blocked proposedchanges. The House bill approved in March 1996 would require companies thatdismissed American workers to hire H-1B workers to pay the temporary foreignreplacement workers 10 percent more than the prevailing wage, and increasefines for violations from the current $1,000 to $5,000 per violation. There are 140,000 permanent immigrant visas available annually, and 123,000permanent immigrant visas were issued to needed foreign workers and theirdependents in FY94. Mitchell Landsberg, "An odd journey to visa surety," AP, April 30, 1996.Bob Davis, "Despite his heritage, prominent economist backs immigration cut,"Wall Street Journal, April 26, 1996. Eric Schmitt, "Senate is WeighingOverhaul of Job-Visa Program," New York Times, April 15, 1996. DeborahBillings, "Audit by DOL Inspector General Faults Employment-based ImmigrationPrograms," Daily Labor Report, April 15, 1996. William Branigin, "USworking-visa programs abused," Washington Post, April 14, 1996. _______________________________ California:Initiatives andWages In California, one proposition qualified for the November 1996 ballot, andone did not. The California Civil Rights Initiative qualified for the ballot,with over one million signatures, but the identification initiative, Save OurState II, did not. Save Our State II would have required all applicants for welfare paymentsor other government benefits in California to present state-issuedidentification cards proving their US citizenship or legal residency, allpersons born in California to be fingerprinted at birth, and all birthcertificates to contain information regarding the residency status of thebaby's mother. In San Francisco, a proposed initiative to give noncitizens the right tovote in local elections was prevented from circulating for signatures by ajudge who said that non-citizen voting would violate the Californiaconstitution. The judge's ruling seems to also invalidate a plan to permitnon-US citizen legal immigrants to vote in school board elections. Supporters and proponents of unauthorized aliens in 1994 argued over itslikely effects on legal and illegal aliens, and in April, UC researchersreported that young Latinos with mental illnesses in the Bay Area reduced byone-fourth their outpatient clinic visits, and increased their usage ofemergency medical services. Bilingual education came under attack in many newspapers recently. In manyschools, children who speak Spanish and other foreign languages are segregatedfrom other children. Many school districts are beginning to immersenon-English speaking students in English classes, and reporting that thestudents learn English and other subjects faster than if they are placed inclasses in which math and other subjects are taught in their nativelanguages. In California, state law requires non-English speaking children to betaught in their own language until they learn enough English to transition intoregular classes taught in English. However, the percentage of K-12 childrenwho transition from native language to regular classes has been falling--onlyfive percent of the California's limited English proficient students made themove into regular classes in 1993. In some cases, parents of children placed in native-language classes haveprotested that their children are not learning enough English to beeconomically successful. California has 1.2 million K-12 students who speak little or no English,and on April 10, 1996, the Assembly Education Committee approved a bill thatwould give local school districts the authority to decide how to integratenon-English speaking children into regular classrooms. MALDEF, the bilingualteachers' association, and the California Department of Education are likely tooppose giving local school districts more flexibility in deciding how tointegrate non-English speaking students. In California, a union-led effort to raise the state's minimum wage from$4.25 hourly to $5 on March 1, 1995, and to $5.75 on March 1, 1998, qualifiedfor the November 1996 ballot, and is expected to be approved by voters--aJanuary 1996 poll found that 84 percent of Americans favor raising the minimumwage. There are 43 states with state minimum wage laws, and 10 haveestablished minimum wages above the federal minimum wage, including Hawaii witha minimum wage of $5.25 per hour.` There are about 3.7 million US workers earning the $4.25 minimum wage--byone estimate, they receive one percent of US wages--and 10 million more whoearn $4.25 to $5.15 per hour--including 1.5 million in California. About 54percent of the minimum wage workers are under 25, including 37 percent of thoseunder 20. It appears that the Republican-dominated Congress will permit a vote onraising the minimum wage to $5.25 by 1998 in May 1996, and that this increasewill be approved. The 72 Thai workers found to be imprisoned in a Los Angeles sweatshop inAugust 1995 have received $1 million in wages from their formeremployers--seven Thais--and the clothing companies that bought the clothes sewnthere. Lawyers for the 72 workers are seeking $5 million in civil suitsagainst retailers who bought clothes from the sweatshop. Two of the operatorsof the sweatshop were sentenced to prison in April 1996. After peaking at 20.2 million in 1993, the number of California driver'slicenses fell to 19.1 million in 1995. Usually, one driver's licenserepresents two people in the states, so this data would suggest that 2.2million people left the state. Immigration is among the explanations offered for the apparent discrepancybetween the increased number of residents and jobs and the decreased number ofdriver's licenses. A 1994 California law required applicants for driver'slicenses to show proof that they are legal US residents. Jerry Gray, "Gingrich Promises House Vote on Minimum Wage Issue," New YorkTimes, May 2, 1996; Mary Vellinga, "Told bilingual education policies failing,panel OKs revisions," Sacramento Bee, April 11, 1996. John Miller, "Bilingualed's abolitionists," Wall Street Journal, April 10, 1996. Ted Bell, "DMV filesshow drop in drivers," Sacramento Bee, April 9, 1996. ______________________________ Florida'sGrowth,Arizona'sProp. 187 Florida is currently the fourth most populous state, with 14 millionresidents, and is projected to grow to 17-18 million by 2010, and to 22 millionby 2020. According to a new study from the Center for Immigration Studies,immigrants and their children account for 30 percent of the state's populationgrowth. About 45 percent of Dade County's two million residents were born abroad,making Dade County the US county with the highest percentage of foreign bornresidents--almost 30 percent of the county's residents are not US citizens.The county's residents include 669,000 persons of Cuban origin; 110,000,Haitians; 74,000, Nicaraguans; 54,000, Colombians; 23,000, Mexicans; 23,000,Dominicans; 18,000, Hondurans, and; 16,000, Peruvians. Miami is the only large US city with an Hispanic majority, and most of the20,000 Cubans permitted to enter the US each year settle in Miami. There aresometimes tensions between US-born Blacks and Haitians because the Haitians aredoing better--the unemployment rate in Little Haiti is 42 percent, but that isstill lower than in nearby African-American neighborhoods. There are an estimated 400,000 illegal immigrants in Florida (compared tosome two million in California), and Florida voters are expected to vote on aninitiative similar to California's Proposition 187 in November 1996 that woulddeny many social services and education to illegal aliens. Democratic Gov.Lawton Chiles opposes the measure, although Florida sued the federal governmentin April 1994 for $1 billion per year to cover it said represented the costs tothe state of providing services to illegal immigrants. According to INS, about 45 percent of the 33,000 aliens apprehended inFlorida since 1992 said they were smuggled into the US. A campaign to place a Prop. 187-type initiative on the November 1996Arizona ballot began in March, 1996. The proposed measure would cut off allgovernment aid to illegal immigrants. Ron Prince, who chaired California's Prop. 187 campaign, moved to Arizonato coordinate the efforts there. Organizers need 112,961 signatures by July 3,1996 in order to place the measure on the ballot. On March 25, the US Supreme Court agreed to hear in the fall of 1996 anappeal by Arizonians for Official English to reinstate the Arizonaconstitutional amendment that would make English the official governmentlanguage. The amendment was approved by Arizona voters as in 1988. The Arizona amendment, Article 28, was challenged by a state employee whowrote her reports in Spanish for a non-English speaking supervisor, and federalcourts in 1990 and 1995 held that the amendment violated the first amendmentfree speech rights of public employees and the people they serve. Arizona decided not to appeal these court decisions, so the appeal is beingcarried by Arizonians for Official English. A Supreme Court ruling could dealwith the validity of English-only amendments in the 21 states with them, andwith the right of private groups to sue to enforce initiatives that statesdecide not to defend. Linda Robinson, "America's new melting pot," U.S. News & World Report,April 29, 1996. "English-only to get high court test," Sacramento Bee, March26, 1996. Joyce Price, "Poor education, English cluster most immigrants in afew states," Washington Times, March 10, 1996. Frank Murray, "Views vary onimmigration," Washington Times, March 9, 1996. Steven Holmes, "Californiagovernor sues US for cost of imprisoning aliens," New York Times, March 6,1996. Alan Everly, "INS to verify Anaheim Jail's count of illegal immigrants,"Los Angeles Times, March 6, 1996. "Arizona: Anti-Immigrant PropositionCampaign to Begin," HealthLine, March 5, 1996. David Lesher, "Wilson Files NewIllegal Immigrant Suit," Los Angeles Times, March 6, 1996. "Shaping Florida:The Effects of Immigration, 1970-2020" available for $6 from Center forImmigration Studies, (202) 466-8076 (fax); msk@cis.org _______________________________ Anti-TerrorismandAsylum The anti-terrorism bill signed by President Clinton on April 24 wouldpermit asylum officers, with the approval of their supervisors, to excludealiens requesting asylum from entering the US if they arrive without documentsand do not have a "credible fear of persecution," or if they entered the USillegally. In 1995, about 3,300 aliens arrived in the US without documents and soughtasylum. Immigrant rights groups argued that the "enter illegally" provisions thatcould lead to exclusion from the US might be used to exclude millions of aliensapprehended after illegal entry. Most of the aliens apprehended by the BorderPatrol are fingerprinted and photographed, and then allowed to "voluntarilyreturn" to Mexico. Under some interpretations of the anti-terrorism bill, anasylum officer could exclude such aliens from the US without offering them adeportation hearing, the current practice. A deportation hearing is a more formal judicial proceeding in which theburden of proof is on the US government to show why the alien should not beallowed to stay in the US. On May 1, the Senate by a 51 to 49 vote substituted Attorney Generaldiscretion for the terrorism and Simpson bills' summary exclusion provisions.The Senate-approved amendment would permit administrative review of an asylumofficer's decision to exclude an asylum seeker who arrives without documents.The House-approved bill permits summary exclusion, so the issue will be decidedin the House-Senate conference committee. As the anti-terrorism law went into effect in late April, the INS begandetaining illegal aliens who had been convicted of crimes in the US as theyleft prison. Past practice was to allow such aliens to post bond while theyappealed deportation orders, and permitted immigration judges to permit thealiens to remain in the US if they were in the US at least seven years and haveemployment and family ties here. Some Chinese women who object to the one-child policy have been able to winasylum in the US. On May 2, 1996, the US Board of Immigration Appeals will hear the appeal ofan African woman who in 1994 requested asylum in the US because she would havefaced genital mutilation in her native Togo. Foreigners can request asylum inthe US if they face a well-founded fear of persecution because of their race,religion, nationality, political opinions or membership in a social group; thewoman argues that she is part of a social group--women who oppose genitalmutilation. After front page stories in the New York Times on this case, the woman wasreleased from detention April 24. The Clinton Administration filed a brief in support of providing asylum forwomen who have a credible fear of being forced to undergo genital mutilation asadults. The World Health Organization estimates that 85 million to 114 milliongirls and women have been mutilated in 26 African nations. The board's rulingin this case will be binding on the nation's 179 immigration judges, who havebeen divided in their handling of such cases. In 1994, the Clinton Administration told immigration officers that theycould postpone indefinitely the deportation of women who faced forcedabortions in China, but the Board of Immigration Appeals ruled that such fearcannot justify asylum--30 Chinese women have been affected by this policy. In 1995, guidelines were issued to help immigration officers identify womenwho should get asylum because sexual violence were issued, and three women haveso far been granted asylum for fear of genital mutilation. In March 1996,battered spouses of US citizens were allowed to apply for immigrant status ontheir own. Eric Schmitt, "Provision in terrorism bill cuts rights of illegal aliens,"New York Times, April 19, 1996. Celia Dugger, "Woman, Seeking Asylum, EnduresPrison in America," New York Times, April 15, 1996. _____________________________ IndependentMexicanUnions Industrial wages in Mexico are equivalent to only 50 percent of their 1982level, but the number of strikes in Mexico is still very low--there were over600 strikes in Mexico in 1982, 300 in 1986, but only 50 in 1995. The MexicanCTM, an integral part of the PRI, has five million members in 14,000 affiliatedunions--one in seven deputies in the Mexican Chamber of Deputies is a CTMofficial. Independent unions are becoming more aggressive. They have about 500,000members, but they accounted for 25 percent of all strikes in Mexico in 1995.Some 40 independent unions have formed the Coordinator of MexicanWorkers. On April 11, the semi-official Labor Congress said that it may expel nineunions for planning an unauthorized march May 1 to protest government economicpolicies, including the teachers, telephone workers, and electricians unions;they are about 12 percent of the CTM's membership. The CTM canceled its May 1march, fearing unrest because of Mexico's economic crisis. A new book, Bordering on Chaos, argues that Mexico could descend intoeconomic stagnation that would propel millions of Mexicans northward. Tecun Uman, a town of 20,000 also known as Guatemala's Tijuana because ofthe Central Americans who congregate there to sneak into Mexico and, often, tothe US, is reportedly filled with Central Americans who have sufferedmistreatment at the hands of the Mexican police. One 1995 report said thattwo-thirds of the migrants who had been apprehended in Mexico reported thatthey were mistreated or beaten by Mexican authorities. The Mexican and US governments are apparently taking quiet steps tocooperate in areas that have long been sources of tension. For example, inApril 1996, Mexico for the first time approved US requests to extradite Mexicannationals accused of committing crimes in the US. According to onecommentator, the Mexican government is changing from automatically saying no toUS initiatives to embracing some of them. In April, 63 Mexicans apprehended in the US were flown from San Diego toGuadalajara, and another 450 are expected to be flown to the interior of Mexicoby July 1996. Mexico announced in April that foreign firms will not be able to manage thenew private pension funds that are being established to bail out the bankruptpublic pension system. In Chile, foreign firms manage about 70 percent of theprivate pension funds. Sam Dillon, " Mexico Makes Big Shifts Toward More Pro-U.S. Policy," NewYork Times, May 2, 1996. Dianne Solis, "Mexico has its own border nightmare,"Wall Street Journal, May 1, 1996. "Split threatens Mexico's monolithic labormovement," Reuters, April 11, 1996. Dianne Solis, "As Mexico Struggles, newunions strike back," Wall Street Journal, April 4, 1996. Oppenheimer, Andres,1996, Bordering onChaos. _______________________________ CentralAmerican/a>Immigrants The seven countries of Central America south of Mexico are smaller, poorer,and more rural than Mexico. They sent about 40,000 legal immigrants to the USin FY94--the highest rates of emigration were from Belize and El Salvador, andthe lowest was from Costa Rica. Over 90 percent of the 1.1 million CentralAmerican immigrants who arrived in the US since 1820 came in the last 15 years,versus 60 percent of the Mexican immigrants. According to unofficialestimates, over 400,000 Central Americans enter Mexico with the intend oftraveling on to the US. Mexico expels more than 70,000 illegal aliens across the Guatemalan bordereach year. Over 65 percent of the migrants arriving illegally in Mexico report"ill treatment, beatings and threats at the hands of the authorities,"according the official Mexican human rights commission. To pass through Mexico, Central Americans must travel hundreds of milesduring a journal that can take up to three months. The cost of hiring asmuggler to guide them through Mexico ranges from $300 to $10,000. Many of the Central Americans entering Mexico become seasonal farm workersin Chiapas. The children of undocumented workers born in Mexico can notreceive birth certificates making it impossible to register them for school.Mexico also denies non-emergency health care to illegal immigrants and theirchildren. More Central Americans filed asylum cases in the US in FY94 thanimmigrated, suggesting that, unlike Mexicans, many Central Americans arrive astourist non-immigrants and then seek to remain in the US by applying forasylum. Several candidates for election in Nicaragua traveled to California inearly March to raise money for their campaigns among the estimated 500,000Nicaraguans in the US. The 1990 Census counted 203,000 Nicaraguans in theUS. Phil Gunson, "Mexico Protests Too Much at US Abuse of Migrants," TheGuardian, April 19, 1996. Diego Cevallos, "Immigration-Mexico: TheGovernment's Double Standards," Inter Press Service, April 17, 1996. AnthonyDePalma, "Police Brutality in Mexico, Echoing California Case, Puts Zedillo onthe Spot," New York Times, April 13, 1996. _______________________________ EUROPE _______________________________ EU--Illegaland InternalMigration Europol has declared "organized illegal immigration" to be the policeorganization's "greatest concern." In several countries, officials whowere assigned to go after alien smugglers have been accused of protecting them,including several French immigration officers at Orly airport, and immigrationofficials in Hamburg. Europol blames the corruption on the amount of money that can be collectedfrom aliens who want to enter Western Europe. Local police can also earn apayoff from the criminal activities--such as prostitution and drugdealing--that many of the foreigners can be induced to engage in once theyarrive. A push by the Netherlands for a collective visa, asylum and immigrationpolicy and a wider role for the European Court of Justices has the support of14 of the EU member states--all but Britain. An EU immigration policy was onthe agenda for the first of a series EU's Inter-Governmental Conferences inTurin, Italy. The IGC will seek to reform EU institutions and revise the 1991Maastricht treaty. After five years of debate, EU employment ministers on March 29 agreed onthe rights of EU nationals sent by their firms to work in another EU nation.So-called "posted workers" are different from workers who cross borders ontheir own to seek jobs, as e.g. Italians who migrate to Germany to seek work atBMW, and also different from self-employed persons such as accountants who wantto offer their services in another EU nation. Under the freedom of services clause of the EU treaty, many Germanconstruction firms established subsidiaries or relationships with firms in theUK and Portugal, hired workers there, and "posted" them to Berlin, Europe'slargest construction site, at wages that were one-fourth of prevailing Germanwages. Under the EU directive, EU workers posted in another EU country mustusually be paid the same wages as local workers from the first day of theiremployment abroad, although countries can permit lower wages for the firstmonth. Postings that last less than eight days would be exempt. EU membernations have two years to approve national implementing legislation. The European Court of Justice ruled that unemployed persons who take cashsettlements when they are laid off, can still collect family benefits. Theruling came as the result of a case in which a Spanish worker who had lived andworked in Germany for 26 years, took a lump sum payment when he was laid off,and lost his unemployment benefits. The court ruled that community law on social security benefits does notdistinguish between those receiving monthly unemployment benefits from thosewho take a lump sum, and are therefore considered temporarily suspended fromreceiving unemployment benefits by their national governments. The EU labor force of 2010 is projected to rise to 180 million, andemployment to 166 million, leaving 14 million unemployed. Sam King, "Tangled web of human smuggling" The European, April 11-17, 1996;"Most EU States Support NL on the Future of Europe," ANP English News Bulletin,April 4, 1996. EU Labor Ministers Set Wage Floor for Foreign Workers," TheWeek in Germany, April 5, 1996. "Court says cash settlements do not cut offfamily benefits," Reuters, March 29, 1996. _______________________________ Germany:Bosnians, Kurds, andConstruction/a> Bosnians. There are about 320,000 Bosnians living in Germany, andthey are scheduled to begin to return to Bosnia on July 1, 1996. A pollcommissioned by the UNHCR found that 25 percent of the Bosnians in German areready to return, but 45 percent of the Bosnians in Germany do not feelconditions are right for their return--an estimated 60 percent of the housingin Bosnia has been destroyed or damaged. Germany has spent an estimated $10 billion on Bosnians. Single Bosnians in Switzerland lost their "temporary protected status" onApril 30, 1996, and have four months to leave the country. Families will loseTPS April 30, 1996. The Netherlands has 45,000 Bosnians and Denmark has 17,500. The German government announced on April 17 that it would send 150policemen to Bosnia to assist the UN multinational police force deployed there.The multinational police force will be composed of 1,700 policemen from over 30countries. Germany also provides temporary protected status for 120,000 ethnicAlbanians from Serbia. The Federal Interior Ministry announced that 9,121 foreigners sought asylumin March 1996, continuing the 10,000 per month pace set so far in 1996. Mostwere nationals of Turkey, Yugoslavia (Montenegro and Serbia), and Iraq, butthere were also 140 asylum requests from Bosnians. There were 7.1 million foreigners in Germany on January 1, 1996, including2.2 million wage and salary workers. Aussiedler. Even though the number of ethnic Germans arriving inGermany fell to 41,000 in the first three months of 1996, Germany continued todebate the number of ethnic German Aussiedler that can be absorbed. Germanyhas since 1993 limited the number of Aussieder to 220,000 each year. Upontheir arrival in Germany, Aussiedler get German language instruction, areeligible for pensions, and become German citizens upon request. About 40,000 Jews from the ex-USSR have migrated to Germany, and another73,000 more have applied to emigrate. One survey found that 70 percent wereuniversity graduates, but 30 percent were jobless. There were about 30,000Jews in Germany until 1989. Expulsions. On March 26, the political parties in the Kohlgovernment discussed whether laws should be changed to permit the expulsion offoreigners involved in illegal demonstrations. The CDU and CSU want to givethe government the authority to immediately expel foreigners who seriouslydisturb the peace (schwerer Landfriedensbruch) without first obtaining acriminal conviction. Also discussed was a reduction from five to three years the penalty thatpermits foreigners to be expelled from Germany for non-political crimes. The Kurdistan Workers Party or PKK has reportedly made "revenge" deaththreats against German chancellor Helmut Kohl and Foreign Minister KlausKinkel. A trial is underway in Stuttgart involving alleged PKK members whofirebombed Turkish establishments in Germany in 1994. A study by the Turkish Studies Center in Essen reported that "blindtesting"--sending similarly qualified Turks and Germans for jobs--found thatGermans were preferred to Turks, especially in retail trade and construction.Under Germany's anti-discrimination laws, the burden of proof is on the alienwho charges that he suffered discrimination. Construction/Economics. German building unions and employers agreedto a 1.85 percent wage increase on April 11, averting what would have been thefirst construction strike since World War II. The wage increases went intoeffect April 1 in the former East Germany, and September 1, 1996 in EastGermany. Wage increases won by unions in 1995 averaged double the rate ofinflation. On April 17, the Bundesbank reported that Germany's construction industry,which has been booming for the past five years, is set for a period ofconsolidation. German building groups say that business has begun to taper offamid tough competition from low-wage foreign competitors. Under a new law, EU workers sent by their employers to Germany must be paidat least minimum wages DM 18.60 marks ($12.40) per hour in former West Germany,and DM17.11 marks ($11.4) in East Germany. The German labor force in 1996 is 34.4 million, and unemployment was 4.1million in March 1996, or 10.8 percent. In one in 10 German families, both parents are unemployed. The FederalLabor Office in Germany reported on March 6 that the unadjusted unemploymentrate in the west rose to 9.6 percent from 9.4 percent in January. In easternGermany, the unemployment rate was 17.5 in February, up from 16.8 percent inJanuary. The combined data for eastern and western Germany shows unemploymentat 11.1 percent in February, up from 10.8 percent in January. Economists blame some of the rise in unemployment on the exceptionally coldweather in February, and the tendency of construction employers to lay offworkers and have them collect UI benefits rather than making privately funded"bad weather" payments. The Bundesbank reported that social support--akin to US GeneralAssistance-- doubled from DM 21 billion in 1985 to DM 43 ($29) billion in 1994.Social support is the paid as a last resort to guarantee a minimum livingstandard to the disabled (Hilfe in besonderen Lebenslagen) and to personscapable of working (Hilfe zum Lebensunterhalt)--about two-thirds of the socialassistance is paid to "besondere Lebenslagen" disabled persons. In 1993, about 1.5 million persons in the former West Germany receivedLebensunterhalt, and almost half of them were foreigners. Local governments pay about three-quarters of the social support and theincrease has made it difficult for them to reduce their budget deficits. Informer west Germany, payments remained steady for asylum seekers in 1994because of a change in the rules governing benefits. In 1995, welfare benefitpayments by municipalities increased by 9.4 percent in all of Germany. The Kohl government announced plans at the end of April to reduce socialspending by $16 billion in 1997, largely by reducing social assistancepayments. For example, sick pay, which is currently 100 percent of a worker'ssalary for six weeks, would be cut by 20 percent, and the retirement age forwomen would be raised from 60 to 63. Ruth Walker, " Clock Ticks on Return Of Bosnia's Refugees," ChristianScience Monitor, April 23, 1996; "Buba says German building sector toconsolidate," Reuters, April 17, 1996; "Bonn urged not to force Bosnianrefugees home," Reuters, April 17, 1996. Tony Roddam, "Analysts Hail PragmaticGerman Building Wage Deal," Reuters, April 11, 1996. "Foreign asylum-seekersin Germany decline," Deutsche Presse-Agentur, April 4, 1996. Ruth Walker,"Feeling Squeezed, Germany Opens Tough Debate on Who Belongs," ChristianScience Monitor, April 3, 1996. _______________________________ FrenchCommission Recommends ImmigrationRestrictions/a> A parliamentary commission on April 21 called for a tightening of thecountry's immigration laws in order to reduce the "temptations" of France tounauthorized foreigners. Estimates of the number of illegal immigrants inFrance range from 250,000 to 600,000, with suggestions that their numberincreases by 30,000 per year. The Sauvaigo commission's 46 recommendations include restricting the accessof illegal aliens to free health care and education, finger-printing visaapplicants from some countries, and holding suspected illegal immigrants for up45 days to facilitate deportation--in many cases, police cannot identify andthus deport aliens under the current 10 day detention limit. The commission recommended that employers of illegal workers should be madeto pay for their repatriation, and called for creation of a computerizedregister of anyone offering lodging or hospitality to foreigners. The 30 member commission made its recommendations on a 26-4 vote, with theSocialist members dissenting. The government was divided in its reactions to the report-- the Frenchminister for humanitarian assistance said it contained "unacceptable andscandalous" ideas. The government announced that it had apprehended 2,000 illegal foreignworkers in 1995. So far in 1996, police raided 114 illegal workshops inParis. Some questioned the constitutionality of the recommendations. The NationalFront endorsed the recommendations, but said they did not go far enough--itcalls for the repatriation of 3 million immigrants to their countries of originand for the re-examination of 2.5 million naturalizations granted since 1974.A recent poll found that 28 percent of the French supported the National Front,up from 19 percent in January 1994. The United Nations Human Rights Commission criticized France on April 11for the "wave of xenophobia and racism" sweeping the country, criticizing the"Pasqua laws" enacted in 1993 that prevent the deportation of foreignersmarried to French nationals, and the parents of children born in France, but donot grant some of these foreigners work or residence visas. The UniversalDeclaration of Human Rights was signed in Paris in 1948. The first week of April, Amnesty International issued a report that chargedFrench police with cruelty and ill-treatment of foreigners. A group of African immigrants were shuttled from a church to a gym to atheater to avoid deportation from France--the police were asked to remove theAfricans from the church by Catholic Church authorities. Some of the Africanswere deported to Mali; in one case, Malians attacked the police who accompaniedthem after the plane landed. France returned more than more than 10,000 foreigners to their countries oforigin in 1995. A plane returning a drug trafficker to the Congo had to makean emergency landing in Marseille after passengers attacked the policemenaccompanying the trafficker for not removing his handcuffs. Of the 21,170 applicants for political asylum in France in 1995, about 16percent or 3,400 were accepted as refugees, including 16 of 2200 Algerianapplicants. There were 26,000 asylum applications in 1994. France announced in March 1996 that it would remove border checks onpersons coming from Schengen partners Germany and Spain, but continue to checkpersons coming from the Benelux until an agreement on drugs is reached with theNetherlands. France's population rose from 40 million to 58 million since World War II,and 25 percent of the increase was due to immigration. The immigrants included1.5 million expatriates who returned to France from overseas colonies after1956, including 650,000 from Algeria. The percentage of foreigners in France has been about 6.5 percent since1970, the level reached in 1931 after a wave of immigration by foreign workersin the 1920s. On April 24, the French government announced new measures to use computersto control health care costs, another effort to rein in the rising costs of thesocial welfare state. Current French law permits individuals to choose theirdoctors, with the government picking up most of the costs. Efforts to reducepensions for government workers set off strikes. Integration. Roubaix, a city in northern France that is one third ofimmigrant origin, was in the news because of a bombing outside policeheadquarters that prompted a chase and shoot out that ended in Belgium. Many of the immigrants first came to Roubaix to work in the textileindustry. Over the past 30 years, the textile industry has disappeared, andthere are few jobs for second generation immigrants. City officials say it was a mistake to concentrate the immigrations in onearea, where extremism can take root . In Alma-Gare, near the site of the gunfight, most women are veiled and the adolescent boys often were Arafat-styleheadgear. Young people of North African background complain that they are not"treated properly" by the French and not been given an equal chance--hencetheir turn to fundamentalist Islam. A government commission chaired by National Assembly member Henri Cuqrecommended that some high-rise apartment complexes that house immigrants bedestroyed because they are crime and health hazards. About 150,000 immigrants,most from north and west Africa, live in France's 710 high-rise hostels. Mostare run by subsidized associations or state agencies. The report said that 25 hostels, most in the Paris area, should bedestroyed within the next five years. Others should be rehabilitated, with newcontrols to keep out illegal residents. Some hostels reportedly hold threetimes as many residents as they should. The hostels reportedly hamper integration because the immigrants are keptisolated from French society. Some managers of the hostels have givenauthority to African elders, who run the hostels according to tribal rules. Overseas. On April 12, Prime Minister Alain Juppe said he wouldincrease efforts to prevent illegal immigration into French Guyana, France'sonly South American possession. Juppe said he planned to build a detentioncenter in St. Laurent, and to increase patrols on the nation's eastern borderwith Brazil. Illegal aliens, primarily from Brazil, Haiti and Surinam, make upan estimated 25 percent of French Guyana's population of 150,000, and that16,000 foreigners were expelled to Surinam. St. Laurent was used by France from the mid-19th century until 1946 as thecenter of its Devil's Island penal colony complex. Unemployment in FrenchGuyana is 23 percent, and half of its economy is directly linked to a rocketbase in Ariane. "French ministers speak out against anti-immigration proposals," AgenceFrance Presse, April 18, 1996. Emily Picy, "French Deputies Seek Crackdown onIllegal Migrants," Reuters, April 16, 1996. Mary Dejevsky, "French rust beltprovides ready recruits for Islam," The Independent, April 16, 1996. GeoffreyVarley, "French right calls for tougher anti-immigration laws, Agence FrancePresse, April 16, 1996. Craig Whitney, "African Immigrants Refusing to LeaveFrance," New York Times, April 4, 1996. "France is urged to restrictmigrants," The Independent, April 17, 1996. Barry James, "UN rights reportflays France for its 'Racist' Immigration Laws," International Herald Tribune,April 12, 1996. Alexander Miles, "France to tighten French Guyana's borders,"April 12, 1996. "French report hits at immigrant hostels," Reuters, April 10,1996. _______________________________ GreeceOffers Albanians Amnesty Greece plans to offer legal status to the 250,000 to 500,000 illegalAlbanians in the country, part of friendship agreement signed by the twocountries in March 1996. Albania will allow the establishment of Greek schoolsfor the 60,000 to 300,000 ethnic Greeks in Albania. Greece deported illegalAlbanians to Albania until 1994. Remittances from Albanians in Greece are estimated to be at least $300million per year, 10 percent of Albania's $3 billion GDP. Greece accused Turkey of harboring "slave traders" on April 18, after aTurkish boat allegedly dropped off eight illegal Iranian immigrants on a Greekisland--the Iranians had paid $1,000 to $4,000 each. A Greek patrol boat firedwarning shots into the air; Turkey claimed that the incident took place inTurkish waters, and that a fisherman was wounded. The incident aggravated antagonism between Greece and Turkey regarding theownership of several small islands in the Aegean Sea. A Greek governmentspokesperson said that illegal immigration from Turkey to these islands was aserious problem. Between 1992 and 1995, Greece says that 22,906 illegalimmigrants entered Greece via Turkey, plus 9,590 so far in 1996. Most persons who illegally enter Greece via Turkey do so by land, throughthe northern Greek region of Evros, inhabited mostly by Turkish-speaking MuslimGreeks "Greece rejects Turkish protest over boat incident," Reuters, April 23,1996. "Greece says patrol boat fired warning shots at Turks, Reuters, April22, 1996. "Dina Kyriakidou, " Greece to legalize Albanian workers by autumn,"Reuters North American Wire, March 22, 1996. _______________________________ ItalianCandidates Ignore Immigration Issue In the run-up to Italy's elections on April 21, the mainstream parties --the center-right Freedom Alliance and center-left Olive Tree -- did not discussimmigration, despite almost daily reports of ships attempting to smuggle aliensinto Italy catching fire or running aground. Both major alliances argued thatdebating immigration would only help the extreme right. The leftist Olive Tree alliance won 169 of the 315 seats in the ItalianSenate, and 324 of 630 seats in the Lower House. The Olive Tree publiclysupports migrant rights, arguing that Italy must become multi-racial andmulti-cultural society. The National Alliance and the Northern League, on theother hand, want to apprehend and expel illegal immigrants. Italy will come under increasing pressure from France and other EU nationsto control illegal immigration when it becomes a full member of the Schengenagreement. European Union members Denmark, Finland and Sweden, and non-membersNorway and Iceland, will become observers at Schengen meetings as of May1. Italy's has 922,706 legal migrants -- including 141,000 from EU nations,and they are about 1.6 percent of the population. The number of illegalimmigrants was dramatically cut in March 1996, from around 500,000 to about200,000, after the immigration law was changed in November, 1995 to allow theimmediate deportation of illegal immigrants who break the law, and the rapidexpulsion of those who do not have the right papers. Thousands of illegal immigrants reportedly went to police stations on March31 in order to try to legalize their status before a new "immediatedeportation" law went into effect on April 1, 1996. Illegal immigrants withregular jobs but without legal status were allowed to regularize their status. Gregory Crouch, "Three to Watch: Populists of the Hard right," New YorkTimes, April 21, 1996. Jorge Pia, "Election candidates sidestep issues," InterPress Service, April 19, 1996. _______________________________ Poland/RomaniaEmigration Emigration from Poland decreased sharply in the early 1990s, down to lessthan 50,000 from the peak 280,000 emigrants in 1989. An estimated 300,000 to350,000 Poles take up legal employment abroad every year; half as seasonalworkers in Germany. During the 1980s, about 2 million mostly young and educated Poles left thecountry for one year or more, and about half stayed abroad. Some 36 millionPoles left the country at least briefly in 1996, six times the number of exitsin the mid-1980s. Poles complete most of the applications for US diversity visas--they filed50,000 applications in 1995. Poland admitted 11,000 foreigners for employment in 1995, including 2000with blue-collar workers--most were from the Ukraine. Another 11,000foreigners were employed in Poland in 1995 on long-term permits. In 1995, an estimated 100,000 foreigners worked illegally in Poland,usually in seasonal jobs. Some 82 million foreigners visited Poland in 1995,including 10 million from countries to the east of Poland. Romania is cracking down on illegal immigration. Since the breakup of theSoviet bloc, Romania has become a springboard to Western Europe. Romaniareportedly has about 20,000 illegal immigrants, many from Africa, Asia. " More Travel, Less Emigration," Polish News Bulletin, April 23, 1996."Illegal immigrants caught in Romania," Xinhua News Agency, February 4,1996. _______________________________ ASIA _______________________________ VietnameseBoatPeople Over one million Vietnamese "boat people" have been resettled since 1975,including 823,000 in the US, 137,000 each in Australia and Canada, 96,000 inFrance, and 19,000 each in the UK and Germany. On April 20, a Malaysian navy ship transported 317 Vietnamese boat peopleto Vietnam in the first of four forced repatriations by ship planned for thenext two months. Once offloaded, the returnees are taken to reception centersfor screening before being returned to their home villages. The Malaysian navy will transport 1,765 Vietnamese over the next twomonths. The remaining 1,363 will be returned by air. Malaysia offersVietnamese in camps an easy two hour flight home if they volunteer, or forciblereturn on a boat. Other Asian countries have avoided sending Vietnamese boat people back byship-- some critics have branded them prison ships. The Malaysian governmenthas speeded up the return of Vietnamese boat people because it plans to shutdown its two remaining detention camps by June 30, when the UNHCR stops fundingthem. The Comprehensive Plan of Action for dealing with people leaving Vietnam byboat was adopted in 1989. Since then, some 80,000 boat people were recognizedas refugees and resettled elsewhere, 500,000 left Vietnam legally as immigrantsunder the Orderly Departure Program, and 115,000 Vietnamese left their countryin boats, landed in nearby countries, and hoped to be selected to resettle in athird country as refugees. Most of the 115,000 were determined not to be refugees and were returned toVietnam, but 35,000 remained in camps in April 1996, including 19,200 in HongKong, 4,800 in Thailand, 4,300 in Indonesia, and 3,700 in Malaysia. The campshave been closed to visitors so that they can be emptied by June 30,1996. Local events sometimes make it difficult for the Vietnamese in the camps toreturn to Vietnam quietly. For example, the Philippines government announcedplans to close a camp holding 2,000 Vietnamese by June 30, 1996, but afterforcibly returning several Vietnamese, the government came under pressure fromthe Catholic church not to force the Vietnamese into airplanes to send themhome. In Hong Kong, Britain's Privy Council ruled that 15 Vietnamese should gofreed because Hanoi was unlikely to take them back--all were ethnic Chinesewith Taiwanese travel documents. This raised hopes that other ethnic Chinesecould avoid a return to Vietnam. The Privy Council's decision forced the Hong Kong legislature to tablediscussion of the new Immigration Bill amendment, which would have given thegovernment the power to indefinitely and arbitrarily detain Vietnamese boatpeople. The Vietnamese government says it can handle up to 3,600 returningVietnamese each month. Each returning person is screened; Vietnam has refusedto take hundreds of the people back on the grounds that they are foreignnationals or are ethnically not Vietnamese. In Vietnam, most reports are that two-thirds of returned boat people haverestarted their lives, with the help of cash grants of about $1,000 for afamily from the United Nations and European Union, and grants for thecommunities they return to minimize local jealousy. "Hong Kong clears first hurdle towards controversial boatpeople law,"Agence France Presse, April 24, 1996. Fung Wai-Kong, "Viet bill 'tarnishes'reputation on rights," South China Morning Post, April 25, 1996. "Malaysianship carrying boat people reaches Vietnam," Reuters, April 20, 1996. JohnChalmers, "Vietnam draws fire over mass return of boat people," Reuters, April20, 1996. Seth Mydans, "Boat people Embark on Sad Voyage Home," New YorkTimes, April 19, 1996. Seth Mydans, "New boat people exodus: back to Vietnam,"New York Times, April 17, 1996. _______________________________ ChineseCrackdown on Migrants China began a nationwide crackdown on illegal overseas workers on May 1.Under new regulations, foreigners must obtain work permits from their locallabor department and residential permits from public security departments.Foreign workers already living in China have until June 30 to secure thenecessary permits. Foreign workers who fail to get the necessary permits couldbe fined or deported. The regulations will affect every one from diplomatic spouses to foreignprostitutes, claims a Beijing labor official. There are 170,000 foreignersworking in China-- 70,000 are employed by government organizations, and 100,000by foreign institutions or overseas-funded ventures. The Chinese government also announced new regulations to regulate internalmigration for employment. The Project of Orderly Trans-regional Migration ofRural Laborers requires workers wishing to find work outside their home townsto obtain a permit from the local authority, as well as a certificate from theauthorities in the destination--cities with high unemployment will beoff-limits to migrants. Under the new rules, migrants will not be allowed to look for work in majorcities already impacted by internal migrants. The government plans to attemptto induce workers to stay put by providing more jobs in government-subsidizedprojects in underdeveloped areas. The government hopes this new undertakingwill limit the number of migrants to about 30 million in 1996 and 40 million bythe year 2000. The Chinese Ministry of Labor estimates that 12.5 percent or 30 million ofChina's rural workers are employed outside their places of origin. Otherestimates place the number of internal migrants as high as 80 to 100million. Chinese economists argue that the migrant labor force has been a boon tothe economy, but the large transient population is blamed for increased crimeand social instability-- 649,000 transients, registered as temporary residentsin urban areas, were apprehended for committing crimes in 1995. Observers say that China's migrant problem will likely worsen in the nextseveral years because nearly 130 million farmers in rural areas are nowredundant due to population increases and encroachment on farm land bydevelopment projects. Beijing opened a recruitment center for migrant workers in the West RailwayStation, the first step to regularize the flow of an estimated three millionmigrant workers employed by some 2,900 enterprises and private businesses.Central Beijing has about three million residents, and another eight millionpeople live in the metro area. As the men go to the cities to find jobs, more Chinese women are left torun the farms. Researchers are finding that the status of women farmers isincreasing, along with their income. In northern Shaanxi, one women beganhelped local women farmers establish an apple industry. The woman's familyincome was $3,500, compared to the national average of $190. Chinese farmingwomen still face discrimination in government programs developed for male headsof households. There are 1.2 billion people in China, and 45 percent are under 26. The Chinese government announced plans to move about 500,000 Chineseworkers into mining towns in Tibet. Official Chinese figures place Tibet'spopulation at about 2.4 million, 90 percent ethnic Tibetans. Unofficial datasuggest that the increasing number of Chinese traders and workers has pushedthe Chinese population to 150,000, with the urban population primarily HanChinese. The influx of Han Chinese into Tibet is expected in increase ethnictensions because the Tibetans resent any incursion into their country by China.The Chinese government responded that the purpose of the mining program that isbringing Chinese to Tibet is to develop the economy, not encourage immigration. The Han Chinese in Tibet will be paid three to four times more than inChina because of a hardship allowance. "China to enforce job permit system for foreign workers," Xinhua NewsAgency, April 30, 1996. "China to crack down on illegal foreign employees,"Agence France Presse, April 25, 1996. "New measures announced to promote"orderly" migration of rural workers," BBC, April 10, 1996. "China enforcesnew measures to control migratory chaos," Agence France Presse, April 10, 1996.Jane Macartney, "China tries to tackle rising unemployment in 1996," Reuters,April 7, 1996. "Flood of workers to increase tensions in Tibet," Japan EconomicNewswire, April 2, 1995. Vivien Pik-Kwan Chan, "Tibet fears sparked by Chinaflood of workers, South China Morning Post, April 2, 1996. _______________________________ MalaysiaForeign Workers Are SecurityThreat The Malaysian government is calling foreign workers a national securitythreat. One Malaysian official said Malaysia needs to learn from theexperiences of Germany and France. Malaysian officials estimate that there are over one million foreignworkers in the country, about one-eight of their work force. Most of theforeign workers are from Indonesia and the Philippines, and they work onplantations, construction sites and in factories. About 500,000 are illegal. Malaysia's new five-year plan, unveiled in mid-April, included a call forthe growth of capital-intensive and high-wage industries, including aerospace,electronics, information technology, education services, and biotechnology, toincrease incomes and to curb labor shortages. The Malaysian minister for human resources blames employer unwillingness toprovide housing for their workers as a reason immigrants are setting up illegalsettlements on government reserve land. In the Malaysian state of Selangor,there were about 343,000 foreign worker squatters. In 1988, 23 settlements with sizable Indonesian populations were identifiedin the Klang Valley. In Kuala Lumpur, immigrants were found in 56 squattersettlements in 1989. Indonesians were seven percent of the capital's estimatedsquatter population of over 180,000. The Malaysian government is planning to raze all squatters' settlements ongovernment land. The Malaysian government in April 1996 also began requiringemployers to provided housing for migrant workers to discourage squatting, andannounced that it is increasing the number of enforcement personnel responsiblefor demolishing the squatters' settlements. The Indonesian Embassy requested extra time before Indonesian camps arerazed so that the Indonesian foreign workers could find other housing. One editorial in the New Straits Times said that, although the demolitionof squatter settlements is heart-wrenching, it must be done to protect thecounty's law-abiding citizens. The editorial also criticized the governmentfor giving ex-squatters preferential treatment to receive low costhousing. University of Malaya anthropologist Azizah Kassim says that Malaysia hasthe largest foreign work force among Asean countries, with between 14 and 15percent of the population foreign in 1995. She estimates that there are overhalf a million legal foreign workers, and between 500,000 and 700,000 illegalforeigners. The Malaysian government has been trying to register illegal foreignworkers through various amnesty programs, but the programs have not been verysuccessful. One reason is that it costs an Indonesian worker in Malaysia aboutRM460 ($185) to get a job through official channels, and only RM 70 through alabor broker. In addition, illegal workers are not tied to one job andemployer. Malaysian officials assert that illegal settlements aggravate education,housing and health problems. Azizah found that the ready availability offoreign workers makes it hard for trade unions to increase wages and improveconditions. If Malaysia were to experience a recession, there could be massexpulsions, as in the 1930s. Malaysia is a multi-ethnic society in which each group is worried about itsshare of the population. The influx of Indonesians is believed by some Chineseto be tolerated by the Malaysian government, which allegedly sees Indonesiansas adding to Malay political power. Malaysia is building a RM54.6 million ($22 million) wall 2.5 to 3.5 metershigh on its northern border with Thailand to discourage illegal immigration anddrug smuggling. Ahmad Suffian, "Squatters: Shot in the arm for State enforcement unit," NewStraits Times, April 10, 1996. Reme Ahmad, "Malaysia Readies Five-YearEconomic Blueprint," Reuters Asia-Pacific Business Report, April 11, 1996.Alina Rastam and Sharon Nelson, "Where do they stand?" New Straits Times, April5, 1996. Sharon Nelson and Alina Rastam, "Keeping tabs on foreign labour," NewStraits Times, April 5, 1996. Muharyani Othman, "Labour pains of migrantworkers," New Straits Times, April 5, 1996. Juneita Johari, "Differentsalaries, conditions for maids," New Straits Times, April 5, 1996. "Squattingon a problem," New Straits Times, April 3, 1996. Hamisah Hamid, "Lim BlamesEmployers," Business Times (Malaysia), March 27, 1996. _______________________________ Japanto Train ForeignWorkers The Japanese government plans to extend the maximum length of "training"for foreign workers from two to three years in order to encourage theacceptance in the country of foreign workers. The current program was last revised in April 1993. Trainees are onprobation for six months, and then tested for skills. If they pass the test,they can continue working at a company for one and a half years. The number of foreign trainees was 1,164 in fiscal 1993, and 2,320 in thefirst nine months of FY95. Most trainees are from China. Most of the workersare trained at smaller companies such as machinery makers and construction. There are an increased number of meetings to discuss foreign worker issuesin Japan. Some of the Japanese sponsors advocate at least a limited amnestyfor some illegal workers and the possibility of guest workers becomingpermanent residents. One government report in 1995 estimated that there were600,000 foreign workers, including 300,000 illegal workers. Japan has announced a goal of having 100,000 foreign students by the year2000, up from 54,000 in 1994, in order to combat shrinking enrollment due topopulation declines. However, only 3,000 foreigners took the standard entranceexams required by all public and some private universities in 1995--the lownumber is attributed to a crackdown since 1993 on illegal foreign workers inJapan, the high cost of living, the Hanshin earthquake and the sarin gasattacks. "Osaka citizens' groups issue anti-discrimination declaration," MainichiDaily News, April 22, 1996. "Tokyo group to discuss foreign workers'problems," Japan Economic Newswire, April 28, 1996. "Universities struggle tofind eligible foreign students," Mainichi Daily News, April 17, 1996. "Gov'tto expand training program for foreign workers," Japan Economic Newswire, April9, 1996. _______________________________ HongKong/a>Prepares Residents for 1997 Some 160,000 Hong Kong residents lined up before the March 31, 1996deadline to apply for British National Overseas (BNO) passports that give themmore freedom to travel internationally after July 1, 1997. BNO passportspermit visa-free travel for holders to the UK and 80 other countries, while theSAR passports to be issued to Hong Kong residents by China currently permitvisa-free travel only to the UK and Singapore. About half of Hong Kong's 6.2 million residents are eligible for BNOpassports. An estimated one million Hong Kong residents hold foreign passports,raising the issue of how China, which does not permit dual citizenship, willtreat them. One proposal is to permit those with foreign passports to declarethemselves to be foreigners or Chinese when they enter Hong Kong--if theydeclare themselves foreigners, they will enjoy consular protection from theircountry of nationality in Hong Kong, but may lose some of the rights thatChinese have in Hong Kong. A variation on this proposal is to allow current Hong Kong residents whodeclare themselves to be foreigners to nonetheless be able to live and work inHong Kong without visas. The Hong Kong government is drafting a list of people of ethnic minoritywho may be left stateless after the handover. The list is expected to bereleased in the next two weeks. The list will contain up to about 60,000 namesof those who do not hold three-star permanent Hong Kong identity cards andwhose only travel document is either a British Dependent Territory's Citizenpassport or a British National Overseas passport. Most of the ethnicminorities are from India and Pakistan. During a March visit, British Prime Minister John Major promised sanctuaryfor ethnic minorities if they came under pressure from China to leave HongKong. The Hong Kong government announced new rules for mainland Chinese migrantsto get permanent residency in Hong Kong on April 25. Effective April 24,holders of one-way permits will be allowed to stay for seven years on arrival,and then become eligible for residency. Previously, migrants from China wouldhave had to receive four extensions. The change will allow 52 immigrations officers to be reassigned, and reducegovernment processing fees by $6 million. Jane Moir, "Migrants to get 7-year permits on arrival," South China MorningPost, April 26, 1996. Scott McKenzie, "Ethnic minority list drawn up forpost-97," South China Morning Post, April 26, 1996. Peter Stein, "Hong Kongemigrants consider fate after territory returns to Chinese rule," Wall StreetJournal, April 5, 1996. _______________________________ Taiwan:Foreign Workers and IllegalImmigration On April 10, some 550 Chinese illegal immigrants in Taiwan staged ademonstration at a detention center after being held as long as seven months.The Chinese were caught in fishing boats before they entered Taiwan; they weremigrating in search of jobs. They are demanding to be returned to China, butthe Chinese government has refused to take them back. Taiwanese government agencies will allow Hong Kong labor brokers to helpfind jobs in Taiwan for specialists and technicians from the British colony.Only legally registered labor agencies in Hong Kong will be allowed to openTaiwan offices. The brokers will be prohibited from sending unskilled workerssuch as maids to Taiwan. Officials of the Council of Labor Affairs and labor representatives reachedan agreement that will prevent Taiwan companies from employing foreign workersfor longer than six or eight years. The CLA wants to cut down on the country'sreliance on overseas workers, and to allocate the foreign worker quotas tocompanies that have the most acute need for foreign workers. The CLA wants to lower the ratio of foreign to native workers, since theunemployment rate in Taiwan is at a relatively high rate of two percent.However, agreement could not be reached on a CLA proposal to cut the ratio offoreign workers to 30 percent of the total work force in the manufacturingsector from the current level of 35 percent, reducing the ratio for majorpublic construction projects to 50 percent from 65 percent, and lowering theratio for large investment projects exceeding NT$ 200 million to 40 percentfrom 50 percent. Taiwan currently has over 210,000 legal foreign workers. There were about160,000 foreigners in Taiwan in 1994, including 125,000 blue-collarworkers. Although the unemployment rate has lead to restrictions on foreign workersin some areas, they are credited for the success of the Taichung industrialprocessing zone. In 1993, 77 foreign workers were hired, and their number roseto 528 in 1994. In 1995, over 900 foreign workers were employed, and therewere still over 400 job vacancies in the zone. Foreigners account for 10percent of the work force, with most of the workers from the Philippines. "Hong Kong labor brokers to be allowed to set up offices here," Reuter,April 26, 1996. "Labor Council to limit length of employment for foreigners,"China Economic News Service, April 25, 1996. "Foreign Workers Contribute toSuccess of Taichung Industrial Zone," China Economic News Service, April 18,1996. "Illegal aliens in Taiwan, Reuter, April 12, 1996. _______________________________ PhilippinesRemittances Up The Philippine Central Bank reported that remittances from Filipinooverseas contract workers increased over 63 percent to US $4.93 billion in 1995(124 billion pesos), up from US $3.01 billion in 1994. The number of Filipinos going abroad fell from 719,602 in 1994 to654,022 in 1995. Filipino workers in Singapore remitted a record or US $106million in 1995. Most of the 65,000 Filipinos in Singapore are female domestichelpers, and they remit an average $1630. The Philippines is the only country with a law that explicitly tries toprotect its nationals employed abroad--the Migrant Workers and OverseasFilipino Act of 1995. Several Filipino politicians have that the country's OverseasWorkers Welfare Administration (OWWA) and the Philippine Overseas EmploymentAdministration (POEA) be merged into a new Cabinet level department to dealwith Filipinos working abroad. Other proposals include the creation of anOverseas Filipino Workers bank, with a capital contributions from thePhilippine Social Security System (SSS) and Government Service Insurance System(GSIS). On April 18, a Philippine congressional committee, the Committee onOverseas Contract Workers, reported in mid-April that Singapore, Malaysia,Saudi Arabia, Egypt, Kuwait, Qatar and Turkey do not have laws to protectforeign workers. There are 500,000 Filipino workers in these seven countries,employed mostly as maids, and Singapore, Qatar, Turkey and Egypt do not havelaws to protect foreigner maids. In Malaysia, labor laws apply equally toforeign and local workers, but the foreign workers must pay levies for theprivilege of working in the country. A wave of kidnappings of ethnic Chinese for ransom in the Manila area--someinvolving police--is reportedly threatening some Chinese investment in thecountry. "Philippine panel says workers abroad are unprotected," Japan EconomicNewswire, April 18, 1996. "Filipino overseas workers remit $5 billion," XinhuaNews Agency, April 2, 1996; Nirmal Ghosh, "Filipino workers in Singapore sentback record $150m," Straits Times, March 17, 1996. _______________________________ OTHER _______________________________ NewZealand/ustraliaImmigrants The New Zealand First Party is gaining strength in opinion polls, mostly byportraying the 125,000 Asian immigrants in the country of 3.5 million as "toorich" and persons who "sponge" off the local economy by leaving their familiesin New Zealand, while they commute to jobs in Taiwan. Asians are about 60percent of New Zealand's immigrants. The First Party, headed by a Maori, calls for a limit of 10,000 immigrantsper year and a four-year probation period for all immigrants during which theycould own a maximum 25 percent of any New Zealand company. The First Party'scampaign has been blamed for three attacks on Asian immigrant families in thepast few months. In response to the increasing anti-immigrant sentiment, a group of mostlyAsians launched a new political party of April 22. The Ethnic Minority Partyof New Zealand hopes to give a political voice to ethnic minorities. Asiansaccount for 3.5 percent of New Zealand's population. The new party plans toform a coalition with other small parties to reach the five percent thresholdneeded to gain representation in the Parliament. Some see the creation of a racially based party as detrimental to racerelations in New Zealand. Australian Immigration Minister Paul Ruddock announced plans in March 1996to encourage new immigrants to bypass Sydney and Melbourne for South Australia,Tasmania and the Northern Territory. Some 80,000 immigrants are expected in1996, mostly from Hong Kong, China, Vietnam, the Philippines and India. Voters in New South Wales and Queensland re-elected two candidates whowant to eliminate special preference for Aborigines. Their re-electionreflects a growing sentiment, especially among the poorer whites, that theAborigines, who have received protections from the government, are on the"gravy train." The new coalition plans to also review the present immigration policy, witha proposal to cut welfare to new immigrants who are unemployed. Ken Coates, "Racial Row Leads Asians to Seek Own Political Voice," InterPress Service, April 29, 1996. Matthew Brockett, "NZ's Asian political partyfuels race debate," Reuters, April 22, 1996. Surinder Singh, "Racial issuesturned voters against Labor in two states," Straits Times (Singapore), March 6,1996. _______________________________ Foreignersin theGulf/a> The six Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) States--Bahrain, Kuwait, Oman,Qatar, Saudi Arabia, and the United Arab Emirates-- are attempting to reducetheir dependence on foreign workers. There are over seven million foreigners among the GCC's 10 million workers,and foreigners make up 90 per cent of the work force in the United ArabEmirates (UAE), 83 per cent in Qatar, 82 per cent in Kuwait, 69 per cent inSaudi Arabia and around 60 per cent in Bahrain and Oman. The total GCCpopulation of 26 million is expected to increase to 39 million by 2010,including 21 million residents under 21. In October 1995, GCC labor ministers adopted a "blueprint on facilitatingthe movement of national manpower between member states and the replacement offoreign labour by national manpower." However, plans to train local workers,promote free mobility for GCC nationals within the region, and reducedependence on foreign workers, in part by reducing their wages and benefits,have been slow to develop. Saudi Arabia has about 7.5 million workers, including 5.5 millionforeigners (73 percent of the labor force are foreigners). Oman has 900,000workers, including 620,000 or 69 percent foreigners. Kuwait has 718,848 workers, including 605,889 or 84 percent foreigners.Bahrain has 226,448 workers, including 135,786 or 60 percent foreigners. Bahrain, an island nation linked by causeway to Saudi Arabia, has apopulation of 572,000, divided about equally between Bahrain nationals andforeigners. The per capita income was $14,600 per year in 1993. Bahrain nationals make up 90 percent of government workers and 30 percentof private-sector workers. However, from two to 11 percent of Bahrainnationals are unemployed. The government is attempting to urge Bahrain nationals to acceptlower-level jobs now held by foreigners. Bahrain nationals now constitute 25percent of employees in four- and five-star hotels, compared with five percentin the early 1980s Sunni Muslims control the government and most of the island's wealth, andthe Shiite Muslim majority. The UAE has 2.4 million people, and 90 percent of its 800,000 workers areforeigners. Males outnumber females in the UAE two to one. In January 1996, the UAE announced that foreigners could bring spouses,sons up to 18, and unmarried daughters or sons in school if they earned atleast 3,000 dirhams ($817) each month and were provided with free housing (4000dirhams without free housing). Some 2.6 million people who say they were hurt by Iraq's invasion of Kuwaitin August 1990 have filed claims for compensation, asking for $190 billion, and30 percent of Iraq's revenues from the sale of oil would be diverted to paytheir claims, a projected $1.2 billion per year. Barbara Crossette, "Iraqi Oil Impasse Hits Gulf War Victims," The New YorkTimes, April 28, 1996. John Lancaster, " Bahrain Invents a Working Class,"Washington Post, April 4, 1996. Joe Avancena, " Migrant workers' plight,"Moneyclips, April 3, 1996. Ahmad Mardini, "More local hands for privateemployers," Inter Press Service, January 5,1996. WT02-B15-2IA090-000969-B027-125http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/By-Month/MN-Vol-3-96/MN_June_96.html 128.120.36.171 19970122205055 text/html 152997HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 20:51:41 GMTLast-Modified: Saturday, 25-Nov-95 17:23:45 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 152738 MIGRATIONNEWS  MIGRATION NEWS Vol. 3, No. 6 June, 1996 Migration News summarizes the most important immigration and integrationdevelopments of the preceding month. Topics are grouped by region: North America, Europe, Asia, andOther. There are two versions of Migration News. The paper edition is about 8,000words in length, and the email version about 15,000. The purpose of Migration News is to provide a monthly summary of recentimmigration developments that can be read in 60 minutes or less. Many issuesalso contain summaries and reviews of recent research publications. Distribution is by email. If you wish to subscribe, send your emailaddress to: MigrationNews <migrant@primal.ucdavis.edu> Current and back issues may be accessed via Internet on the Migration NewsHome Page--- http://migration.ucdavis.edu There is no charge for an email subscription to Migration News. A paperedition is available by mail for $30 domestic and $50 foreign. Make checkspayable to UC Regents and send to: Philip Martin, Department of AgriculturalEconomics, University of California, Davis California 95616 USA. Migration News is produced with the support of the University ofCalifornia-Berkeley Center for German and European Studies, the German MarshallFund of the United States, and the Pew Charitable Trusts. ISSN 1081-9916 _____________________________ NORTHAMERICA _____________________________ ImmigrationReformAdvances/a> On March 21, 1996 the US House of Representatives passed a bill 333-87 thatwould add agents to the US Border Patrol, take other steps to reduce illegalimmigration to the US, and prevent legal immigrants from receiving welfareassistance. On May 2, 1996, the Senate approved a similar bill by a vote of97-3, making it likely that some type of immigration reform law will be enactedin 1996. Both Senate and House versions of immigration reform are known as H.R.2202. About 3.2 million illegal aliens were estimated to have been in the US inOctober 1992, and their number is believed to be increasing by about 300,000per year. Half of the settled unauthorized alien population in the US isthought to have entered without inspection, and half are persons who enteredlawfully. Most of the proposals in the new legislation are aimed at personswho sneak across the borders. The Senate conference committee that was assigned the task of reconcilingthe separate bills was appointed in May; the House committee is expected to beappointed in early June. Congress is expected to vote on the resulting billby summer. President Clinton will probably sign a bill if it does not includethe House-passed provision that would allow states to deny K-12 education toillegal alien children. The House and Senate bills include three major sets of measures to reduceillegal immigration and reduces the access of legal immigrants to welfare.First, both provide for stronger border enforcement, adding 1,000 Border Patrolagents per year for five years, bringing the total from 5,175 in 1996 to almost10,000 by 2000. Both call for a 14-mile "triple fence" on the US-Mexicanborder south of San Diego, and would increase the penalties for smugglingaliens into the US and for using false documents to obtain US jobs or welfareassistance--document fraud could bring a $500,000 fine and 15 years in prison.Both bills also permit the Attorney General to allow local police departmentsto "seek, apprehend, and detain" illegal aliens who are subject to an order ofdeportation. Second, both bills introduce pilot programs to enable employers to verifythe status of newly-hired workers. The Senate bill would give the President upto eight years to test three verification programs and report the results backto Congress, while the House measure specifies a three-year voluntary pilotprogram for employers in five states -- California, New York, New Jersey,Florida and Texas. No national worker eligibility verification system could beestablished, however, without another congressional vote. Both bills narrowthe range of documents that persons seeking US jobs may present to employers asproof that they are lawful workers from the current 29 to six. Third, both bills seek to prevent LEGAL immigrants from obtaining welfarebenefits. Under current law, immigrants must show that they will not become"public charges" in the US, and this requirement is usually met by the US-basedsponsors of relatives immigrating. They sign affidavits assuming financialresponsibility for their relatives. If the pending legislation becomes law,these affidavits will become legally binding. If immigrants apply for welfare assistance within 10 years of their arrival(Senate), or before they become naturalized US citizens (House), the welfareagency could "deem" or assume that the immigrant has access to his sponsor'sincome and assets. US residents who want to sponsor immigrants would have tohave incomes of at least 125 percent (Senate) or 200 percent (House) of thepoverty line ($14,700 for a family of four in 1993), up from the currentrequirement of at least a poverty line income. Under the proposed legislation, if the immigrant and sponsor's incomes areso low that the immigrant nonetheless qualifies for assistance, the immigrantmay become deportable. Under US law, an immigrant is deportable if she becomesa "public charge," defined in pending legislation as receiving welfareassistance for 12 months or more in a five-year period (Senate) or seven-yearperiod (House). The Senate bill makes illegal aliens eligible for emergency Medicaid,school lunches and other nutrition programs, immunizations, and short-termdisaster relief, but permits legal immigrants to participate only in schoollunch and nutrition programs. The Government Accounting Office in May reported that 25 percent of theelderly supplemental security income recipients were legal immigrants. Abouttwo-thirds of the immigrants on SSI live in California, New York and Florida.SSI was established in 1972 to help people who do not qualify for SocialSecurity benefits. In 1996, the maximum SSI payment is $470 a month for anindividual and $705 for a couple. In 1995, about 6.5 million people receivednearly $25 billion in federal SSI benefits, and $3 billion in statebenefits. The House and Senate bills differ in three important areas. The Housebill, but not the Senate bill, would permit states to deny K-12 education tounauthorized alien children in the US. There are believed to be at least600,000 such children in US schools, half in California. Second, the House bill prohibits illegal alien parents from applying forwelfare benefits on behalf of their US-born and US-citizen children. The UScitizen children remain eligible, but a legal US resident would have to applyfor benefits on their behalf. Third, the House bill permits, under certaincircumstances, the immediate expulsion of foreigners who arrive in the US andapply for asylum; the Senate removed a similar provision on a 51-49 vote. Many advocates are using the pending immigration legislation to preserve orremove provisions affecting immigrants in anti-terrorism law signed in April1996. For example, under the "summary exclusion" procedures included in theanti-terrorism law, beginning in November 1996, INS officers at ports of entrywill have final authority to exclude from the US aliens arriving withoutdocuments, and those arriving with false documents, who request asylum. Undercurrent US law, an alien may request a hearing with an immigration judge beforebeing removed from the US, and may seek judicial review of a denial of anasylum application and order of deportation. Similarly, the anti-terrorism law eliminates the possibility that legalimmigrants who have been in the US for at least seven years can avoiddeportation if they were convicted of felony crimes in the US. The immigrationbill relaxes this a bit, saying that the immigrant must be sentenced tofive or more years in prison to be ineligible for 212(c) relief fromdeportation. In FY94, 4,100 legal immigrants asked to stay in the US afterbeing convicted of crimes, and 1,800 were allowed to stay. The anti-terrorism bill similarly does not permit immigration judges tosuspend deportation for unauthorized aliens who have been in the US seven ormore years if they entered without inspection. In FY94, 4,300 unauthorizedimmigrants asked to stay in the US, and 2,400 were allowed to stay. Theimmigration bill preserves suspension of deportation, renaming it cancellationof deportation or removal. Eric Schmitt, " Provisions on Legal Immigrants Jeopardize Bill on IllegalAliens," New York Times, May 28, 1996. Marcus Stern, "Debate stallsverification system on immigrant workers," San Diego Union-Tribune, May 13,1996. Tatiana M. With, "Immigrants fear federal measures," Boston Globe, May12, 1996. Eric Schmitt, " Senate Votes Bill Aimed at Aliens in US Illegally,Crackdown Gains, 97-3, Measure Faces Reconciliation with a House Version, andPerhaps a Clinton Veto," New York Times, May 3, 1996. _____________________________ INS:Numbers,Criminals, Sanctions Legal Immigration. The INS was criticized by Congressional leadersof immigration subcommittees in May 1996 for "misleading" the public aboutimmigration levels. Just before a crucial Senate vote March 28 on whether toreduce legal immigration, the INS released the FY95 immigration numbers, whichshowed that 720, 000 immigrants arrived in FY 1995, down 18 percent from880,000 in FY 1993. The agency said that the numbers showed that prudent planning andmanagement were making immigration levels controllable without new legislation,and the Senate thereupon defeated an effort to reduce legal immigration. Internal INS projections became public, however, revealing that the agencyexpects immigration levels to rise in 1996 and 1997--some 100,000 to 200,000visa applications were pending at the end of FY 1995 due to an administrativelogjam. Advocates jumped to exploit the new data. Those who want to reduceimmigration argued that the administration's use of numbers was another exampleof the politicization of the immigration issue. Those who favor the status quo, or more immigration, argued that thelong-run level of legal immigration is about 850,000 per year, and that, in anyyear, the number "admitted" may rise or fall by 10 to 20 percent as a result invariations in INS processing, and because of fluctuations in the number ofvisas requested by US employers. On May 16, 1996, the House Immigration Subcommittee held a hearing on thenumbers issue, during which the INS was criticized by Lamar Smith, chair of theimmigration subcommittee for "misleading Congress" after trends in legalimmigration. The INS projects about 953,000 immigrants and refugees in FY1996. The INS testified that the wild card in projecting legal immigration to theUS is the behavior of the 2.7 million illegal aliens who were legalized andbecame permanent resident aliens under the Immigration Reform and ControlAct--1.6 million as LAWs (unauthorized aliens in the US before 1982 or personslegalized under Section 245A of the INA), and 1.1 million as SAWs (Section210). It is estimated that spouses and minor children of legalized LAWs andSAWs comprise 80 percent of the 1.1 million people in the second preferencebacklog--70 percent are Mexicans. According to the INS, most of the 911,000 spouses and minor children on thesecond preference waiting list who want to join newly-legalized aliens in theUS are already in the US--101,000 applied for Family Unity protection fromdeportation, and many of the rest are in the US illegally. By one estimate,about one-fourth of all immigrants "admitted to the US" in any year are alreadyin the US. The timing and manner by which this second preference backlog is eliminatedplay key roles in identifying the number of immigrants "admitted" to the US.The backlog could be eliminated if legalized aliens naturalize, and petitionfor the admission of their immediate families--LAWs could naturalize afterDecember 1993, and most SAWs after December 1995 (there is no quota on theadmission of family members of US citizens, and INS data do not differentiatebetween US-born and foreign-born US citizens who petition for the entry oftheir immediate relatives). About 42 percent of the foreign-born residents of the US in the 1990 Censuswere naturalized US citizens, and 23 percent of the Mexican-born residents hadbecome naturalized US citizens by 1990. The INS assumed that 45 percent of the newly legalized aliens wouldnaturalize, a higher percentage than usual for Mexicans because, to become a USimmigrant, the LAWs had to take an English and civics test that is similar tothe naturalization tests. Among the LAWs, a survey suggested that there wouldbe one spouse or minor child to be admitted as an immigrant for each threelegalized aliens. The INS assumes that each of the 1.1 million SAWs wouldpetition for a spouse or child. The INS assumed that all of the family members of LAWs and SAWs are in thebacklog, and that an average 60,000 per year would be admitted to the US undercurrent laws, so that about 200,000 would remain in the second preference queuein 2003. As of May 10, 1996, at least 308,000 legalized aliens applied fornaturalization, representing 20 percent of the total eligible group. A second factor changing immigrant admissions numbers is that, beginning inthe summer of 1995, aliens residing illegally in the United States when theywere eligible to become immigrants could adjust their status while remaining inthis country. Because of delays in setting up the INS system to process theseimmigrants, many of the aliens who applied for adjustment to immigrant statusin 1995 will be admitted as immigrants in 1996. The number of Mexican-born US residents appears to have increased in the1990s. There were 4.3 million Mexican-born residents enumerated in the 1990Census, 6.3 million in the March 1994 CPS, and 6.7 million in the March 1995CPS. However, the CPS reports that significantly more Mexicans arrived in the1980s than does the Census, i.e, more Mexicans in the US in 1995 than in 1990reported that they arrived in the 1980s. This is a surprising result, becausesome Mexican-born residents emigrate, and others die. An analysis by Jeff Passel suggests that the Mexican-born population in theUS is rising, but not by the 500,000 per year implied by 1990 Census-1994/95CPS changes. It appears that many SAWs were not enumerated in the 1990 Census,but were in the US with their families in 1994-95, and reported that theyarrived in the US in the 1980s. Criminal Aliens. Under the State Criminal Alien Assistance Program(SCAAP), the Department of Justice makes grants to states in accordance withINS estimates of the number of illegal immigrants in state prisons. According to Sen. Spencer Abraham (R-Mich), there are almost 500,000convicted foreign-born felons in the US. Aliens are first tried to determinewhether they committed a crime in the US. If convicted, each is entitled to ahearing before an immigration judge to determine if he/she is to be deported. Criminal aliens ordered to be deported may appeal to the US Board ofImmigration Appeals (BIA), asking to remain in the US because they e.g., havefamilies here. The INS typically releases criminal aliens while they wait forthe outcome of these deportation hearings, since the alien has already been inprison for the US crime committed, and GAO estimates that most criminal aliensreleased commit additional crimes--77 percent of non-citizens convicted offelonies are re-arrested at least one more time in the US. To expedite deportations, the INS began to station agents and hearingofficers in federal and state prisons, so that the alien can ask to preventdeportation before being released. The INS has also begun to station agents incounty jails--Anaheim may be the first city in the US to have INS agentspermanently stationed in its jail in order to identify and deport all illegalimmigrants who have been arrested. According to a survey conducted in Fall1995, 35 percent of the Anaheim 's inmates were illegal aliens. Pending immigration legislation includes government funding for a six-monthpilot program at Anaheim jail. According to a report in the Los Angeles Times, of the 2,300 suspectedMexican drug traffickers taken into custody in border areas in 1995, one infour were sent back to Mexico because of jail overcrowding and lack ofresources to prosecute them in the US. US Customs says that, in general,prosecution is deferred if the smuggler has less than 125 pounds of drugs, orif the defendant is a Mexican citizen. One reason US jails are overcrowded is the large number of foreignersdetained by Operation Gatekeeper. In the first week of May, 1996, of the 930inmates housed at the Metropolitan Correction Center in Los Angeles, 49 percentwere charged with immigration law violations and 36 percent were being held fordrug offenses. The INS is closing 30 interior Border Patrol offices and shifting theagents to the border. The INS has allocated $5 million to fly 5,000 Mexicans apprehended in theUS to the interior of Mexico in 1996--an average of $1,000 per person forairfare and transportation from the airport to home communities. The first 13Mexicans were flown to Guadalajara in April 1996. Employer Sanctions. On May 23, 1996, the INS announced that IBP ofDakota City, Nebraska; Monfort Inc. of Greeley, Colorado; Excel Corp. ofWichita, Kansas; and BeefAmerica of Omaha, Nebraska --meatpackers that employ56,000 workers at 48 sites in ten states and represent about 80 percent of theindustry--agreed to participate in the INS's voluntary Employment VerificationPilot (EVP) helps employers determine whether their non-citizen employees arelegally authorized to work in the United States. After hiring a new employee, employers participating in EVP send theA-numbers and other information to an INS database via modem, and the INSverifies the alien's right to work. In California, an EVP arrangement with 234employers who have 80,000 employees in Santa Ana and City of Industry,including Disneyland, found that about 26 percent of all newly-hired workerspresented false documents to employers. These 234 California employers checked on the status of 11,500 non-UScitizens over seven months, and found that 2,948 were not legally authorized towork. In a midwestern meatpacking experiment, 27 percent of the non-UScitizens hired were found to have presented false documents. It may be that more than one in four workers presented false documents,since employers do not check on persons who assert that they are US citizens.The INS does not seek to apprehend aliens who are denied work, under the theorythat inability to work in the US is enough of a deterrent. In Santa Ana, south of Los Angeles, a bakery in the city's enterprise zonethat recruited workers through the city-run Economic Development Departmentclosed after INS inspections found that 47 of 62 workers were not authorized towork in the US. (Enterprise zones are state-designated areas that use taxincentives to draw jobs to economically depressed districts.) The cityscreened workers to determine if they were economically disadvantaged, but notfor legal status. An INS agent in 1995 estimated that almost 25 percent of the workers in222 meatpacking plants in Nebraska and Iowa were in the US illegally. In 1995,INS agents in Nebraska and Iowa arrested 704 people on illegal immigrationcharges, nearly double the 363 arrests the office logged in fiscal 1994. Someof those apprehended reported that they paid $400 each to be transported fromthe border to Chicago. The Excel Corporation, a beef processor in Kansas, agreed to a new contractaffecting about 2,300 hourly workers, mostly Hispanics, that includes a 20 centper hour wage increase. The 13-month contract also includes a stipulation thatif an employee's immigrant status changes and the employee notifies the companyof the change, the employee will not be disciplined for having earlier providedfalse information. Greg Hernandez, "INS Study May Support Agents at Anaheim Jail," Los AngelesTimes, May 27, 1996. Eric Schmitt, "US expands status checks on job seekers,"New York Times, May 24, 1996. Vincent J. Schodolski, "Ante raised in smugglingaliens," Chicago Tribune, May 13, 1996. H. G. Reza, "Drug runners Arrested atborder Often Go Free," Los Angeles Times, May 12, 1996. Kenneth Noble,"Sympathies Sharply Divided on Beatings of Immigrants," New York Times, May 6,1996. Bonnie Weston, "The Bivona Bakery closes after an immigration raiddepletes staff hired with the help of a Santa Ana agency," Orange CountyRegister, May 5, 1996. Marc Stern, " "Outcry greets INS projection of soaringlegal immigration," San Diego Union-Tribune, April 24, 1996. ________________________ CaliforniaMigration Internal Migration. California lost a net 143,000 residents toother states in 1995, reflecting the slowdown in the state's population growthin the first half of the 1990s. During the 1980s, California gained a net 1.25 million residents from theother 49 states. Between 1990 and 1995, California lost a net 1.55 millionresidents to other states. California gained a net 1.4 million immigrants inthe first half of the 1990s, or almost 300,000 per year. California, which had an estimated population of 31.6 million in 1995, isexpected to have 41 million residents in 2010. California 's population growthis fueled by births (over 600,000 per year) and immigration (over 300,000 peryear). In reviewing population growth since 1980, demographer Hans Johnson notesthat California's population increased by 500,000 in 1980, a peak 900,000 in1989, and then 100,000 in 1993. Johnson's estimates, based on the assumptionthat 91 percent of the 18 to 64 year old residents have drivers' licenses,suggest that there was very high unauthorized immigration to California in thelate 1980s, and a high outmigration of US-born residents to other states. Estimates of illegal immigration based on apprehension data, by contrast,report declining illegal immigration in the late 1980s. Welfare. About 2.7 million of California's 32 million residentsreceive cash assistance, including 20 percent of California's children. About17 percent of the US welfare recipients live in California but, becauseCalifornia has a high cost of living, and because California has beenrelatively generous, the $6.7 billion spent on cash assistance in California is27 percent of US welfare spending. In the ongoing debate over how to reform welfare, Democrats stress offeringcarrots to induce poor people to work--higher minimum wages, job training andchild care--while Republicans stress penalties for not working--time limits onthe receipt of assistance, lower grants, etc. Politics. California politicians, beginning with Governor PeteWilson in 1994, link the state's problems to immigration and population trends.A standard "new Democratic" analysis of the state's problems begins withCalifornia's unique demography. California is a big and ethnically diversestate that is seeing its middle class move to other states. As one result, elderly and often wealthy white California voters resist newtaxes, while poor minority residents need more state-provided services thantheir taxes pay for, from schools to criminal justice. California faces thechallenge of building and staffing more schools for the current baby boomentering K-12. Prop 98 requires the state to maintain school funding, plus theprospect of less money but the same responsibility in a federal health andwelfare block grant, while dealing with a growing criminal justice system. Bysome estimates, criminal justice is now California's largest industry. Some historically African-American California cities are rapidly becomingmostly Latino cities, as African Americans move out and Latinos move in. EastPalo Alto is an example. Between 1980 to 1990, the African American populationin East Palo Alto dropped from 60 percent to 42 percent, while the Latinopopulation increased from 14 percent to 36 percent. Blacks are older-- in1995, the school district had 29 percent black children, and 58 percent Latinochildren. California on May 23 announced that women seeking pre-natal care underMedi-Cal will have to show proof that they are California residents. Theprenatal care for needy women served 100,000 women in 1995 at a cost of $25million ($250 each). On May 24, a San Diego judge barred the "U.S. Citizens Patrol" frompolicing the airport--the patrol was seeking to deter illegal immigrants fromusing the airport to travel around the US. The INS apprehends 20 to 25unauthorized aliens at the San Diego airport each day. Labor Markets. David Heer of USC in November 1994 surveyedimmigrants at day labor markets in southern California, at Mexican soccerleague games, patrons of catering trucks with Spanish menus, and persons inthree shopping centers, and found that 55 percent of the Mexican-born residentslive in areas that have mostly Mexican-born residents. "Calif. Braces for Wave of Lao Tribal Refugees," The Record, May 26, 1996.Michael McCabe, " Historically Black East Palo Alto Moving Toward LatinoMajority," San Francisco Chronicle, May 14. ________________________ Florida:No Federal Reimbursement On May 13, the US Supreme Court refused to permit Florida to sue thefederal government to recoup the cost of providing services to illegal aliens.Florida in 1994 sued the US government for $1.5 billion for violating the 10thamendment to the US constitution, which reserves powers not granted to thefederal government to the states. Lower courts dismissed Florida's suit,saying that it raised political rather than legal issues, and the Supreme Courtrefused to hear it. According to Florida's suit, the federal government's failure to preventillegal immigration caused Florida to incur costs to incarcerate illegal aliencriminals, educate children, and provide health care. The federal districtjudge agreed: "The court recognizes that the state of Florida is sufferingunder a tremendous financial burden due to the methods in which the federalgovernment has chosen to enforce the immigration laws.... But recognizing thesefacts does not create a legal theory under which this court may grantrelief." The dismissal of the Florida suit may revive the two initiative campaigns,Save Our State and FLA-187, that seek to get voter approval for Prop 187-stylemeasures in Florida -- 430,000 signatures are needed. Florida had an estimated322,000 illegal immigrants, about 10 percent of the national total, in October1992. Five other states -- New York, California, Arizona, Texas and New Jersey --have had similar lawsuits thrown out by federal judges. Diane Hirth, "Florida can't recoup costs of immigrants," Orlando Sentinel,May 14, 1996. Joanne Morrison, "High Court Refuses to Hear Florida ImmigrationCase," Bond Buyer, May 14, 1996. Herbert A. Sample, "Migrant burden rejected,"Fresno Bee, May 14, 1996. Diane Hirth, "High Court Rejects Florida Appeal,"Sun-Sentinel (Fort Lauderdale), May 14, 1996. ____________________________ Mexico-USAgree on Migrant Rights Mexicans' Rights. On May 8, the US and Mexico signed 11 agreements,including a four-page "Memorandum of Understanding on Consular Protection" thatspells out the rights of legal and illegal Mexican nationals in the US. TheMOU largely restates current US law and practice, and emphasizes that the INSis to notify Mexican consular authorities when they detain pregnant women andchildren. Another MOU pledges that the US and Mexico will cooperate to crack down onalien smugglers, and notes with "deep concern" the beatings and accidentsinvolving unauthorized Mexicans in southern California in April, 1996. Therewere almost weekly incidents in southern California in April in whichimmigrants trying to flee were injured or killed when the vehicles they were incrashed. On May 9, one of the two unauthorized Mexican aliens clubbed by 1996Riverside county sheriffs on April 1, 1996 filed two suits seeking compensationfor civil rights violations. Southern Californians continued to debate the beatings and accidents ofunauthorized aliens, with many immigration restrictionists arguing that thedeputies were justified in using force to apprehend the aliens. If the borderwere closed, they asserted, there would be no chases and beatings. The two beating victims have been featured at numerous rallies in supportof immigrant rights, prompting even some of those sympathetic to immigrants'rights to worry about the backlash from a lawsuit filed by lawyers for theimmigrants, arguing that "the felons [the aliens] should not get a windfallbecause of the deputies misconduct." Mexico's aggressive support fordemonstrations and the suit was also criticized. Smugglers who bring aliens across the 2,013-mile US-Mexico border for a feeare raising their rates. According to Border Patrol agents who interviewaliens after they are apprehended, fees for a guaranteed safe passage to LosAngeles have risen from a maximum of $200 to $400 or more. Mexico has begun to crack down on smugglers who bring non-Mexicans throughMexico en route to the US. In May, Mexican police arrested several smugglers,and deported the aliens from Central and South America who were being smuggledto the US. Smuggling people in Mexico is a federal crime punishable by two to 10 yearsin jail--judges handed down prison terms to 700 smugglers in 1995, almostdouble the 1994 total. The Mexican Congress is likely to approve in Septembera redefinition of smuggling to "organized crime," which would permit 20 yearsin jail, and allow police to go after the persons behind the smugglers. In Arizona, the U.S. Border Patrol launched a ''Stay Out, Stay Alive'' topersuade potential illegal aliens not to try to enter the US through thedesert. US Secretary of State Christopher led eight cabinet secretaries to Mexicofor the 13th US-Mexico Binational Commission meetings on May 7-8. The meetingsinvolved over 300 officials from both countries. Population. Mexico's population surpassed 91 million in 1995,despite a steady decline in the population growth rate, according to a majormid-decade census report issued April 25, 1996. Mexico added 10 million peoplebetween 1990 and 1995, but the growth rate slowed to 1.8 percent in 1995 fromtwo percent in 1990. According to the Mexican census, the country's populationwas 66.8 million in 1980, and 81.2 million in 1990. Mexico is rapidly urbanizing--some 46 percent of Mexicans lived in citiesof 100,000 or more in 1995, up from 11 percent in 1970. The percentage ofMexicans living in towns of less than 2,500 fell from 41 percent in 1970 to 26percent in 1995. In 1995, Mexico City had 8.4 million residents, and the Valley of Mexicothat includes Mexico City had 16.4 million, including Ecatepec on the northernoutskirts with 1.5 million residents, and Nezahualcoyotl to the east with 1.2million. Guadalajara had 1.6 million people and a metropolitan area of 3.3million in 1995, and Monterrey had 1.1 million and an urban area population of2.9 million. The Mexican peso, which has stabilized at about 7.5 pesos to $1 since Fall1995, is considered to be increasingly overvalued by some analysts, since theMexican inflation rate of 30 percent far exceeds the US rate of three percent.The peso is down 54 percent in nominal terms from its 3.4 pesos to $1 rate ofNovember 1994, but down only 19 percent in inflation-adjusted terms. In mid-May, Mexico reported that exports--fueled by the pesodevaluation--were up 20 percent in the first quarter of 1996 versus 1995. A Mexican peasants organization, the National Union of Autonomous RegionalCampesino Organizations (UNORCA), in April, 1996 said that 80 percent ofMexico's three million ejidatarios, and 2.5 million small farmers are nowvulnerable to bankruptcy and that NAFTA is to blame. In late April, 1996, theMexican government announced a plan to provide $1 billion in credit andtechnical assistance to 600,000 producers of grains on 11.5 millionacres. With the opening of a 2,300-employee Samsung television assembly plant inTijuana on March 29, 1996, Mexico now has almost as many televisionmanufacturing workers as the US--25,000 in Mexico versus 30,000 in the US.Samsung pays the assembly line workers--70 percent women with six or less yearsof schooling--345 pesos for a 45-hour work week, or about $47 per week or $1per hour. Over 90 percent of the television sets assembled in Mexico areexported--NAFTA eliminated tariffs on electronics imports from Mexico andCanada. Samsung will open a research & development facility in SanDiego. Mexico has a system of labor courts, and some have argued that, to attractforeign investment, these courts have become "employer friendly." For example,many planned strikes do not result in plant shutdowns--to be legal, a laborcourt must certify the strike. On June 30, 1996, Presidents Clinton and Zedillo are scheduled to open anew truck crossing port linking Calexico and Mexicali (pop 750,000).Mexicali's maquiladoras are booming, a reflection of its stable, non-unionlabor force, abundant water supplies from the Colorado River, and proximity tothe U.S. marketplace-- President Zedillo grew up in Mexicali. There is apparently more cross-border movement by local residents. SomeMexicans legalized under IRCA reportedly are living in the US, but sendingtheir children to Mexico for schooling, and to get them away from gangs. Mark Fineman, "Mexico busting smugglers," Los Angeles Times, May 27, 1996.Alfredo Corchado and Frank Trejo, "'86 law has 'made border more irrelevant,'Dallas Morning News, May 13, 1996. Stanley Meisler and Mark Fineman," Strainsshow during Mexico visit," Los Angeles Times, May 7, 1996. Craig Torres,"Peso's stability unnerves some Mexicans," Wall Street Journal, May 2, 1996. ____________________________ Regulatingthe Immigrant LaborMarket The US Department of Labor on May 3 issued its first-ever report on thenation's garment workers. Half of the sewing shops that were investigated hadviolated federal labor laws. There are about 22,000 sewing shops in theUS. DOL encourages upstream garment manufacturers and retailers to police theirsubcontractors and earn a place on DOL's "No Sweat" list of retailers thatmonitor their suppliers. JC Penny and Talbots were cited as companies thatbought clothing from sewing shops that violated wage and hour laws. Some garment manufacturers have contracted with Cal Safety ComplianceCorporation in order to assure themselves that the sewing shops they use are incompliance with labor laws. The firm employs 52 inspectors to make quarterlyinspections of the shops. According to Cal Safety, half of California's 4,000licensed sewing contractors are not in compliance with labor laws. Inaddition, there are believed to be 1,000 unlicensed sewing shops in southernCalifornia. On May 6, 1996, the four Thais who operated the sweatshop in El Monte thatconfined Thai sewers to an apartment complex were sentenced to six- andseven-year prison terms and ordered to pay $4.5 million to 70 unauthorizedworkers. Andrea Adelson, "Officials link 2 retailers to sweatshop-made goods," NewYork Times, May 20, 1996. Andrea Adelson, "Garment Makers Are Being Told toPolice Sweatshops," New York Times, May 4, 1996. ____________________________ Immigrantsand USBusiness/a> Immigrants in the US have higher rates of self-employment than US natives.As immigration increased over the past 25 years, immigrants from particularcountries have become associated with particular businesses in many areas ofthe US. For example, immigrants from India and their descendants own almost half ofthe economy motels in the US. US residents of Indian ancestry own over half ofthe 620 Econo Lodges, and one-third of the 1,100 Comfort Inns. Many of theIndian-Americans who own US lodgings are named Patel, and many moved from thewestern Indian state of Gujarati to Africa, and then came to the US viaAfrica. In New York, 53 immigrants from India, Pakistan, and Bangladesh were thesuccessful bidders for new taxi medallions, paying up to $180,000 each for theright to operate a yellow cab in New York City. Other immigrant groups that have found a niche in the US economy includeKoreans who sell fruits and vegetables in major US cities, Palestinians whooperate small stores open for long hours in cities such as Detroit, andCambodians who operate doughnut shops in California. The economic recovery in southern California is spotlighting the role ofimmigrants in business. According to some observers, southern California isdeveloping an economy based on small companies run by ethnics who are heavilyinvolved in international trade. The Koreatown section of Los Angeles, for example, was badly damaged in1992 riots, but today is home to 500 toy distribution companies with 6,000employees. Los Angeles' industrial corridor, stretching 24 miles down AlamedaBoulevard, from downtown Los Angeles to Long Beach Harbor, has thousands ofimmigrant-run businesses. Manufacturing employs 717,000 workers in LosAngeles, including 120,000 in garments, and many of these businesses areimmigrant-owned and immigrant staffed. This industrial corridor is also the place where unions are attempting torecruit new members. The Service Employees International Union added 8,000newly-unionized janitors to its membership in Los Angeles, virtually all ofthem Latin American immigrants. About 1.4 million Hispanics are union members,making them eight percent of the 17.5 million union workers in the US. Many of the Hispanic union leaders in southern California got their startin union organizing with the United Farm Workers union. In Orange county, almost one-fourth of all residents were born abroad, andsome analysts believe that immigrant entrepreneurship is spurring an economicrecovery in southern California, since "minority-owned" firms are increasingtheir employment at faster than average rates. There are believed to be280,000 Latino-owned firms in California in 1996, up from 70,000 in1982. Many of the immigrant-owned businesses are small, employing the immigrantand his family. A USC study of self-employment among immigrants found that,over their first 20 years of residence, rates of self-employment jump, fromeight to 21 percent for Asian immigrants. Immigrant Investors. Two US programs that aim to attract immigrantbusinesses to the US are reportedly plagued by fraud. Under one program,authorized in IMMACT in 1990, up to 10,000 foreigners can be admitted asimmigrants each year if they invest at least $1 million--or $500,000 in ruralareas--and create at least 10 US jobs. There are numerous consultants advertising to would-be investors, butrelatively few takers--only 106 investors committed $1 million or more in FY94,and 51 committed $500,000 or more (with their dependents, 444 persons wereadmitted under the investor criteria). One reason why so few foreigners invest in the US in exchange for permanentimmigrant visas is that, once they become US residents, their income earned inother countries becomes subject to US taxes. The other immigrant business program that is not living up to expectationsis the L-1 visa program, which permits foreigners with US business branches toenter the US temporarily. Originally designed in the 1970s to permitmultinationals to move key foreign personnel into the US easily, the programhas evolved into a way for small and sometimes fictitious "businesses" to bringrelatives to the US. There were almost 100,000 L-1 admissions in FY94, up fromabout 70,000 in FY91. Over half of the visas in this category go to thespouses and dependents of "intra-company" transfers. There were 9,500 Turks enumerated in the 1990 Census in New York, mostly inSunnyside, Queens and, as economic conditions in Turkey deteriorate, theirnumber may now top 25,000. Minimum Wages. Congress in May 1996 debated whether and how much toraise the US minimum wage, currently $4.25 per hour, and there were hundreds ofstories about the likely effects of a minimum wage increase on the three tofour million US workers who now earn $4.25 per hour. There are about 133 million persons 16 and older employed or looking forwork, and about 107 million are employed in the wage and salary jobs covered byminimum wage laws. About 12 million US workers--one in nine-- earn less than$5.15 per hour, and thus would be affected directly by President Clinton'sproposal to increase the minimum wage to $5.15 by 1997. The 90-cent increase would push annual pay for a full-time minimum-wageworker from $8,500 a year to $10,300 and, with the earned income tax credit,lift a breadwinner with a family of four above the $15,600 poverty line. The discussions of whether to raise the minimum wage centered on fourissues. First, how many jobs are likely to be eliminated at higher wages?Employers argue that a 20 percent wage hike--$4.25 to $5.15-- would eliminateabout 600,000 jobs, or five percent of the 12 million jobs that pay $5.15 orless. Second, who earns the minimum wage, or, do minimum wage workers "need"higher wages? Although many minimum wage workers are teens working in fastfood restaurants, most are adult women employed in a variety ofservices. Third, how would the effect of higher minimum wage vary across regions andindustries? For example, between 15 and 20 percent of all workers in statessuch as Louisiana, Mississippi, and Arkansas earn less than $5.15 per hour,versus five to eight percent of workers in the Northeast. Fourth, would a higher minimum wage in fact be paid, or would manyemployers disregard the law? The Wall Street Journal on May 20 ran a page onestory that repeated estimates that two to three million US workers areillegally paid less than the minimum wage. The story noted that the penaltyfor violating the minimum wage is to pay it--apparently not a strong sanctionfor often cash-strapped businesses. DOL found that 43 percent of 76 garment makers in southern California inMay 1996 were violating minimum wage laws. Over the past five years, DOL hasnormally assessed US employers about $20 million annually for violating minimumwage laws--the frequency of minimum wage violations per 1,000 workers ishighest in southern states such as Florida, Georgia, Arkansas, and Texas. Manyrestaurants do not pay their employees who receive tips the one-half theminimum wage (currently $2.13 per hour) as required. Some economists argue that, instead of increasing the hourly minimum wage,the Earned Income Tax Credit should be expanded. The EITC paid $21 billion tolow earners in 1995--poor people with earnings report their earnings on theirtax forms, and the government mails them a check for up to 40 percent of theirearnings--e.g, family with two or more children and earnings of up to $8,890could receive up to $3,556 in EITC payments in 1995. Immigrant Mobility. The Wall Street Journal on April 26, 1996discussed the Chiswick-Borjas debate over the economic progress of immigrants.The writer noted that the first wave of immigrants after 1965 included a highpercentage of skilled Asians, so that, when Chiswick tracked their economicmobility in the late 1970s and early 1980s, he found that they catch up inearnings to similarly-educated US-born residents within 10 to 15 years. However, subsequent immigrants, especially the relatives of Mexicanimmigrants, had less education and motivation, what Borjas called "decliningquality," leading Borjas to predict that these immigrants would never catch upto similar US-born residents in earnings. Furthermore, Borjas argues that manyimmigrants lack the "ethnic capital" needed to catch up economically to similarUS-born residents. Hispanic immigrant networks, according to Borjas, are morelikely to lead them into the welfare system than into self-employment. Borjas estimates that US-born workers lose $133 billion per year in lowerwages because of competition from immigrant workers, and that one-third of thewidening wage gap between high school drop outs and more educated workers isdue to immigrants. G. Pascal Zachary, "While Congress jousts over minimum wage, some peopleignore it," Wall Street Journal, May 20, 1996. Karen Brandon, "Organized laborlooking to Hispanics for recruits," Austin American-Statesman, April 28, 1996.John Emshwiller, "Fraud plagues US programs that swap biases for investments,"Wall Street Journal, April 11, 1996. "Immigrants help City of Angels to takewing again: Latinos and Asians, with the family as the main engine, are drivinga southern Californian recovery," Financial Times, March 29, 1996. JoelKotkin, "New fuel for California's engine," Wall Street Journal, March 25,1996. Edwin McDowell, "Hospitality is their business," New York Times, March21, 1996. _______________________________ EUROPE _______________________________ EU:1997, the Year AgainstRacism The EU Parliament has designated 1997 as European Year against Racism, andcalled for the "isolation" of "racist parties" such as France's National Frontand the Austrian Freedom Party. A report presented to the European Parliament by Dutch Christian DemocratArie Oostlander blamed "racist parties" for increasing xenophobia, racism andanti-Semitism in Europe. MEPs supported the report's call for a general ban ondiscrimination. The EP also agree that member states should makenaturalization and dual nationality and voting easier for immigrants, but itstopped short of agreeing that member states should introduce measuresoutlawing and punishing organizations engaging in racist and xenophobicactivities. The report was adopted on May 9. On May 8, Belgian officials detained Austria's Joerg Haider, one of thetargets of the EU's battle against xenophobia, for four hours because officialsbelieved he was trying to enter the country illegally. Belgian immigrationofficials held him in a room packed with illegal African immigrants until acopy of his passport was faxed to the authorities. Generous health and related benefits are being debated or cut in Europe toincrease the flexibility of the labor market and, hopefully, lead to morejobs. Some expect business to boom for employment services companies as Europederegulates labor markets--these companies provide temporary and permanentemployees to firms and become the "employers of record." In the UK in 1993,temporary help was 2.7 percent of total employment, 1.7 percent in theNetherlands, and 1.1 percent in France--versus 1.4 percent in the US. In May, the second and third largest employment services companies--Ecco ofFrance and Adia of Switzerland--agreed to merge, so that the combined company,as well as Manpower, will each account for about 10 percent of the $77 billionemployment services market world-wide each year. In April, France announced cuts in its health care programs, expected to beapproved by Parliament in Summer, 1996, and Germany announced plans to reduceits budget deficit by $33 billion by reducing work and welfareassistance. Under a 1971 law, Italy guarantees pregnant women full pay during the lasttwo months of pregnancy and the first three months following the birth-- fivemonths at full pay, with 80 percent of the tab paid by the government. In1995, the Italian government paid $900 million in maternity benefits. Inresponse, some Italian employers avoid hiring young women, or hire them inpart-time, contractual jobs. There are few public or private child care facilities for children aged0-3, but 90 percent of the children aged three to six are in "scuola materna,"the state-supported kindergartens. Italy has one of the lowest fertility rates in Europe--at current rates,the average woman will have 1.2 births in her lifetime, versus two in theUS. Celestine Bohlen, "Europe's Maternity Leave System," New York Times, May12, 1996. "MEPs Condemn Leaders of Racist Parties," Reuters, May 9, 1996. _______________________________ GermanCourt Upholds AsylumReforms Asylum/Aussiedler. The German Constitutional Court on May 14 upheldthe asylum reforms that went into effect on July 1, 1993--the reforms sharplyreduced the number of applicants for asylum in Germany. The German courtemphasized that the reforms did not change an individual's right to asylum inGermany if she faces political persecution at home. The court upheld the three key reforms--safe countries of transit, safecountries of origin, and detention for airport arrivals. Under the reform,applicants must apply for asylum in the first safe country that they enter--Germany is surrounded by safe countries. Second, the reforms define safecountries of origin, to which applicants can be returned while theirapplications are considered. Third, applicants who fly to Germany can bedetained if they apply upon entry, or they must apply within three days aftertheir arrival--the court extended this period to apply to seven days in its234-page ruling. The number of foreigners seeking asylum in Germany was 9,500 in April,1996, bringing the total to 40,000 for the first four months of 1996, including7,900 Turks, 7,400 from Serbia and Montenegro, 3,200 from Iraq, and 2,000 fromAfghanistan. In 1995, there were 127,937 applications for asylum, 127,210 in1994, 322,599 in 1993, and 438,191 in 1992. In 1995, about nine percent of the asylum seekers were granted asylum inGermany. During the first four months of 1996, some 54,200 ethnic Germans arrived inGermany from the ex-USSR. There were 218,000 Aussiedler arriving in Germany in1995, and 222,600 in 1994. About two million ethnic Germans have emigratedfrom the former East Bloc to Germany since the 1989 opening of the Berlin Wall,and four million still live in eastern Europe. The German government denied a May 27 story in Der Spiegel that it wasconsidering limiting the influx of Jewish refugees from the former Soviet Unionbecause most of them were no longer persecuted, and are now economic refugees.In 1990, Chancellor Helmut Kohl agreed to accept for humanitarian reasons anunlimited number of Jews from the former USSR. More than 45,000 Jews and theirrelatives have migrated to Germany. Bosnians. Some 200,000 of the 320,000 Bosnians living in Germanyare scheduled to return to Bosnia in the six months beginning July 1, 1996--anestimated 70 percent of them were ethnically cleansed from areas now underSerbian control, so that they will have to return to areas controlled by theMuslim-Croat federation. Some local Bosnian leaders in government-controlled parts of Bosnia -almost all under the control of President Alija Izetbegovic's ruling MuslimDemocratic Action Party - are demanding that each person returning from Germanybring "taxes" of up to DM10,000 (US $6,600) each. A German assessment ofprospects for the return of Bosnians, and for peace in Bosnia, was verypessimistic--the 16 Laender interior ministers on May 3 agreed that beforeBosnians can be returned, local safety must be guaranteed. The UNHCR agrees. On May 12, a UNHCR official said that most of the twomillion Bosnians displaced by the war--including the one million elsewhere inBosnia--will not be able to return to their original homes because they will be"unwanted strangers" in their old homes. There are also believed to be 120,000 Kosovo Albanians in Germany-- mostlyfailed asylum-seekers. On May 16, the Serbian government agreed to take themback into the reconstituted Republic of Yugoslavia--Serbia and Montenegro.Germany said it will not pay Yugoslavia to expedite the Kosovo Albaniansreturn. Labor Market. The German government, seeking to make the labormarket more flexible, is permitting small employers to dismissworkers--henceforth, employers with less than ten employees, up from thecurrent less than five, will be freer to dismiss workers. The president of the "Bundesanstalt fuer Arbeit" or federal labor office onMay 1 said that Germans must accept the fact that labor market flexibility isthe key to creating jobs. According to Jagoda, Germany would have two millionmore jobs if the number of part-time jobs could be increased. Turks/Vietnamese. Integration indicators for second-generationTurks are mixed. On the one hand, there are about 16,000 Turks studying inGerman universities. On the other hand, 86 percent of the foreign youth under20 who are jobless have not learned an occupation. Over 80 percent of Turkishchildren in Germany have worker parents. Some Turks advocate coordinated Turkish and German government efforts tointegrate Turks in Germany. Turkey's Prime Minister Yilmaz visited Germany inMay, seeking German help to unfreeze EU subsidies for Turkey that have so farbeen blocked by Greece, and asking Germany to protect and better integrateTurks living in Germany. Yilmaz warned the German government that most Kurds seeking asylum inGermany are "working undercover" for the outlawed PKK. There are about 500,000Turkish Kurds in Germany, out of a total Turkish population in Germany of 2.2million. Since 1992, 35 Vietnamese have been killed in Berlin, usually in fightingwith other Vietnamese gangs over the sale of non-taxed cigarettes. Gangleaders tend to operate from Czech or Polish border villages rather than fromGermany. There are about 60,000 Vietnamese living legally in Germany, and another40,000 more are thought to be illegally present--cigarette vendors are drawnfrom the illegals ranks. Vietnam agreed to accept many of the former EastGerman guest workers who were Vietnamese in exchange for $65 million inassistance, but took only 67 Vietnamese in 1995, far less than the 2,500 in theagreement. Last year's clampdown on right-wing violence by the German governmentresulted in a 44 percent drop in violent crime by neo-Nazis and right-wingextremists, according to the Federal Office for the Protection of theConstitution's annual report. The report indicated that violent crimes with aracist or right-wing motive fell from 1,489 in 1994 to 837 in 1995, the lowestlevel since 1990. Contributing to the drop in racist crimes is the tighteningof Germany's asylum laws, which halted much of the support for the extremeright-wing political parties. "Germany denies it may limit Jewish immigration," Reuters, May 24, 1996."German right-wing violence down 44 percent in 1995," Reuters, May 24, 1996.Stephen Kinzer, " In Germany, Vietnamese Terrorize Vietnamese," New York Times,May 23, 1996. Jovan Kovacic, "Kinkel presses Belgrade on Dayton, improvesties," Reuters, May 16, 1996. "Serbia agrees to repatriation of asylum-seekersfrom Germany," BBC, May 17, 1996. "UN aide sees most refugees unable to returnto Bosnia homes," Reuters, May 12, 1996. Ian Traynor, "Minister denouncesefforts by Bosnia and Serbia to charge fee for war exiles returning fromGermany," Guardian, May 6, 1996. _______________________________ FrenchDebate ImmigrationRestrictons Interior Minister Debre endorsed some of the 46 recommendations made by aparliamentary commission April 16, 1996, arguing that "if we want to integratethe legal foreigners in this country, we have to be intransigent with those whoare illegal." Among the recommendations were to permit police to hold illegalaliens for up to 45 days, versus the current 10 days, and to create files onpersons with whom new immigrants live in France. The parliamentary commission's report created a furor by calling for an endto automatic immigrant access to education and medical care, and for permittingforeigners under 18 to be deported. Another Parliamentary report released in May estimated that France islosing $20 billion to $32 billion annually because of undeclared work byillegal immigrants. Polls suggest that 33 percent of the French want tougher laws againstillegal immigration, while 49 percent believe that better enforcement ofcurrent laws will suffice. Some expect France's political parties to competewith one another to "get tough" on immigration to offset the appeal of theNational Front in elections in 1998. In order to counter the National Front's "get tough" attitude onimmigration, the French Interior Minister has ordered the expulsions of severalplaneloads of illegal immigrants. Debre argues that tightening immigrationcontrols is the only way to stem the rise of the ultra-right wing. The National Front accused the French government on May 20 of suppressingofficial reports that show links between immigration and crime. According tothe reports, which could not be verified by the government, there were 200stone-throwing attacks on buses in 1995, and over 100 bus drivers had beenassaulted and more than 600 cars set on fire in Lyon. In a May 25 interview with the Los Angeles Times, Jean Marie Le Penexplained that the "growth in immigration...provoked unbearable economic andsocial consequences... the idea of the 'nation' remains the most effective wayto protect security, liberty, identity and prosperity...One cannot make Frenchpeople from massive immigration. To live in security and harmony, people needa certain homogeneity." Le Pen recommended that one solution to US immigration problems would be toinvest in Mexico, so that Mexicans can achieve "their aspirations inside theirown borders." Mexicans, according to Le Pen, are easier to integrate in the USthan are Islamic immigrants in France, since Mexicans share many aspects of USculture and Christianity. Film star Brigette Bardot attacked Muslims for slaughtering sheep tocelebrate religious holidays. Bardot, though married to a local leader of LePen's National Front party, supports the Chirac government. Bardot complainedthat while churches sit empty because of a lack of priests, mosques are beingbuilt throughout France. According to Bardot, France has been invaded byforeigners, with the blessing of the government. Scott Kraft, "Jen Marie Le Pen: The Strong Voice of France's Far Right,"Los Angeles Times, May 26, 1996. Jonathan C. Randal, "Brigitte Bardot's Eweand Cry; Protest of Ritual Slaughter Draws Charges of Racism," Washington Post,May 22, 1996. "French far-right party attacks crime reports," Reuters, May 20,1996. "Bardot denies being anti-Muslim," Reuters, May 19, 1996. Adam Sage,"National Front lands a right hook," The Times, May 14, 1996. _______________________________ UK:Debate onAsylum As the Asylum and Immigration Bill made its way through the BritishParliament, a Seasonal Agricultural Workers Scheme was added to permit Britishfarmers to employ, from May through November, up to 10,000 Eastern Europeans asfarm workers. The bill will introduce employer sanctions, and some farmersfeared that they would not be able to recruit enough short-term casual labor toharvest crops. Since World War II, foreign students have been able to work temporarily onBritish farms. Foreign students are paid the same as UK workers at wage levelsset by the Agricultural Wages Board. On May 9, the British government defeated an opposition move to eliminaterestrictions included in the Asylum and Immigration Bill on council housing forasylum seekers and certain categories of immigrants. The government was alsoable to defeat an cross-party move to maintain child benefits forasylum-seekers who were being denied other social security benefits. A May 2amendment to the bill giving police and immigration officers the power to stopand search people they suspected of being illegal immigrants was also defeated. The number of people applying for asylum in the UK rose by 11,000, to44,000, in 1995. Most applicants are from Nigeria, Somalia, India, Pakistanand Sri Lanka. The government says that since January 1996, when new rules to cut benefitsto "bogus" asylum seekers went into effect, the number of asylum seekersdeclined from 11,563 the previous quarter to 8,069. Figures for April showedasylum applications dropped from an average monthly number of 3,690 to 2,068.Only 1,308 of the claims were lodged by people already living in the country--the lowest number since February 1994. Britain in April decided not to deport a Saudi dissident to placate SaudiArabia, reversing a January 1996 decision to send him to the Caribbean islandof Dominica after a court ruled that the UK had not shown that Dominica was asafe haven for the dissident. The Saudi dissident was "given leave to remain" in the UK with his familyfor four years. This status permits him to leave and re-enter the UK. The Saudi government has assured British officials that they will notretaliate against British firms because of the dissident's activities. Saudi Arabia had warned Britain that it was putting at risk trade linksworth billions of dollars a year by allowing a Saudi dissident to remain inLondon. Mohammed al-Masari has published reports accusing the Saudi royalfamily of corruption and human rights abuses. Judy Hardy, "Asylum Crackdown Slashing Number of Applications," PressAssociation Newsfile, May 16, 1996. "Britain: Saudis ease off overdissidents," UPI, May 24, 1996. Untitled, Extel Examiner, May 16, 1996.Randall Palmer, "Saudis play down dispute over British dissident," Reuters, May14, 1996. James Bruce, "Saudi warns UK again over dissident's asylum,"Jane's Defence Weekly, May 8, 1996. Kate Chattaway, "Move to Protect ChildBenefit for Asylum-Seekers Defeated," Press Association Newsfile, May 9, 1996.Kate Chattaway, "Government defeats bid to ease housing curbs onasylum-seekers," Press Association Newsfile, May 9, 1996. John Darnton,"Britain, Facing setback in court, won't deport Saudi dissident," New YorkTimes, April 19, 1996. _______________________________ Russia/Ukraine Since the USSR was formally dissolved in 1991, some nine million peoplehave been uprooted, including at least two million people who fled regionalconflicts like those in Tajikistan and Georgia. In May 1996, there was aconference organized by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, theInternational Organization for Migration and the human rights division of theOrganization for Security and Cooperation in Europe. There are believed to be about six million migrants in the CIS states,according to the IOM, including 2.5 million refugees and displaced persons.Some predict that another two to four million ethnic Russians will move toRussia within the next five years. Some 2.7 million of the Russians outside Russia reportedly moved to Russiaover the past three years. According to the Institute of Economic Forecasts ofthe Russian Academy this has compensated for the natural decrease in theRussian population. Over the past 10 years Russia's death rate has been aboutone million per year with a much smaller number of births. The Ukrainian government has challenged the argument that the break-up ofthe USSR left 25 million Russians outside Russia. The 25 million figure, whichcomes from the 1989 Census of the USSR, included 11 million ethnic Russians inUkraine. However, the Ukrainian government argues that many of the ethnicRussians in Ukraine are "Ukrainians who speak Russian." The IOM has signed a migration agreement with the Ukrainian government toprovide technical cooperation, information and assist with the return ofmigrants. The Ukraine has received over 300,000 illegal migrants since the collapseof the Soviet Union. Russia's Federal Border Service reports that they have deported about 367Chinese from the Maritime Territory since the beginning of the year. TheChinese normally enter the country with tourist visas then do no return home. Russia in April announced that food imports would be restricted after July1, 1996--about 45 percent of Russia's food is imported. Some 6,000 Russian companies have received permission to employforeigners. Liliya Kuznetsova, "Over 2,7 Immigrants Arrived in Russia Over Past ThreeYears," TASS, May 23, 1996. Barbara Crossette, "A Focus on Those Displaced bySoviet Union's Fall "Migration offsets natural decline in population," InterfaxNews Agency, March 21, 1996. "Russian Federal Border Service cracks down onillegal Chinese immigrants," Interfax News Agency, February 1, 1996. _______________________________ ASIA ______________________ Migrationat AsianSummits The Asean Trade Union Council (ATUC) in mid-May announced at anInternational Labour Organisation-ATUC symposium that it would urge governmentsand employers to phase out migrant workers and replace them with localworkers. The ATUC urged that the recruitment of migrant workers be done on agovernment-to-government basis, or by reputable employment agencies dulyregistered with the government. On March 1 and 2, the leaders of Asia and Europe held the Asia-EuropeMeeting (ASEM) summit in Bangkok to discuss common issues. The EU would liketo discuss human rights, while the Asian countries would like to concentrate oneconomic cooperation and technology transfers. Thai activists pushed the summit members to adopt the UN convention ofrights of migrant workers and family members and minimum standards for thetreatment of smuggled aliens. Most Asian governments have not signed the 1990 United Nations conventionon the rights of migrant workers and their family members, nor taken steps tofulfill the 1995 Beijing platform for action to against human traffickingnetworks. In many cases, children are trafficked--there are an estimated onemillion child prostitutes in Asia. Hong Kong and the Philippines urged 500 delegates participating in anagenda-setting meeting for the 18-nation APEC annual summit to includeprovisions that would make labor migration easier. One participant said thatan APEC labor migration agreement may be signed at the 1998 annualmeeting. The November, 1996 meeting is scheduled to be held in thePhilippines. The UN Commission on Human Rights asked for better protection of womenmigrant workers. The resolution, adopted in April, 1996, calls on countries toimplement legislation to prevent violence against women and to prosecuteoffenders. The Global Alliance against Trafficking in Women urged governments to adopta set of "standard minimum rules" to protect the rights of women laborers andthose forced into prostitution. According to the Alliance, female victims areoften prosecuted, and traffickers are often prosecuted under immigration ratherthan tougher criminal laws. The International Labour Office has taken a special interest in 1996-97 inwomen workers, including migrants working outside their country of origin, andwomen employed in foreign-owned firms that receive special incentives to investin their country of nationality. The ILO estimates that some 800,000 Asian women leave their countries oforigin for jobs abroad each year. An ILO report blames unscrupulous laborbrokers and weak laws for permitting the emigration of Asian women to reachsuch high levels. However, instead of recommending more regulation of womenmigrants, the ILO recommends that women be provided with more informationrather than regulation. The ILO is also launching a major study of export processing zones, the 230areas in 70 countries in which special rules apply to foreign firms thatestablish factories. So-called maquiladoras employ almost 40 million localworkers worldwide to assemble goods, usually for re-export. Most of theworld's export processing zones are in Asia--there are at least three millionworkers employed in 64 zones in Asia, plus 14 to 40 million more workers inChinese special economic zones. "Asean unions call for phasing out of migrant workers," Straits Times, May12, 1996. "Human Rights Commission for protection of women migrant workers,"Agence France Presse, April 13, 1996. "Asian, European countries urged toguarantee migrants' rights," Agence France Presse, February 21, 1996."Asia-Europe summit a change for change," Nikkei Weekly, February 19, 1996. _______________________________ Japan:Accept More Refugees? Sadako Ogata, the UN High Commissioner for Refugees, urged Japan to acceptmore refugees in May 1996. Japan signed the 1951 Refugee Convention in 1982,and has accepted about 10,000 Vietnamese refugees. The Japanese government has said that Japan may accept refugees from theKorean Peninsula and other areas of the Far East in an emergency situation,such as war or other hostilities. There are an estimated 170,000 Japanese-Brazilians in Japan, representingabout 15 percent of the 1.2 million descendants of Japanese emigrants whosettled in the states of Sao Paulo and Parana, Brazil. Many of the ethnicJapanese were peasants in Brazil, and are reportedly not used to the pace offactory work in Japan. A Japanese survey shows that 25 per cent of the Brazilian "dekaseguis" whohave immigrated to Japan want to settle in Japan. Mexican police in May broke up an organized crime ring that investigatorssay lured 1,200 young Mexican women into prostitution in Japan over a 14-monthperiod. The women were told that they would be singers or actresses in Japan,but were forced into prostitution upon their arrival by "yakuza" crimesyndicates. Japanese law allows Mexicans to enter Japan as tourists without avisa. "UN High Commissioner for Refugees to Open Doors More to Refugees," JijiPress Ticker Service, May 22, 1996. Gregory Gross, " Mexican women forced tobe sex slaves taken to Japan," San Diego Union-Tribune, May 3, 1996. _______________________________ Thailand:Two Million Illegals? Thailand's security forces estimate that there may be over two millionunauthorized foreign workers in the country, four times the mid-1995 estimateof 590,000. The official government estimate is 500,000 illegal immigrants, ofwhom 300,000 are from Burma. The rest are from Cambodia, Laos, and China.Most are employed in fishing, farming, construction and the textile andfootwear industries. The Thai Immigration Bureau arrested 219,455 illegal immigrants between1990 and June, 1994. Thailand has a work force of 35 million, and 10 percent belong to unions.The unions complain that illegal aliens depress wages--the Thai minimum wagewhich is 135 to 145 baht (about four dollars) a day. On the island of Phuket,illegal but skilled Burmese workers reportedly work for 70 and 150 baht perday. Thai employers can be fined 60,000 baht for each illegal worker theyhire. Thailand is considering permitting Burmese workers to be employed legallyin border provinces if employers pay insurance fees of 5,000 baht perworker. Dr. Kritaya Archavanitkul, of the Population and Social Research Instituteat Mahidol University, reported in "Policy Options for the Importation ofForeign Labour into Thailand" that it is very difficult to make sustainableforeign worker policies because reliable data on the extent of labor shortagesand the number of foreign workers are inadequate. Thai officials report an increase in foreign beggars, who are attracted tothe country because of the tradition of Buddhists giving alms to the poor.Many come from the neighboring countries of Cambodia and Burma. Most beggarsearn $4-12 per day. "Thailand's labor-intensive era to end: banker," Xinhua News Agency, May16, 1996. Marque Rome, "The deomonization of foreign labor," Bangkok Post May12, 1996. Varunee Torsricharoen, "Neighbor beggars enjoy lucrative Thaimarket," Japan Economic Newswire, May 12, 1996. Lee Siew Hua, "S'pore,Thailand reach understanding on labour," Straits Times (Singapore), April 27,1996. Michael Richardson, "Migrant Workers: Problem and Boon," InternationalHerald Tribune, April 8, 1996. Prangtip Daroueng, "Migrant Workers Pose MajorDilemma," Inter Press Service, April 7, 1996. _______________________________ Singapore:Reduce Dependence Singapore's Labor Minister warned the construction industry to improve itsproductivity rather than rely on foreign workers. According to ConstructionIndustry Development Board figures, more than 85 per cent of the tradesmen andgeneral labour in Singapore's construction industry are foreign workers, and 90percent of the foreign construction workers are unskilled. Despite a levy ofS$440 per month for each unskilled foreign worker, and S$200 for every skilledworker, the number of foreign workers is increasing. The levy helps to prop up the wages of local workers who compete withforeigners, and allows the Singaporean government to extract some of the wagegap that motivates migration. Singapore phased in a tough new strict liability standard in construction,making general contractors liable for the labor law violations ofsubcontractors. The revised Employment of Foreign Workers Act went into effecton March 1, 1996, and three general contractors are being assessed fines forthe 100 illegal foreign workers brought to their work sites bysub-contractors. On May 15, the labour ministry said it would seek prison terms forcontractors who hire illegal workers, even for a first offense--two contractorswere jailed for eight months and 10 months on first offenses. Since 1995,there have been 361 employers fined, including one firm that paid S$312,000 forhiring 26 illegal workers, or $12,000 per worker. In January, 1995, Senior Minister Lee Kuan Yew said that Singapore had50,000 foreign supervisors, managers and professionals, and another 300,000blue-collar foreign workers. Some 9,000 to 10,000 illegal foreigners are foundin Singapore each year. Some researchers argue that industries that have high proportions offoreign workers, such as manufacturing and construction, are less likely totake steps in their personnel policies to accommodate local workers. Forexample, retailing, which is not allowed to employ foreign workers, offers manypart time jobs. Singapore's labor ministry says that there are potentially620,000 housewives and retirees who could work in Singapore. "Labour minister warns against importing more foreign workers," AgenceFrance Presse, May 24, 1996. Chua Lee Hoong, " Balancing the interests oflocal and foreign workers," Straits Times, May 4, 1996. _______________________________ VietnameseBoatPeople:Repatriation and Rioting Hong Kong and other places in southeast Asia that house the 33,000Vietnamese "boat people" remaining in camps stepped up their efforts to returnthem before UNHCR funds end on June 30, 1996. The largest group of Vietnameseis in Hong Kong--some 18,000 remain in camps and, on May 10, several hundredVietnamese escaped after rioting for two days to protest their return toVietnam. The rioters burned 17 buildings, including the building housing theirrecords, in the hopes of slowing their repatriation. The US sought to encourage returns by promising to give Vietnamese in thecamps before October 1, 1995 one more chance to apply for asylum in the USafter their return to Vietnam--some 2,000 to 6,000 more Vietnamese might cometo the US under this plan. Each returning Vietnamese receives $240 from theUNHCR. Some 800,000 Vietnamese fled their country in boats after 1975. Steven Erlanger, " U.S., Vietnam Agree to Give Boat People One LastChance," New York Times, May 15, 1996. Richard Bashor, Vietnamese Riot atDetention Site," Chicago Tribune, May 12, 1996. Edward A. Gargan, "200Vietnamese Refugees Flee Detention Camp in Hong Kong," New York Times, May 11,1996. _______________________________ ChinaRestricts Foreign Workers On May 1, 1996, China introduced new restrictions on foreigners working inthe country, and on internal migrants, in a bid to preserve "social order."The Regulations on the Management of Foreign People's Employment in China saythat only foreigners with "special skills" will be permitted to work in China,and they must obtain licenses by June 30, 1996. Under a 1993 regulation, foreign job-seekers were obliged to register withthe State Bureau of Foreign Experts (SBFE) and apply to "Chinese intermediaryorganizations" before looking for work in China. An estimated 180,000 foreigners are currently employed in China, accordingto the official Xinhua news agency, and 12 million Chinese are employed byforeign joint venture companies. State enterprises have an estimated 40 million redundant employees, andthere are a further 124 million "surplus" farm workers, plus 80 million migrantworkers. China abandoned "employment for life" in 1986. China's household registration system, established in 1958 to regulaterural-urban migration, assigns persons at birth to agriculture or urbanresidences, and, until recently, this distinction governed access to housing,employment, and government services. There are three major types of internalmigration within China--de jure permanent (officially acknowledged changes inhousehold registration), de facto permanent, and temporary--both are moves thatdo not result in changes in household registration. Schools in major cities such as Beijing, Shanghai and Tianjin began inMarch to offer education to the children of migrant workers. One analysis of migration patterns within China confirmed the "migrationhump" hypothesis, i.e., that increased development temporarily INCREASESemigration. "China considers education for children of migrant workers," BBC, May 26,1996. "New restrictions on foreign workers," South China Morning Post, May 9,1996. _______________________________ Malaysia: Detained Foreigners Can Work in Ag The Malaysian government in mid-May announced that the 11,000 illegalworkers being detained could obtain an "amnesty" or legal work permit if theyagreed to work in agriculture. There are believed to be up to 100,000 illegalworkers employed on plantations in peninsular Malaysia. Plantation employersmay request detained foreign workers from Indonesia, Bangladesh, Pakistan andThailand through July 31, 1996. The government initiated the program to reduce the amount of money spent ondetention centers. Malaysia's Manpower Department opposed the scheme, arguing that offeringamnesty to illegal foreign workers in detention camps will encourage moreillegal immigration, and not encourage labor-saving mechanization inagriculture. Unions agreed. The Federation of Malaysian Manufacturers' Malaysian Electrical andElectronics Industry Group (FMM-MEEIG) asked the government to relax rules onimporting foreign workers, so that the industry can restructure and reduce itsdependence on foreign labor. Under current procedures, a Foreign Workers TaskForce handles each employer request for foreign workers, and the manufacturingsector is only allowed to recruit foreign workers from Bangladesh, Indonesia,Pakistan and Thailand. Many foreign investors want the levy on each foreign worker--doubled onJanuary 1, 1996; M$ 200-M$ 400 per month for professional and managementcategories and M$70 to M$ 150 for manufacturing and construction--to be waivedfor new investments in Malaysia. A wildcat strike by foreign workers at the Kuala Lumpur InternationalAirport under construction brought a reminder that foreign workers can bedeported for striking. According to the Labor Minister, "Going on strike isnot the Malaysian way of resolving industrial issues." There were in May 1996some 17,173 workers, including 7,623 foreigners from 49 countries, employed by39 contractor at the KLIA site. The largest groups of foreigners are fromIndonesia (4,407), followed by Bangladeshis (1,074), and workers from Myanmar(391). The Malaysian government announced that, beginning January 1, 1997, foreignworkers would no longer be permitted to be employed to pump gas. In response,several gas station chains announced that they would phase in machines thatpermit drivers to swipe their credit card and get gas by self service. The Seventh Malaysia Plan will attempt to attract women and retirees tojoin the labor force in addition to phasing out labor-intensive industries.Over the next five years the government plans to restrict the importation offoreign labor to agriculture, construction and domestic services. The government predicts that by the end of the Seventh Malaysia Plan therewill be 781,000 legal foreign workers in the country. The Malaysian government has established a special task force to tackle theissue of land encroachment by foreign settlers. The first meeting, which had20 representatives from different government agencies was held on May 22, 1996. Ahmad Suffian, "Task force to tackle illegal settlers problem," New StraitsTimes, May 21, 1996. "KL to let detained illegal migrants work in agriculturesector," Straits Times, May 14, 1996. "Malaysia: Adequate Labour SupplyCrucial," Business Times, May 14, 1996. "Labour Shortage Challenge," BusinessTimes, May 7, 1996. Shirene Shan, "Govt's drive to reduce intake of migrantworkers a success," Business Times, May 7, 1996. "Migrants problem "a resultof gov't soft policies," Straits Times, May 5, 1996. David Ong-Yeoh, "Issue ofHiring Foreign Workers," Business Times, May 3, 1996. _______________________________ HongKong Cuts Age Restrictionson Chinese Children The Hong Kong government announced on May 18 that it will eliminated theage restriction on children entering Hong Kong on one-way permits from Chinaafter July 1, 1996. This means that thousands of mainland children will beallowed to join their Hong Kong families. Under current procedures, onlychildren outside the school-age range - under five or between 16 and 20 - areeligible to migrate to Hong Kong. Despite eliminating the age restrictions,the director of education says there will still be enough room in HKschools. The Hong Kong government increased the daily immigrant quota from 105 to150 people in July 1995. Of the 45 additional places, 30 were given tomainland children who will have right of abode in Hong Kong after the Chinesetake over in 1997. The remaining slots went to persons separated from theirspouses for 10 years or more. Hong Kong's legislative council narrowly passed a bill that allows thegovernment to detain boat people not formally rejected for repatriation by theHanoi government. The law was enacted to counter a recent ruling by the PrivyCouncil which deemed it illegal to detain anyone whom Hanoi was not willing toaccept back. The ruling resulted in the release of hundreds of asylum-seekersfrom camps in Hong Kong, mostly ethnic Chinese who are not consideredVietnamese by Vietnam. The passage of the law was criticized by the Human Rights Watch/Asia. Fung Wai-Kong, "Viet bill passes despite criticism," South China MorningPost, May 23, 1996. "Legislators vote in favour of controversial boat peoplelaw," Agence France Presse, May 22, 1996. "Human Rights Watch criticizes HongKong on boat people," Agence France Presse, May 22, 1996. Billy Wau-Yuk andQuinton Chan, "Age range widened for young immigrants," South China MorningPost, May 19, 1996. _______________________________ Taiwan: Maximum Foreigners The Council of Labor Affairs announced on May 22 that there were 212,800foreign workers in Taiwan, and that this was the "maximum limit." The CLA hasissued permits for hiring 287,300 foreign workers. Taiwanese unions on May 1 protested that foreign workers were depressingtheir wages, driving them down from NT$2,500 ($93) per day in construction toNT$400 to NT$800 a day. The Council of Labor Affairs in May 1996 for the first time allowed aFilipina maid to stay in Taiwan and change her employer after proving that shewas sexually assaulted by her present employer. The maid arrived in mid-April,and left her employer in mid-May for a halfway house for foreign workers. Shereportedly paid NT$50,000 ($1850) to obtain a maid's contract. "Labor council to adjust quota system for foreign workers," China EconomicNews Service, May 23, 1996. "Statistics issued on foreign workers," BBC, May13, 1996. _______________________________ OTHER _______________________________ ChinesetoAustralia Christmas Island, a remote island 1,240 miles off Australia's north westcoast, has been the target of the largest influx of Asian boat people in over ayear. Over 250 people in four boats, most from southern China, landed on theisland the second week of May. Australian immigration officials say it is tooearly to tell if another wave of asylum-seekers is on its way. The last major wave of boat people was in late 1994 and early 1995, whenover 800 Vietnamese born ethnic Chinese landed on Australia's northern shores.Most were Vietnamese-born ethnic Chinese who said they had been discriminatedagainst by Chinese authorities. Despite a pledge not to reduce immigration, the newly-elected conservativegovernment is apparently planning to reduce the number of refugees accepted byAustralia from 15,000 to 10,000 per year, thereby saving about $12 million peryear. Australia in 1993 permitted 29,000 Chinese to remain after the June 4, 1989Beijing crackdown and, as their family members join them, China has become thethird leading country of immigration to Australia, after Britain and NewZealand. The 19,500 Chinese students and their 9,500 spouses and children weregranted permanent residence in November 1993. The Australian Immigration Minister proposed an immigration plan in May1996 that would award extra points to immigrants who promise to live outsideSydney and Melbourne for at least two years after their arrival. Under thecurrent system, an extra five points are awarded to applicants in the familycategory, such as siblings, non-dependent children and some parents, sponsoredby people living in regional areas--the number of points may be raised to 20,or 20 percent of the 100 needed for admission. Karen Middleton, "State Rejects Bonus for Immigrants," The Age (Melbourne),May 18, 1996. Liam Fitzpstrick, "Refugee quota cut proposed," South ChinaMorning Post, May 17, 1996. Australia to cut refugee intake by athird-newspaper," Reuters, May 16, 1996. Michael Millett, "Ministers TuneMigrant Balance," Sydney Morning Herald, May 15, 1996. Mark Bendeich, "Newwave of boatpeople swamp tiny Australian island," Reuters, May 13, 1996. "BoatPeople Flood into Christmas Is.," Sydney Morning Herald, May 10, 1996. _______________________________ Israel'sForeignWorkers The Knesset State Control Committee released a report in May 1996 thatasserted that 10 percent of Israel's workers are foreigners--100,000 workinglegally, and 100,000 illegal workers, including an estimated 10,000 illegalPoles. Many politicians are echoing former Jerusalem mayor Teddy Kollek, whoasserted in April that Israel may be creating a "guest worker" problem ofGerman proportions by importing 80,000 mostly Thai and Romanian workers. Otherpoliticians call the foreign worker issue a "time bomb"that "threatens thecountry." Kollek argued that Israel rely on its own and Palestinian workers. Until February 24, 1996, the first suicide bombing, some 80,000Palestinians were employed legally within Israel's borders, and another 40,000to 50,000 worked illegally as day laborers in Israel. Today, the number hasbeen reduced to about 15,000 daily commuters--including 7,000 Palestinianworkers over the age of 40. The PLA estimates that 60 percent of Palestiniansare jobless, and that border closures cost $6 million in losses eachday. In May 1996, Israel authorized the entry of another 10,000 foreign workersfrom Bulgaria and Romania to take the place of Palestinians who are barred fromIsrael. In the hotly contested election on May 29, 1996, it was revealed that500,000 Israelis live outside Israel, usually in the US. Evelyn Gordon, 'Illegal workers rarely bothered by the authorities,"Jerusalem Post, May 16, 1996. Teddy Kollek and Amos Kollek, "Foreign workersand foresight," Jerusalem Post, April 5, 1996. _______________________________ LibyaTo Expel More Palestinians In June, 1996, Libyan authorities are expected to begin expelling thousandsof Palestinians. The Palestinians will be placed in camps near the Egyptianborder. In 1995, Libya expelled nearly 30,000 Palestinians to protest theagreements with Israel on self-rule in the West Bank and Gaza, and agreed tosuspend the expulsion of Palestinians for six months, until April 1996. During talks with Gadaffi in Cairo on May 28, Egyptian President HosniMubarak was expected to ask the Libyan leader not to expel thousand ofPalestinians. About 200 Palestinians remain stranded on the Libyan side of the Egyptianborder because no country will take them, and they refuse to return to Libya.Israel controls immigration into the West Bank and Gaza, and sets toughconditions for entry by Palestinians who have been living in exile. "Libya's Gaddafi in Cairo for talks with Mubarak," Reuters, May 25, 1996."Libyans prepare camps for expelling Palestinians, "Reuters, May 16, 1997. _______________________________ LiberianRefugees Several ships filled with Liberians fleeing fighting were initially turnedaway from neighboring country ports by countries that feared the Liberianswould not leave. In mid-May, about 2,000 Liberians who paid $75 each to flee fighting intheir country on a Ghana-bound Nigerian freighter on May 5 were pushed out tosea after their ship was partially fixed in the Abidjan, Ivory Coast. Thereare already about 350,000 Liberians in the Ivory Coast as a result of thesix-year civil war. The UNHCR estimates that more than 750,000 people haveleft Liberia in since the fighting started in 1989. Ghana later allowed the Bulk Challenge ship to land after passengersreportedly rioted, and aid agencies provided them with water and food. WestAfrican peacekeepers in Monrovia, Liberia took steps to prevent Liberians fromboarding outgoing ships. Nigeria led the 16-member Economic Community of West African Statespeacekeeping force, ECOMOG, established in 1990 to keep the peace in Liberia.However, many Liberians renamed the peacekeeping group "Everything That CouldMove Is Gone," a reference to the peacekeepers tendency to strip Liberia ofeverything from its mineral wealth to factory equipment. There were apparentlystolen UN vehicles and equipment on the Bulk Challenge ship. Liberia, founded in 1847 by freed American slaves, has a population ofabout three million--an estimated 80 percent of Liberians have been displacedby the ongoing civil war. "Liberia's refugee exodus to west Africa reaches 750,000," Agence FrancePresse, May 14, 1996. Howard French, "Plight of Liberian Refugees ShipParallels Diplomatic Breakdown," New York Times, May 12, 1996. "Tide ofrefugees pushed out to sea," AP, May 11,1996. _______________________________ RESOURCES _______________________________ Data on the Foreign-Born from the October 1994 CPS. 1996. US Departmentof Labor, International Labor Affairs Bureau, Bulletin 3, May. Since January 1994, the monthly Current Population Survey of households hasincluded information on place of birth and year of immigration. In October1994, there were 14 million foreign-born persons in the US labor force, and 118million US-born workers, making foreign-born workers about 11 percent of the132 million labor force. Half of the foreign-born workers--6.4 million--wereHispanic, and two-thirds of these immigrant Hispanics were born inMexico. Foreign-born men are more likely to be in the US labor force, andforeign-born women are less likely to be in the labor force. About 78 percent of foreign-born men (53 percent of foreign-born women),and 74 percent of US-born men (59 percent of US-born women), were in the laborforce in October 1994, meaning that they were employed or unemployed andlooking for work. Harris, Nigel. 1996. The New Untouchables: Immigration And The New WorldWorker. New York: St Martin's. This book argues that countries such as the United States, that define anAmerican way of life in cultural, political and economic terms, look atnationality as a choice for individuals, so that immigrants are encouraged toAmericanize and naturalize. Ethnic-origins can be reflected in hyphenations,such as Italian-American. In Europe, by contrast, the sense of nationhood is more tribal: a nationconsists of its indigenous peoples, even some who have left. Harris argues that governments do not impede the movement of the rich or ofthe employees of multinational corporations, and they will not be able torestrict the migration of the unskilled. The agents who move unskilled workersacross borders--labor workers and contractors "bore like termites through thefortifications of the state to create supply and demand" for foreignworkers. Williamson, Chilton, Jr. 1996. The Immigration Mystique: America's FalseConscience. New York: Basic Books. This book challenges the ''myth'' that immigration was always a blessingfor America. Williamson sees the massive immigration from 1870 to the 1920s asthe start of great and disruptive changes, citing gradual but persistentnegative effects on national identity, social and political order, populationgrowth and the environment. Today's immigrants, Williamson argues, embrace multiculturalism andchallenge the very idea of a special American identity. Today's immigrantsallegedly press for a larger and ever-more intrusive government, thusundermining traditional American concepts of personal liberty andself-reliance. Sowell, Thomas. 1995. Migrations and Cultures: A World View. New York:Basic Books. In this book, Sowell asks what makes immigrants prosperous by examining sixhigh-achieving migrant communities, from German migrants to the Eastern Europeand Russia to "overseas Chinese" in Asia. The answer, according to Sowell, ishuman capital -- education and skills -- and cultural capital -- risk-taking,self-reliance, thrift, cohesion, work habits, and concern for their children'sfuture. There is a chapter on the migratory history of Jews, Germans, Japanese,Chinese, Indians and Italians. According to Sowell, "Nothing is more commonthan to have poverty-stricken immigrants become prosperous in a new country andto make that country more prosperous as well." Sowell has three themes. First, not all cultures are equal in theirability to prosper. Second, it makes no sense to invite immigration from theThird World into industrial countries, since the immigrants bring with them toolittle cultural capital to succeed. Third, government intervention inindustrial countries cannot overcome the lack of cultural capital and guaranteeimmigrant success. Sowell repeats a theme of his earlier books that avoiding reliance ongovernment is the key to a group's economic success. Thus, Sowell emphasizesthat Japanese immigrants in the US were able to prosper despite governmentaldiscrimination. World Bank Atlas. 1996. Washington. World Bank. The average GNP per capita in 1994 was $4,600 in the 159 countries on whichthe World Bank assembles data--it ranged from almost $40,000 for each of the40,000 residents in Luxembourg to $130 for Ethiopians. Faist, Thomas. 1995. Social Citizenship for Whom? Young Turks in Germanyand Mexican Americans in the United States. Avebury: Aldershot, England. This three-part, 248-page book compares the different systems of twocountries to integrate young adults into the labor market. The study comparesTurks in Germany and Mexicans in the United States, both of whom have similardisadvantaged situations. The author recommends a guaranteed income for schoolleavers to help them transition to the labor market. The first part of the book outlines the theoretical framework of how theschool-work proceeds. The second part explores the empirical research by theauthor in the cities of Duisburg, Germany and Chicago. Part three summarizesthe findings and offers policy recommendations for eliminating the second-classcitizenship of many Turks in German and Mexican-Americans. Menchaca, Martha. 1995. The Mexican Outsiders: A Community History ofMarginalization and Discrimination in California. University of Texas Press:Austin, Texas. A 250-page, 10-chapter paperback book is billed as an ethnographic historyabout how social injustice has affected Mexicans in the United States. Thework is based on research done in Santa Paula, California. The first chapterdescribes the land tenure system in California in the late eighteenth century,and then moves on to how this resulted in "social separateness" in thecommunity in the 19th century. The book includes chapters on: school segregation, farm labor unions,desegregation attempts, segmentation of the farm labor market and racism. Bach, Robert. 1996. Becoming American, Seeking Justice. This reportpresents the results of 2,500 telephone and 700 in-person interviews with"working poor" immigrants in the US--practically all persons had incomes lowenough to participate in assistance programs, and about 30 percent receivedpublic assistance. The focus of the interviews was on the legal needs of immigrants, and theirmajor need was for legal assistance to deal with housing issues--one in threehad a housing problem, and 20 percent thought they had been discriminatedagainst in housing. Auto-related consumer problems were second, and problemswith health care providers were third. Immigrants were more satisfied with thehelp that they got from non-lawyer notarios (70 percent satisfaction) than theywere with the help that they got from legal assistance lawyers (54 percentsatisfaction). WT02-B15-3IA090-000969-B027-147http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/By-Month/MN-Vol-3-96/MN_July_96.html 128.120.36.171 19970122205107 text/html 107625HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 20:52:00 GMTLast-Modified: Thursday, 21-Dec-95 22:22:30 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 107366 MIGRATIONNEWS  MIGRATION NEWS Vol. 3, No. 7 July, 1996 Migration News summarizes the most important immigration and integrationdevelopments of the preceding month. Topics are grouped by region: North America, Europe, Asia, andOther. There are two versions of Migration News. The paper edition is about 8,000words in length, and the email version about 15,000. The purpose of Migration News is to provide a monthly summary of recentimmigration developments that can be read in 60 minutes or less. Many issuesalso contain summaries and reviews of recent research publications. Distribution is by email. If you wish to subscribe, send your emailaddress to: MigrationNews <migrant@primal.ucdavis.edu> Current and back issues may be accessed via Internet on the Migration NewsHome Page--- http://migration.ucdavis.edu There is no charge for an email subscription to Migration News. A paperedition is available by mail for $30 domestic and $50 foreign. Make checkspayable to UC Regents and send to: Philip Martin, Department of AgriculturalEconomics, University of California, Davis California 95616 USA. Migration News is produced with the support of the University ofCalifornia-Berkeley Center for German and European Studies, the German MarshallFund of the United States, and the Pew Charitable Trusts. ISSN 1081-9916 ________________________ NORTHAMERICA ________________________ CongressWorks to Revise ImmigrationLaw As Congress struggled to reconcile the immigration bills approved by the USHouse of Representatives in March, 1996, and by the Senate in May 1996,advocates flooded House-Senate conference committee members with arguments forand against specific provisions in one or both bills. The House is not expected to formally name the members who will serve onthe conference committee until Congress returns from the July 4 recess, in partbecause, once the House names its conferees, a conference bill must be producedwithin a limited time. However, deals between likely House and announcedSenate conferees are being worked out privately. The major provision attacked by admissionists and political liberals wasthe Gallegly amendment to the House bill, approved by a vote of 257 to 163 inMarch 1996. It would permit the states to deny unauthorized alien childrenfree K-12 public education, as California has sought to do with Prop 187.Opponents of the Gallegly amendment argued that it was unfair to penalizechildren for the fact that their parents illegally brought them into the US,and pointed to the danger to US society of having uneducated children in itsmidst, and to the costs of verifying each child's legal status. In addition, immigration advocates tried to soften or eliminate theprovisions of the House and Senate bills that would define the receipt ofmeans-tested federal benefits by legal immigrants as violating the existingprohibition of becoming a "public charge," and thus making possible thedeportation of legal migrants on that ground. Campaigning in California on June 19, Bob Dole, the Republican presidentialcandidate, endorsed the Gallegly amendment, saying that states should have thechoice of denying public education to illegal alien children, since they bearthe costs, which Dole put at $1.8 billion annually to California. Rep. EltonGallegly (R-CA) introduced Dole and asserted that "it's time to stop makingapologies for putting Americans first." House Speaker Newt Gingrich (R-Ga.)says that "offering free, tax-paid goods to illegals has increased the numberof illegals." President Clinton has hinted that he will veto an immigration reform billthat includes the Gallegly amendment, a veto that some Republicans believewould hurt Clinton's chances of winning California in the presidentialelection. In this, Clinton had the support of 47 Senators, including fiveRepublicans, who threatened on June 10 to vote against a final immigration billthat included the Gallegly amendment. Dole supported Prop 187 in 1994, which Clinton opposed. If the Gallegly amendment becomes law, and is upheld by a US Supreme Courtreversal of the 1982 Plyler v Doe decision, states will be able to order K-12schools to check the status of all enrolling students each year. Such checkswould keep out the estimated 600,000 to 700,000 or 1.5 percent unauthorizedchildren among the 45 million K-12 pupils in public schools. Another sixmillion children who attend private schools would not be affected. The cost of educating illegal alien children in the US is $3 to $3.5billion per year, based on an average cost of $5,000 per child per year. TheUrban Institute estimated the number of illegal alien children in schools inthe seven major immigrant states in 1994: California, 307,000; Florida, 97,000;Texas, 94,000; New York, 88,000; Illinois, 24,000; New Jersey, 16,000; andArizona, 15,000. There was similar lobbying over the sponsorship and benefit changesincluded in the bill that affect legal immigrants. Under US immigration law,an immigrant is deportable if he/she becomes a "public charge" in the US. Inorder to secure an immigration visa for a relative, US-resident sponsorscommonly sign an affidavit promising to support the immigrant once he/she ishere. Under current practice, the US sponsor and the immigrant must have acombined income that is at least 100 percent of the income at the US povertyline for the US sponsor AND the immigrant(s) being sponsored. At the presenttime, that would be, for example, $18,220 for a US family of three sponsoringan immigrant couple--five people in all. Many immigrants who are sponsored by US residents nonetheless apply forfederally-funded benefits after they arrive. US courts have held that thesponsors' affidavits are not binding, so that the government cannot sue a USsponsor for the welfare benefits that were paid to an immigrant whom thesponsor promised to support. The pending immigration bills would raise the income required of USresidents to sponsor an immigrant to 200 percent of the poverty line (House) or125 percent of the poverty line (Senate), make the affidavits binding on the USsponsor, and deem or assume that the immigrant has access to the sponsor'sincome for the purpose of determining whether the immigrant is eligible forbenefits. Advocates for immigration attacked the income requirement for sponsors,arguing that it would permit only "rich Americans" to sponsorimmigrants. Another provision in the proposed law would permit the deportation ofimmigrants who received federal benefits for 12 months within the first fiveyears in the US (Senate) or first seven years (House), the immigrant could bedeported. Most groups favorable to immigration opposed this extension of the groundsfor deportation, calling attention to the wide range of benefit claims thatcould lead to deportation, including e.g., federal student loans and jobtraining programs, and outlining the health threat to US residents fromimmigrants who avoided obtaining subsidized medical care. Using cases ofimmigrants who received training or education and now are successful, advocatesasked whether the US would really deport successful immigrants. For example,an estimated 500,000 legal immigrant college students receive $700 million infederal assistance each year, and many are employed by major US corporations. The Congressional Budget Office estimated that the proposed restrictions onimmigrant access to benefits could save federal taxpayers up to $7 billion overseven years. Many members of Congress said that they supported therestrictions on immigrant access to federal benefits to balance the budget, notto discourage immigration. In attacking the denial of federally subsidized health benefits, advocatesstressed that services such as public health cut public expenditures in thelong run by minimizing the spread of communicable diseases, avoiding emergencyroom care for treatable diseases, and improving the health of US-citizenbabies. One issue that arises in these proposed new restrictions on access toschools, benefits, and health is their administrative costs. Opponents of therestrictions argue that the cost of checking the legal status of pupilsenrolling in school or seeking benefits would be formidable. Proponents of restrictions, on the other hand, argue that administrativecosts would be a marginal addition to current screening procedures. Schoolsalready verify age, residence, and immunization, for example, and the income ofbeneficiaries of means-tested programs is checked, since they will not bereimbursed if they provide benefits to persons with incomes above qualifyinglevels. This suggests two major considerations in evaluating the arguments. First,how much money would the restrictions save in the short and long runs? Second,would the benefit restrictions have as a side effect the discouragement oflegal immigrants likely to need tax-supported benefits? The Gallegly amendment is perhaps the clearest example of a possible newtrend in industrial democracies--use integration policy to affect immigrationflows. The theory is that fewer benefits will discourage illegal immigrantsfrom coming, or staying. Research suggests that illegal aliens generally come to the US for jobs,not welfare or other benefits, so the restrictions on benefits for legalimmigrants may wind up pushing what is now in part a federal responsibilityonto states, cities, and families without affecting the influx of illegalimmigrants. Immigration may remain in the political spotlight during the summer of 1996if Dole seriously tries to win California's 54 electoral votes, one-fifth ofthe number needed to be elected President. The Reform Party of Ross Perot mayalso keep immigration in the spotlight if it nominates as its presidentialcandidate Richard Lamm, the former governor of Colorado and an outspokenopponent of high levels of immigration. Eric Schmitt, "2 Senior Republican Lawmakers Buck Party to Oppose Effort toBar Education of Illegal Aliens," New York Times, June 22, 1996. Maria L.LaGanga, "Dole Endorses Prop. 187 Limits on Schooling," Los Angeles Times, June20, 1996. Thomas Edsall, "Dole Urges Illegal-Immigrant Curbs," WashingtonPost, June 20, 1996. John Marelius, "Dole would put Clinton on spot onimmigration," San Diego Union-Tribune, June 20, 1996. Michael Doyle, "Schoolban may imperil immigration bill," Sacramento Bee, June 11, 1996. MarcusStern, "Immigration bill turns into key election issue," San DiegoUnion-Tribune, June 2, 1996. Marguerite Abadjian, "US Immigration: New Bill toCap Angry Debate," Inter Press Service, May 30, 1996. ________________________ INS:Enforcement andAsylum Border Control. On May 28, 1996, the INS announced that it wasadding 185 agents to patrol the eastern parts of San Diego county to curbillegal alien entries from Mexico. In addition, 11 FBI agents have beenassigned to deal with alien smuggling rings. Border apprehension data, released monthly, are now reported in the press.In May 1996, apprehensions were three percent below levels of twelve monthsearlier, the first decrease since the December 1994 peso devaluation. In the San Diego sector, 40,761 illegal aliens were apprehended in May1996, versus 67,282 in May 1995; 6,078 in El Centro versus 4,271; 3,189 in Yumaversus 2,408; 28,604 in Tuscon versus 20,613; 13,435 in El Paso versus 10,722;1,105 in Marfa versus 965; 11,338 in Del Rio versus 7,007; 11,828 in Laredoversus 9629; and 19,899 in McAllen versus 17,277. President Clinton requested $3.1 billion for the INS in FY97. The INS nowhas 5,200 Border Patrol agents, and 600 more are in training. One unanticipated effect of Operation Gatekeeper is that aliens attemptingentry in eastern San Diego county have started fires in remote areas that aredifficult for firefighters to reach. On June 5, 1996, supervisors declared anemergency in eastern San Diego county after 212 fires broke out between Januaryand May 1996, up from 64 in the same period in 1995. San Diego county askedthe federal government for funds and permission to build roads throughenvironmentally sensitive areas to control the fires. In mid-June, five illegal aliens believed to be on the search for work inCalifornia were found dead in the Arizona desert, reminding observers that inJuly 1980, 13 Salvadorans died trying to cross the Organ Pipe National Monumentsouth of Ajo, Arizona. The INS and Congress continue to debate how to best utilize additionalpersonnel and money to reduce illegal immigration. Congress would like to seea concentrated effort to halt immigration at the border. The INS contend thatthey should make decisions regarding enforcement, and not be dictated to acrossthe country by members of Congress. The INS and Congress are arguing over the fate of the San Clemente,California inland border checkpoint. On weekends, northbound traffic headedfor Los Angeles can back up for hours on Interstate 5 as 100 Border Patrolagents inspect cars for illegal aliens-- illegal alien smuggling isconcentrated on the weekends. The INS plans a $13-million project to add twolanes, an administrative office, and all-weather canopies for the Border Patrolagents. Legislation to fund the project required that construction begin by July 1or the checkpoint would be closed down. Construction is not scheduled untilthe winter of 1996. The checkpoint faces a shutdown during construction or ifthe Border Patrol finds it cannot keep the lanes operating 24 hours a day,which is required by law. The Border Patrol hopes to use a clause in thelegislation which says that if the July 1 deadline is not met, it can becircumvented if the attorney general certifies that "exigent circumstances"exist. The INS and Congress also continue to haggle over the construction of afence through a 14-mile stretch of border between the Pacific Ocean and OtayMountain. A May 30 National Public Radio story on illegal immigrants from Cotija,Michoacan, a town of 20,000 in summer, and 30,000 in Janaury, when migrants arehome, reported that daily wages were $50 to $100 in the US, versus $5 inCotija. On June 10, 1996, on his 24th visit to California since he took office inJanuary 1993, President Clinton promised to do more to prevent illegalimmigration and drug smuggling across the Mexico-US border. According toClinton, since January 1995, 1,700 illegal aliens have been jailed in theUnited States after having slipped back into the country following theirexpulsions. The INS still has in custody some of the 286 Chinese aliens who were on theGolden Venture, the ship that went aground in New York harbor on June 6, 1993.An estimated 100,000 Chinese, some paying $25,000 to $35,000 each, are believedto be smuggled into the US each year. A Justice Department investigation found that senior officials of the INStransferred or released more than 100 illegal immigrants from detention inMiami in 1995 in order to hide overcrowding and understaffing from theCongressional Task Force on Immigration Reform. As a consequence, four seniorINS officials were relieved of their supervisory duties. Many of the detainees who were released by INS were Cubans or Haitians hadnot received medical clearance or faced criminal charges. Employer Sanctions. The INS in October 1995 launched raids on someof the estimated 2,500 of the 6,000 sewing shops in New York City believed tobe operating in violation of labor and immigration laws. There are believed tobe some 22,000 garment contractors in the entire US. By June 2, 1996, 86 shops had been inspected in New York City. Forty-fiveINS inspectors, almost triple the usual 17 inspectors, apprehended 1,228unauthorized workers. About 80 percent of the unauthorized workers apprehendedwere Mexicans or Salvadorans. The INS hopes that, by targeting industries known to employ unauthorizedworkers, it can make employers less likely to hire them, and that illegalaliens will thus be discouraged from coming to the US. INS therefore looks tothe number of job slots freed up for workers legally resident in the US, andthe wages that they can earn in these jobs, as measures of its success. TheINS operates a pilot program in the New York garment industry that permitsemployers to check on the legal status of non-US citizens hired to work. In an account of June 3 critical of INS enforcement procedures, the NewYork Times reported that most of the illegal workers were released back on thestreets the very day they were apprehended. During the first ten months of thefactory inspection program, according to the report, only about 25 percent weredetained for more than a few hours. Apprehended workers are often freedpending a hearing to determine whether they should be ordered to leave the US,a proceeding usually two to five months after their apprehension. The INS apprehended 12,000 illegal alien workers in US workplaces inFY95. Kathie Lee Gifford, a TV talk show host, found that fashions bearing hername were sewn in a New York City sweatshop. She held a joint press conferencein June 1996 with Labor Secretary Robert Reich to announce a July 1996conference in Washington DC to bring together retailers, manufacturers andcelebrities to discuss how to fight sweatshops. Gifford earned $9 million in1995 from her line of clothing. Two interesting aspects of the subject emerged. First, the garmentindustry is one of the few US industries in which someone can become a sizableUS employer--with 25 or more employees--for an investment of less than $50,000.Poorly-capitalized sewing shops are vulnerable to market changes, as well asstepped up enforcement--many do not pay overtime wages on rush jobs frommanufacturers for hot-selling garments. Second, there is a radical difference between New York state laborinspectors and INS workplace inspectors. The INS inspectors are concerned onlyabout the workers' legal status, but not their wages or working conditions,while the state inspectors care about wages but not legal status. Indeed, inNew York, California and other states with high levels of immigration, there isan explicit policy by state labor inspectors, who are often the most familiarwith local employers, of NOT cooperating with the INS (the 800 federal laborinspectors are, on the other hand, obliged to report suspected immigrationviolations to the 300 INS inspectors nationwide). In many European countries, by contrast, the agency with the most labormarket expertise, the labor agency, has responsibility for detecting andremoving unauthorized workers from the work place. European labor agenciesoften see removing illegal workers as a means of protecting legalworkers. The US-based National Labor Committee charged that half of the 29 sewingfirms that make garments in Haiti for US firms such as Disney, JC Penny, andother US retailers pay less than Haiti's $2.40 per day minimum wage--workersare desperate for jobs, as unemployment is 75 percent. The National Labor Committee also accused Nike of paying Indonesian workerswho make its athletic shoes $0.14 per hour; Nike countered that its Indonesianworkers earn an average $0.50 per hour, double the national minimum wage, andreceive free meals and health care. The group, Made in the USA, charged thatbasketball player Michael Jordan earns $ 20 million a year endorsing Nikesneakers, and claimed that this is more than the total annual payroll for theIndonesians who help make them. Nike subcontractors around the world must sign a Memorandum ofUnderstanding that "strictly prohibits child labor, and certifies compliancewith applicable government regulations regarding minimum wage, (and)overtime." Smuggling. The INS on May 29 announced that it had arrested a womanoperating in Reynosa, Mexico, who was making over $1 million annually smugglingSouth Asians and Chinese into the US via Central America and Mexico. InDecember 1995, the INS estimated that up to 100,000 South Asians and Chinesemay be smuggled into the US in this way each year. The Mexican legislature is considering increasing penalties for aliensmuggling, and doubling the maximum prison term for alien smuggling to 20years. Asylum. On June 13, 1996, the US Board of Immigration Appeals in an11-1 decision granted asylum to a Togo woman who asked for asylum in the USbecause, she asserted, she faced female genital mutilation in Togo. A USimmigration judge rejected her application for asylum in August 1995, but theruling is binding on the nation's 179 immigration judges. The INS had asked the BIA to return the case to the immigration judge forrehearing after BIA adopted the INS position that asylum could be granted towomen who fear forced mutilation without consent, and have no opportunity tomove to avoid the practice, as to a city in their country. An estimated 85 million women, mostly in Africa, are believed to have beensubjected to female genital mutilation. Begun in the 5th century BC, thecustom is observed by Muslims, Christians and adherents of traditionalreligions in Africa and Asia. The Senate immigration reform bill would makemutilation of female genitalia a federal crime punishable by up to five yearsin prison, but would not make the threat of such mutilation the basis for anasylum claim. The INS reported in May 1996 that it processes 80 percent of the asylumapplications it receives within 60 days after they are filed. William Branigin, "An Egregious Deception: INS Releases Detainees to MaskCrowding," Washington Post, June 21, 1996. Robert Jackson, "Togo woman grantedUS asylum to seek citizenship," Los Angeles Times, June 15, 1996. CeliaDugger, "After Raids on Illegal Garment, It's Business as Usual," New YorkTimes, June 3, 1996. David Reyes, "Border Patrol Station Gets Help;Immigration: A $13-Million Project Aims to Expand Hours of San OnogreCheckpoint and to Reduce Motorists' Delays on Interstate 5," Los Angeles Times,June 4, 1996. "Cotija Workers Leave Mexico in Search of Work," All ThingsConsidered (NPR), May 30, 1996. ________________________ Mexico:Voting Rights and Emigration Voting Rights. In mid-June, Mexico's major political parties, theruling Institutional Revolutionary Party (PRI), the left-leaning DemocraticRevolutionary Party (PRD), and the conservative National Action Party (PAN),agreed to permit Mexican citizens living outside the country to vote in thenext Presidential election, scheduled for 2000. There are at least 7 millionMexican nationals living in the US, and Mexicans abroad are expected to cast 1to 5 million votes--there were 35 million votes cast in the 1994 MexicanPresidential election. It is not yet clear how Mexicans in the US would vote. US citizens abroadmail ballots to the US--some 2 million ballots were mailed to the US in 1992.However, Mexico's opposition parties oppose mail ballots, fearing fraud. How would US citizens react to Mexican candidates campaigning for votes inCalifornia and other places where Mexican nationals live? Some fear thatMexican flags would increase anti-Mexican sentiment in the US. Emigration. An analysis of Mexican data suggests that 55 percent ofthe Mexico-to-US migration between 1985 and 1990 was from an urban area ofMexico to an urban destination in the US. The National Institute for Statistics, Geography and Information (INEGI)estimated that Mexico had 91.1 million residents in 1995, up 10 million since1990. Greater Mexico City, which includes 27 suburbs, was home to 16.4 millionpeople - considerably fewer than previous estimates of 23 millionresidents. Labor Market. Mexico's economy shrank one percent in the firstquarter of 1996, less than the three percent projected. However, many smallbusinesses are struggling because of debts that they assumed in the boom yearof 1994, and their debts have increased in 1995 and 1996. Interest rates are30 percent for mortgages, and 50 percent for credit card debt. Mexico has 8 to 10 million workers in unions, but the most powerful unionleader is Don Fidel Valazquez, leader of the three million strong CTM. The NAFTA-created Commission on Labor Cooperation in Dallas released itsannual report on labor markets in Canada, Mexico, and the US in May 1996, andreported that real wages fell since 1984 in all three countries. In Mexico,for example, real wages fell sharply between 1984 and 1988, then began toincrease in the late 1980s, and were above 1984 levels in 1994. However, in1995, real Mexican wages fell again, to five percent below their 1984levels. US real earnings were down eight percent between 1984 and 1995, andCanadian real earnings were unchanged. Mexico has the smallest proportion of full-time employees among NAFTAcountries--57 percent, versus 84 percent in Canada and 91 percent in the US.In the US, 57 percent of the women in the labor force worked full time, versus49 percent of the women in Mexico, and 37 percent of the women inCanada. Virtually all of the job growth between 1984 and 1995 in the US and Canadawas in services, versus 81 percent of the job growth in Mexico. Forbes Magazine published an upbeat story on "Maquiladora-ville," orTijuana, on May 6, 1996, which asserted that Tijuana's population of 1.5million is growing by seven percent or 105,000 per year as Mexicans flock toTijuana for maquiladora jobs. Forbes reported that many maquiladora workerslive in shanty towns without running water, and that absenteeism and turnoverare problems for factory managers. As of April 1996, 701,141 Mexicans were employed in maquiladoras, up 13percent over April 1995. Grupo Beta. Mexico has special police units known as Grupo Alpha,Beta etc whose purpose is to prevent crimes being committed against aliensseeking to leave Mexico for the US. In June, 1996, Mexico announced theformation of a 20 to 30 person Grupo Beta Sur, an independent policeforce in the southern state of Chiapas. Mexico has criticized the US for videotaped beatings of illegal Mexicanimmigrants, but President Zedillo reportedly asserted that he fears "that oneday they will make a video . . . of what happens when some of our CentralAmerican brothers are intercepted by Mexican authorities." Many of thesmugglers who charge $1,000 each to smuggle Central Americans through Mexicoand into the US are linked to criminal gangs. Mexico has been returning to Guatemala about 350 Central Americans daily.Mexico's National Migration Institute reported that 105,063 foreigners weredeported from Mexico in 1995, including 575 from India and 184 fromChina. The fifth year of drought in Mexico may be increasing emigration pressurein Chihuahua, Sonora, Coahuila, Sinaloa, Tamaulipas, and Nuevo Leon. Manyfarmers have sold cattle rather than feed them--contributing to lower US beefprices--and fewer acres of corn were planted because of the lack of water,increasing Mexican corn imports. There were widespread rumors in June of a possible coup against PresidentZedillo sometime after December 1, 1996. Under Mexican law, after a presidenthas served at least two years of a six-year term, he can be replaced by aperson from the ruling party. Reportedly, powerful PRI functionaries fear thatcontinuing social chaos and a still stagnant economy will cause the PRI to losebadly in 1997 mid-term elections and would like to find a more attractivecandidate to lead their party. Colin McMahon, "Mexico acts to solve its own border woes," Chicago Tribune,June 4, 1996. "Cotija Workers Leave Mexico in Search of Work," All ThingsConsidered (NPR) May 30, 1996. Tim Shorrock, "Drop seen in real wages in allthree NAFTA countries," Journal of Commerce, May 29, 1996. David R. Ayon, "Democratization Imperils US Latino Empowerment," Los Angeles Times, May 26,1996. Bradford De Long, Christopher De Long, and Sherman Robinson, " The Casefor Mexico's Rescue," Foreign Affairs, May, 1996 /June, 1996. ________________________ California:Internal Migration and Strikes Internal Migration. California in July 1995 had an estimated 32million residents, reflecting 569,000 births in 1994-95, 222,000 deaths,260,000 net foreign immigrants, and a net 334,000 California residents whomoved to other states. According to a new analysis by the CaliforniaDepartment of Finance, the net number of residents moving to other statesexceeded the net number of immigrants to California in 1992-93, 1993-94, and1994-95. California lost a net 143,000 residents to other states in 1995, reflectingthe slowdown in the state's population growth in the first half of the1990s. During the 1980s, California gained a net 1.25 million residents from theother 49 states. Between 1990 and 1995, California lost a net 1.55 millionresidents to other states. California gained a net 1.4 million immigrants inthe first half of the 1990s, or almost 300,000 per year. California, which had an estimated population of 31.6 million in 1995, isexpected to have 41 million residents in 2010. California's population growthis fueled by births (over 600,000 per year) and immigration (over 300,000 peryear). In reviewing population growth since 1980, demographer Hans Johnson notesthat California's population increased by 500,000 in 1980, a peak 900,000 in1989, and then 100,000 in 1993. Johnson's estimates, based, inter alia, on theassumption that 91 percent of the 18 to 64 year-old residents have drivers'licenses, and treating net illegal immigration as a residual after all otherfactors affecting the number of California residents have been taken intoaccount, suggest that there was very high unauthorized immigration toCalifornia in the late 1980s, as well as a high outmigration of US-bornresidents to other states. Estimates of illegal immigration based on apprehension data, by contrast,report declining illegal immigration in the late 1980s. In the March 1995 CPS, there were 23 million foreign-born persons in theUS, including 6.7 million who were born in Mexico, 1.2 million born in thePhilippines, 0.8 million born each in Cuba and China, and more than 0.6 millioneach born in Canada, El Salvador, and Germany. Two-thirds of the Mexicanimmigrants reported that they arrived since 1980--2.6 million in the 1980s, and1.7 million or 345,000 per year in the 1990s. The employment-to-population ratio of recent immigrants is declining. In1960, 93 percent of the 18-64 foreign-born males who arrived in the previousfive years and were not in school were employed or looking for work, 88 percentin 1970, 81 percent in 1980, and 80 percent in 1990. Immigrant Strikes. In Los Angeles, a month-old boycott by many ofthe 6,500 largely immigrant truck drivers at the port in Long Beach fizzledout, as most truckers returned to work. The drivers are considered"independent contractors" by the firms that hire them to deliver freight. Thetruckers agreed to stop delivering freight when they were promised $25 per hourif they forced shipping firms to use a single trucking company. It appears that, in the future, pressure on the truck drivers will grow asmore shipping companies transfer containers directly from ships to rail carsfor distribution throughout the US. Los Angeles handles about 25 percent of USocean-going freight. Also in Los Angeles, nine Chinese immigrants who had been smuggled into theUS, and were being held hostage until their relatives in Fujian came up withmore money to pay the smugglers, escaped after shooting one of the smugglers.The nine had paid $3,000 of the $15,000 fee in China, and the smugglersdemanded an additional $20,000 once the Chinese were in Los Angeles. Mounted Los Angeles police were used in a first-ever effort in mid-June topatrol a popular gathering spot for day laborers in the western San FernandoValley, on Fallbrook Avenue south of Ventura Boulevard in Woodland Hills.Gathering on a street corner to look for work is not illegal in LosAngeles. Criminal Aliens. The California State Senate rejected a nonbindingresolution urging Congress to station an immigration officer are each jail inCalifornia to make sure illegal immigrants who are arrested aredeported. The Anaheim Police Officers Association asked their city council to pass aresolution that called for federal legislation to make it a felony offense tobe in the US without the proper documentation and to allow local, county andstate law enforcement agencies to arrest suspected illegal immigrants. Benefits and Costs. A new study by the Tomas Rivera Center foundthat, over the course of their lifetimes, immigrants contribute more in taxesto California than they cost in government services. The report found that the average immigrant costs the state of Californiaabout $62,600 in educational expenditures. However, when lifetime tax paymentsare adjusted to reflect what is repaid solely in education taxes, the immigrantwill return about $89,437. According to the study, taxes for education plusthose for social programs are $24,493 for legal immigrants, and $7,890 forillegal aliens. About nine percent of the foreign-born mothers aged 14 to 44 were on AFDC,compared to 11 percent of the native-born mothers in the same age group. Polls suggest that, from 1965 to 1993, the proportion of Americans favoringincreased immigration has been stable at about seven percent. The number ofrespondents favoring less immigration, however, rose from 33 percent in 1965 to61 percent in 1993. A December 1995 Roper poll reported that 70 percent of therespondents favor fewer than 300,000 immigrants a year. Sixteen percent of a 500-person sample of Latinos in Los Angeles metro areareported experiencing racism or discrimination in the US. The sample wascomposed of 55 percent legal immigrant, 29 percent US citizens and 16 percentunauthorized immigrants. Nearly 10,000 immigrants took their oaths of citizenship on June 19 in thefirst of several mass ceremonies planned in Los Angeles. In June, 1996, 38,000new citizens are expected take the oath in Southern California. Theseven-county southern California region is expected to account for nearlyone-third of a record one million new citizens nationwide. The rise in the number of immigrants seeking citizenship is attributed toseveral factors including increased the anti-immigrant initiatives and proposedlegislation to reduce benefits for legal and illegal immigrants. Economic Growth. California's economy appears to be rebounding.The unemployment rate dropped to 7.5 percent in April 1996, and about 561,000net new jobs have been added in California since January 1993--at currentrates, California is adding about 300,000 net new jobs per year, or almost1,000 per day. California received an average $4853 in federal spending for each of its31.4 million residents in 1995, less than the $5161 US average. Half of the$152.5 billion in federal payments were Social Security checks. Marcus Stern, "Operations dispute could close I-5 checkpoint at SanClemente," San Diego Union-Tribune, June 21, 1996. Duke Helfand, "CitizenshipSurge Sweeps Southland," Los Angeles Times, June 20, 1996. Alan Eyerly,"Officers Ask tougher Laws on Illegals," Los Angeles Times, June 18, 1996.Marla Jo Fisher, "City may study plan for arrest of illegals," Orange CountyRegister, June 19, 1996. "State Senate Rejects Conroy Bill Requesting INSOfficers At Jails," LosAngeles Times, May 31, 1996. ________________________ ImmigrationUpdate in New York, Florida andIllinois/a> New York City Mayor Rudolph Giuliani on June 6 criticized Bob Dole forsupporting immigration legislation that would restrict federal aid toimmigrants. According to Giuliani, Republicans should not follow publicopinion polls that show broad support for measures to curb illegal immigrants,and to reduce assistance for immigrants. Giuliani also criticized a provision of the pending immigration bill thatwould require state and local agencies to notify the INS if they detect illegalaliens. New York has since 1984 prohibited city agencies from cooperating withthe INS. Huntington Station in Long Island, New York has been battlingconcentrations of day laborers at city corners--one street corner has between125 to 150 men each day looking for jobs. Local business owners say theimmigrant workers are dangerous, because they stand on a traffic island duringthe rush hour. Business leaders tried to move the day laborers to a park down the street,but local residents said they didn't want unemployed men hanging around thechildren's park and near the school bus stop. A compromise was made to move the day laborers to a parking a lot a blockaway from the park, but no one told the immigrant workers, who remain on thetraffic island. Attorney General Janet Reno and Florida Governor Lawton Chiles announced inMay the expansion of programs to halt illegal immigration into Florida,including an airport court at Miami International Airport to deal withforeigners who arrive in the US without proper documents. The INS will alsoestablish a detention center at the airport. Chiles announced that he willsoon sign an executive order forbidding the state to contract with any employerknown to hire illegal immigrants. On June 17, Chiles traveled to Haiti to discuss illegal immigration withHaitian President Rene Preval. Immigration lawyers are increasingly filing petitions for dependency forminor children who are abandoned in the US by parents who send them to the USto live with relatives. The ward of the state procedure was developed to helpsocial workers get US children out of abusive homes, but the INS grantsimmigrant status to minors whom US courts declare to be wards. The Farmworkers Coordinating Council in Boynton Beach says that "hundreds"of 10 to 17 year-old minors who left their families in Mexico or CentralAmerica are working in South Florida agricultural fields. The Latino Institute and the Urban Institute issued a report on May 16estimating that the 244,000 unauthorized immigrants in Illinois pay about $547million annually in taxes, and receive $238 million in services--virtually allof the expenditures were for providing K-12 education to an estimated 33,000unauthorized children at an average annual cost of $7,000. There are believed to be about 138,000 unauthorized Mexicans in Chicago,followed by 47,000 Poles. The seven taxes included in the study are federal and state income, stateand local sales, property, Social Security and Unemployment Insurance. Thesocial-service programs include Supplemental Security Income; Aid to Familieswith Dependent Children; Aid to Aged, Blind and Disabled; TransitionalAssistance; Medicaid; and K-12 public education. On April 29, 1996, a Save Our State-Arizona initiative was filed with theArizona Secretary of State's Office. If organizers obtain the 112,961 validsignatures to place the measure on the November election ballot, Arizona voterswill decide whether to make employers who knowingly hire illegal immigrantslegally liable for damages. The initiative would also create a state"verification center" to determine whether job applicants have legaldocuments. Peter Wallsten, "Chiles to meet in Haiti on immigration," St. PetersburgTimes, June 15, 1996. Eric Schmitt, "Giuliani Criticizes G.O.P. and Dole onImmigration," New York Times, June 7, 1996. Ching-Ching Ni, "Corner ofcontroversy/Laborers Shape-Up Spot Troubles Townsfolk," Newsday, June 3, 1996.Ellen Debenport, "Efforts redouble to bar illegal aliens," St. PetersburgTimes, May 30, 1996. Melita Marie Garza, "All immigration called US economicplus," Chicago Tribune, May 16, 1996. Bill Douthat, "Legal loopholes can belifeline for young immigrants," Palm Beach Post, May 11, 1996. _______________________________ Caribbean/CentralAmericanImmigration More than 435,000 Cubans--about four percent of that nation's population--applied in the US visa lottery that closed April 30, 1996 for about 6,000 slotsto enter the US. The lottery is part of a 1994 agreement between the UnitedStates and Cuba to allow at least 20,000 Cubans a year to immigrate to theUnited States. In 1995, over 190,000 Cubans applied for US immigration visas, and 5,398were granted visas. Since early 1996, more than 60 Cubans arrived in Jamaica seeking politicalasylum. The Jamaican government is considering the approval of a draftagreement to repatriate the illegal Cuban immigrants. The document was signedby Cuban officials on May 15. The 60 illegal Cuban immigrants join another 60 who arrived on the islandbetween 1994 and 1995. Some of the original asylum seekers were given workpermits and visas. Some have fled Jamaica for Puerto Rico rather than riskrepatriation to Cuba. There are an estimated 200,000 to 400,000 Haitians in the DominicanRepublic at any one time, working mainly on sugar and rice plantations. OnApril 30, some Haitians living illegally in the Dominican Republic wererepatriated. Immigration is one of the many points of tension between theSpanish-speaking Dominican Republic and Creole/French-speaking Haiti. In Haiti, the government is worried about "hundreds" convicted criminalsbegin returned from the US, Canada, and France, where many resume their livesof crime with drive-by shootings, carjackings, and kidnappings. The risk ofarrest for crime is low in Haiti, given a newly formed, inexperienced policeforce, and an overwhelmed justice system. The proportion of foreign workers in Bermuda has risen to 22 percent of theworkforce; there were 7,521 foreigners and 26,612 Bermudans employed in1995. In January 1995, Costa Rica began to tighten checks on Nicaraguans whoenter the country. Costa Rica estimates that 475,000 Nicaraguans live in CostaRica, more than half of them illegally. Tensions flared in March 1995, whenNicaragua detained 13 Costa Rican border guards that it maintained chased aNicaraguan into the country. In June 1995, Costa Rica announced plans to grant six-month temporary workpermits to some of the 175,000 Nicaraguans who come into the country every yearas seasonal farm workers for the sugar cane and coffee harvests --the CostaRican government gives the permits to employers, who in turn give them toforeign workers. "Six Cuban refugees repatriated," Reuters, June 21, 1996. "Cuban asylumseekers deported from Bahamas," Agence France Presse, June 18, 1996. "Cubawaits for Jamaica to approve repatriation pact," Reuters, June 6, 1996. _______________________________ EUROPE _______________________________ Asylumand Immigration Controls inEU Asylum. The number of asylum seekers in the 15 EU member states,plus Norway and Switzerland, decreased by 11 percent to 290,000 in 1995, downfrom 325,000 in 1994, according to a report by Eurostat. Germany received 47percent of the asylum applications in 1995, up from 41 percent in 1994. Western Europe, Australia, Canada and the US received a total of 468,000asylum applications in 1995. The number of asylum applicants from ex-Yugoslavia and Romania fell in1995, but there was an increase in applicants from Turkey, Iraq, andPakistan. EU Immigration Controls. The Guardian newspaper reported in Junethat interior and justice ministers in November 1993 planned for a "FortressEurope" policy on immigration. According to the Guardian, the plan tofingerprint all asylum seekers in the EU was launched in the summer of 1993,and approved by the EU Council of Ministers in November 1995. Eastern European nations have displaced developing African and Asiannations as the major source of foreign prostitutes in Western Europe, accordingto the European Commissioner for Justice, Anita Gradin at a June 17 pressconference. Some 200,000 to 500,000 women are involved. Many are young; 75 percentwere under 25 in one study, including many aged 15 to 18. Most traveled toWestern Europe on tourist visas. In Germany, foreign prostitutes make up about75 percent of the total, in Italy, 80 percent, and in Austria, 85percent. Many countries want penalties for smuggling aliens increased. Drugsmuggling typically results in prison terms of 10 to 12 years, versus one totwo years for smuggling aliens. Studies released by the European Commissionhave found that there is growing collusion between drugs and arms traffickersand those involved in smuggling women. EU states were urged to offer specialprotections to women willing to testify against traffickers. Women are still being recruited in the developing countries such as Ghana,Nigeria, Morocco, Brazil, Colombia, Dominican Republic, Philippines andThailand to work as prostitutes in Europe. Jobs. At the Justice and Home Affairs Council in Luxembourg on June4, the British government blocked an EU proposal to establish Europe-widesanctions against employers who hire illegal immigrants. Between 1974 and 1992, about 30 million net new private sector jobs werecreated in the US and Canada, versus five million in the EU. "Immigration: Legal cooperation," European Information Service, June 15,1996. Tony Bunyan, "Fortress Plans Exposed," Guardian, June 10, 1996. "FormerCommunist states now biggest source of trafficking in women," Agence FrancePresse, June 10, 1996. _______________________________ GermansConsider Immigration Policy Immigration Policy On June 18, German President Roman Herzog calledfor immigration in order to increase the size of the working population andthus save Germany's pension system. In a speech to the German Federation ofIndustry (BDI) in Bonn, Herzog said that "an active immigration policy," plusraising the retirement age and increasing the number of women working, wereessential to preserving Germany's social welfare state. The Free Democrats (FDP) on June 10, 1996 called for permitted annual levelbased in part on conditions in the German labor and housing market. Such asystem would open new doors to immigrants wishing to move to Germany. Undercurrent immigration law, foreigners can settle in Germany if they are joiningtheir families or if they are successful asylum seekers (ethnic Germans fromthe ex-USSR can also settle in Germany as German citizens). The FDP also called for easier naturalization for foreign children born inGermany. Party leader and Foreign Minister Klaus Kinkel asserted that "It mustbe easier for foreigners whose lives center on Germany in the long term to haveaccess to German citizenship," suggesting that third-generation foreigners bornin Germany should become Germans by birth. Kinkel also said that "Germany needs an overall concept for immigrationand integration." Chancellor Kohl's Christian Democrats (CDU) oppose set levels ofimmigration, and the secretary general of the CDU sister party, the CSU,Bernard Protzner, said that "Germany is not a land of immigration, and we willnot make it into one. There will be no such law (annual immigration levels) aslong as the CSU can help it." There are about seven million foreigners living in Germany with 81 millionGerman residents, about one-fourth of the foreigners were born inGermany. Chancellor Helmut Kohl agreed in 1990 to accept for humanitarian reasons anunlimited number of Jews from what was the Soviet Union. More than 45,000 Jewsand their relatives have come to Germany, and another 41,000 have been approvedfor entry when they wish. In May, there was talk that the government wouldsoon limit Jewish immigration from the ex-USSR, in part because of a rash offorged documents in which people claimed to be Jews, but the rumors were deniedby the government. Development Aid Minister Carl-Dieter Spranger said that, because there wasno quota on the number of Jews who could move to Germany from the ex-USSR,Germany might come into "conflict with Israel which regards itself as thehomeland for the Jews." Austrian Freedom Party (FPO) leader Joerg Haider on June 14, 1996 calledfor unemployed foreigners to be deported. There are an estimated 36,000unemployed foreigners in Austria. Vietnamese. On June 18, 1996, Vietnam announced that it was readyto accept more than 2,000 Vietnamese living in Germany, taking the first steptoward fulfilling a July 21, 1995 agreement to take back by the year 2000 up to40,000 of its citizens who live in Germany without residence permits inexchange for $140 million in German aid. The agreement called for returning2,500 Vietnamese in 1995, and 5,000 in 1996. There were 96,032 Vietnamese registered in Germany'sAuslaenderzentralregister on December 31, 1995, including 38,166 withoutresidence permits. Most of those to be returned to Vietnam are Vietnamese whoapplied for asylum-- only 5,000 are former East German contract workers. Inaddition, there may be another 2,000 to 20,000 "illegal Vietnamese" inGermany. Hanoi was criticized by the German government for delays in acceptingVietnamese being returned from Germany. So far, only 89 Vietnamese have beenreturned, and 65 of them were convicted criminals sent home under a separateclause of the July 1995 agreement that permits the expedited deportation ofcriminals. According to the German government, some 8,100 Vietnamese haveregistered to go home. Vietnam, which is also experiencing the return of 35,000 boat people insoutheast Asia, insists on verifying that all persons returning are Vietnamese.Neighbors of Germany worry that, if the German government gets tough with theVietnamese staying in Germany, some may move to Hungary, Poland and the CzechRepublic. Ethnic Germans. On May 31, the German government promised tocontinue to allow ethnic German migrants to enter the country. The Germangovernment announced that it would prefer that the 500,000 ethnic Germansliving in Kazakhastan remain there, but that they can migrate to Germany ifthey must. Over 200,000 ethnic Germans from Kazakhastan, where wages average$100 per month, emigrated to Germany in 1994-95. The head of Kazakhastan's Council of Germans has said that the discussionin Germany about restricting ethnic German immigration has triggered a rush ofemigration from the country. The opposition Social Democrats proposed limitingthe influx of ethnic Germans from the former Soviet Union. According to reports, Foreign Minister Kinkel explained to a class of 20young ethnic Germans that " roast chickens will not fly into your open mouths"in Germany. He then asked who wanted to remain in Kazakhastan, and only theteacher did. Bosnians. In June, 1996, Interior Minister Kanther announced thatthe repatriation of Bosnians in Germany would be delayed from July 1, 1996 toOctober 1, 1996. The repatriation is expected to take 12 months. However,each of Germany's 16 states makes the decision on when to return Bosnians, sothat return policies can and do vary by state. The Bosnian government has demanded that Germany help to pay for the costof resettling returning Bosnians, and that the government determine where inBosnia its returning Bosnians are sent. Some of the one million Bosniansoutside Bosnia fear that if they vote in elections scheduled for September 14,1996, they may lose their right to remain in the country where they are takingrefuge. Germany anticipates an easier return of 130,000 persons toSerbia/Yugoslavia. The Yugoslav government is not demanding compensation toaccept the return of its nationals, and has said that young men who went toGermany to avoid military service will not be punished. Labor Market. On May 28, 1996, German employers rejected theEntsendegesetz, a proposal to require foreign workers from other EU countriesto be paid at least the German minimum wages of DM 18.60 ($12) per hour inconstruction in West Germany, and slightly less in the former East.Construction employers favored the effort to prevent social dumping, butemployers from metal and textile industries feared that the constructionEntsendegesetz might set a precedent for their industries. There are 350,000 unemployed German construction workers. British and Irish workers earning between DM22 and DM35 an hour are gettingtwice what they would at home, but far less than the DM 65 labor cost of Germanworkers. Pubs serve as informal labor exchanges. There were 3.8 million unemployed workers in Germany in May 1996, a 10percent unemployment rate. One study found that 20 percent of new PhDs seekingacademic jobs are unemployed. "German president calls for immigration," Deutsche Presse-Agentur, June 18,1996. "Austria extreme right winger wants jobless foreigners deported,"Deutsche Presse-Agentur, June 14, 1996. Douglas Busvine, "Bonn says it willkeep door open to Kazakh Germans," Reuters, May 31, 1996. Andrew Nette,"Vietnam-Germany: Vietnamese Gang Violence Rankles Relations," Inter PressService, May 29, 1996. ______________________ BritishCourt Strikes Down Ban on Welfare A Court of Appeal on June 21 by a 2 to 1 vote struck down as"uncompromisingly draconian" a rule that, beginning in February 1996, deniedwelfare benefits to 8000 asylum seekers who did not apply for asylum upon theirarrival in the UK. The purpose of the restriction was to save about L200million per year. According to the judges, the lack of benefits meant that it was "not merelydifficult but totally impossible for them to remain here to pursue their asylumclaims." A High Court ruling dating in 1803 obliges the British government toassist "poor foreigners" while their claims to settle in Britain weredetermined. Asylum seekers are not allowed to work in the UK, and private helpfor them is limited, according to the ruling. The ruling was, in effect, a finding that Social Security Secretary PeterLilley had adopted regulations that went beyond the underlying law, and orderedLilley to review a denial of benefits to a 25 year old Zairean woman. Lilleysaid he feared the judgment would result in "a fresh flood of bogus claimants"for asylum, and indicated that the decision would be appealed to the House ofLords. Home Secretary Michael Howard withdrew other rules also aimed at making itharder for asylum seekers to remain in the UK. Under the withdrawn rules,asylum applicants could be removed from the UK if they made mistakes on the newapplication forms. In a report on the three million minority residents in the UK, the 212,000black Africans were found to be the best educated, largely because restrictiveimmigration policies keep out unskilled workers. The 840,000 Indians and477,000 Pakistanis in Britain are poised to become solid members of the middleclass, largely because of their high level of education. The 500,000Afro-Caribbean persons in the UK are mostly working class, working for wagesand living in social housing. The British Home Office estimated that employers would spend 13.5 millionpounds verifying the legal right to work of newly-hired employees in the firstyear, and then 11 million pounds per year. The UK is considering introducingemployer sanctions. Alan Travis, "Judges Scorn Asylum Policy," The Guardian, June 22, 1995.Robert Lindsay, "Howard backs down on immigration," The Lawyer, June 11, 1996.Alan Travis, "Howard Talks Down Measures Britain Will Seek to Block," TheGuardian, June 4, 1996. ______________________ FranceCriticized on Asylum The International Federation of Human Rights Leagues (FIDH) in mid-Junecriticized France for increasing the hurdles to asylum seekers. It askedFrance to grant asylum to Algerians who felt threatened by either thegovernment or fundamentalists. The UN Human Rights Commission in April, 1996made similar criticisms. The number of asylum requests in France has been falling, from 61,422 in1989 to 20,170 in 1995. About 24 percent of the asylum applications handled in1994 were approved, versus 27 percent in 1993. On June 15, some 5,000 to 10,000 people marched through Paris to demand anamnesty in the form of residency rights for settled illegal migrants. Theyalso demanded residency rights for illegal migrants who have married foreignerslegally resident in France, and for illegal alien parents of children born inFrance. The National Front, led by Jean-Marie Le Pen, is France's third biggestparty, after the ruling conservatives of President Jacques Chirac and theSocialists. The National Front blames the three million immigrants in Francefor the country's 12 percent unemployment rate. Le Pen continues to insistthat "One cannot make a French people from massive immigration... people need acertain homogeneity...just because this immigration is done without weaponsdoesn't mean it isn't an invasion." When asked in a May 26, 1996 interview how many immigrants that Franceshould accept, Le Pen replied " Zero, zero, zero, excepting individual cases ofpeople who would have shown their merit regarding our country, who bring proofof ties here." Le Pen advocated in a speech talking about potentialimmigrants: "Don't come to our country. We can't take you in and, henceforth,you will not have access to any of the social advantages. If you want to comehere as tourists, we'd like that very much. But we can't pay for yourchildren's schools or your medical care. Not for any of it." Morocco, a country of 29 million with a per capita income of $1000, expectsto receive about $1.2 billion in remittances in 1996, only half 1980s levels.There are more than 2.1 million Moroccans living in Europe, most in France.The country has become a natural transit point for African illegal immigrantsseeking to enter illegally into Europe. "Human Rights groups slams French asylum curbs," Reuters, June 17, 1996.Scott Kraft, " Jean-Marie Le Pen: The strong voice of France's far right," LosAngeles Times, May 26, 1996. ______________________ Asylumin Netherlands andSweden Some 14,509 asylum seekers were removed from the Netherlands in 1995,compared with 13,293 in 1994. About 29,250 people applied for asylum in 1995,down from 52,576 in 1994. The government spent 2 billion guilders on theasylum system in 1995. A survey reported that 85 per cent of the asylum seekers fromBosnia-Herzegovina in the Netherlands want to stay indefinitely. Asylum seekers whose applications are rejected, but who cannot be returned,are granted permanent resident status after three years, but this may soon beraised to five years. Sweden received 9,000 applications for asylum in 1995, down from 37,500 in1993, and granted 3,500 of the 1995 applicants residence permits onhumanitarian grounds. Although Sweden has granted some foreigners refuge onhumanitarian grounds because their asylum cases took too long to process,Sweden is considering eliminating both humanitarian and de facto refugeeasylum. "Slightly more refugees repatriated in 1995," ANP English News Bulletin,June 12, 1996. "Sweden planning to abolish humanitarian asylum," DeutschePresse-Agentur, June 5, 1996. ______________________ SeasonalWorkers inSwitzerland In 1993, nearly one million foreigners were employed in Switzerland,primarily in jobs described as the "three D's," --dirty, difficult anddangerous. Nearly 60 percent of the foreigners working in Switzerland are inthe construction industry, according to the Bureau of Foreign Affairs. Switzerland has among the most restrictive immigration laws on theContinent. Migrants are allowed to bring their families to the country only ifthey can prove that they have enough money and housing. Workers are notallowed to change jobs unless there is a medical reason for doing so. Switzerland, which narrowly rejected a vote to join the European EconomicArea in 1992, is negotiating the free entry of EU nationals and a roadtransport agreement with the EU. Brussels wants the Swiss to eliminate workpermit quotas for EU citizens within three years and is prepared to concede asafeguard clause allowing controls to be reimposed if there is a large influxof illegal immigrants. The Swiss government is willing to ease restrictions onEU nationals followed by a possible abolition of work permit quotas and freedomof movement for EU citizens within five years. The Swiss foreign minister didnot promise that the talks with the EU would lead to the free circulation ofpeople along EU lines. The proposals were blasted by industrialist and SVP member of ParliamentChristoph Blocher, who said that any deals with Brussels on lifting immigrationlimits must be voted by referendum of the Swiss voters. The majority of the Swiss say they favor allowing EU nationals to live andwork in Switzerland without restrictions. Even the four coalition parties,employers and unions support unrestricted living and work for EU nationals. Should the Swiss government alienate public opinion during the tradenegations by moving too boldly, it could affect two referendums relating toEurope expected to be voted on in Spring, 1998. One referendum relates to apro-European bid to restart EEA talks and the other is the Blocher demand thatany negotiations on EU entry must get prior approval from the voters. Francis Williams, "Survey--Switzerland: Looking for the right way in,"Financial Times, April 15, 1996. Cathryn Prince, "Migrant workers find workbut no welcome," Christian Science Monitor, April 3, 1996. "Switzerland OffersCompromise in EU Trade Talks," Reuters, April 3, 1996. _______________________________ ASIA _______________________________ Foreignersin Japan atRecord High The Japanese government reported that the number of registered alienresidents in Japan was over 1.3 million at the end of 1995, accounting for arecord 1.09 percent of the country's population. The number of North and SouthKorean residents declined about 1.5 percent over 1994 levels, and their shareof the number of alien residents fell from 80 percent in 1985 to 64 percent in1990, and to 48 percent in 1995. The number of Filipino residents dropped by 13 percent from the yearbefore, primarily due to a sharp fall in the number of people entering Japanwith permits to work as entertainers, such as singers and dancers. The number of foreigners visiting Japan fell to 3.3 million in 1995, downfrom a peak 3.6 million in 1992. Japanese traveling abroad, by contrast,jumped to 15.3 million. Foreigners denied entry into Japan in 1995 at ports ofentry increased by 33 percent over 1994 levels. The Japanese Justice Ministry announced on June 23 that there was a 15.5percent decline in the number of illegal immigrants who were deported in 1995.Of the 55,470 deported, 49,434 were illegally employed in Japan. The JusticeMinistry attributes the decline in illegal employment to tighter controls andfewer jobs due to a prolonged recession. Among the foreigners illegally employed in Japan, South Koreans were themost numerous, followed by mainland Chinese, Thais and Filipinos. Over 65percent of the illegal workers were male. About 40 percent of the illegallyemployed females came from Thailand and the Philippines. Japan is considering allowing visa-free entry to holders of Hong Kong'sSpecial Administrative Region (SAR) passports. Currently, Hong Kong residentsneed a visa to enter Japan-- 48 countries have been given visa-free status byJapan. About 93,000 Hong Kong people visited Japan in 1995. "Illegal immigrants deported by Japan fall in 1995," Reuters, June 23,1996. Chris Yeung, "Japan may lift visa requirements for SAR," South ChinaMorning Post, June 18, 1996. "Foreigners in Japan Hit Record in '95," JijiPress Ticker Service, June 18, 1996. "More than 55,000 illegal immigrantsdeported in 1995," Japan Economic Newswire, June 23, 1996. "Registered alienresidents in Japan top 1.36 mil.," Japan Economic Newswire, June 22, 1996."Visas exemption for HK residents after 1997 urged," Xinhua News Agency, June17, 1996. _______________________________ FilipinoOverseasWorkers The Philippines, the major emigration nation in Asia, believes that thereare at least 5,000 illegal aliens living in the country who were granted visaextensions in 1973, and then stayed in the country illegally after theirextended visas expired. Most are believed to be businessmen with investmentsin the country. The Philippines is offering an amnesty through the Alien Social IntegrationAct for some of the estimated 70,000 illegal aliens in the country. The Philippines' Bureau of Immigration and Deportation announced on June 5the creation of a special task force to process the amnesty applications ofundocumented residents. The task force, composed of two immigration lawyersand eight intelligence agents, will process applications from illegal alienswith no criminal record who entered the country on or before June 30, 1991.Each principal applicant will be required to pay US $7,923, spouses, US $2,154,and children US $1,192. Through the collection of fees, the task force hopes to raise 4 to 6billion pesos by the end of the alien integration period of December 21, 1996.As of June 1996, only 7,000 aliens applied for amnesty. An estimated 13,000 Filipinos managed to leave Davao illegally for jobs inMalaysia, Indonesia or Taiwan in 1996. According to reports, many Filipinoswho pay money to smugglers to take them abroad lose their money when thesmuggler disappears before transporting them. One report says that, in Davao, Filipinos are asked to pay 90,000 pesos (US$3,440) for the chance to "directly work abroad," with a money-back guaranteein case of problems. In May, Philippine authorities seized anIndonesian-registered boat carrying 24 Filipino workers without properpermits. Despite a Filipino government ban on the deployment of maids to Singapore,Filipino domestic workers still head for that island nation. The Filipinogovernment announced the ban after the hanging of Filipino domestic worker FlorContemplacion for murdering her employer. A Filipino maid earns about S$280per month in Singapore. A Philippine government official says that between 100to 200 Filipino maids arrive in Singapore each week. A UN report indicatesthat about 55 percent of the four to five million Filipinos working abroad arewomen. Unemployment in the Philippines is about eight percent, but according tosome estimates, if all the overseas workers stayed at home, unemployment wouldbe 11 or 12 percent. Leticia Perez, "Filipino maids still heading for Singapore," Straits Times(Singapore), June 15, 1996. "55 more maid agencies accept new contract,"Straits Times (Singapore), June 15, 1996. "Tackling Abuse of Workers," ChicagoTribune, June 9, 1996. "Immigration bureau to crack down on illegal aliens,"Japan Economic Newswire, June 5, 1996. "Philippines human smugglingcontinues," United Press International, May 21, 1996. "The lost daughters," TheEconomist, May 11, 1996. _______________________________ Foreignersin Hong Kong Face Uncertainty Foreigners working in Hong Kong face uncertainty despite Chinese promisesto permit them to live and work in the future Special Autonomous region (SAR)after July 1, 1997. What worries foreigners is that the promise has not beenexplained fully, nor put into writing. Some foreigners, such as those working in politically-sensitive jobs,including journalists, fear that work permits may be delayed or refused. According to research by the Baptist University's Hong Kong in TransitionProject, nearly one fifth of the Hong Kong residents have the option ofemigrating. Many countries, such as Australia, New Zealand and Canada, havedeveloped emergency plans to cope with a mass exodus. A newspaper in Canadarecently reported a secret Canadian government plan to evacuate hundreds ofthousands of Canadians from Hong Kong. Other observers believe that officials in Hong Kong's nearby Chineseprovinces will pressure the government to send Chinese workers to HongKong. There are still 16,000 Vietnamese in Hong Kong, and the government isattempting to send all of them back to Vietnam by July 1, 1997. About 1,400Vietnamese were returned in May 1996. Chinese vegetable growers are taking advantage of the ease with which theycan travel by sea between China and Hong Kong--many Chinese vegetable growersuse speedboats to take their produce to Hong Kong. Richard Ingham, "Foreign workers fret about their future in post-handoverHong Kong," Agence France Presse, June 22, 1996. Yojana Sharma, "Hong Kong:Residents Ready to Move should Things Turn Sour," Inter Press Service, June 17,1996. Peter Humphrey, "China smugglers cruise Hong Kong's leaky sea border,"Reuters, June 3, 1996. "Hong Kong sends 376 Vietnamese boatpeople home,"Reuters, June 6, 1996. Ron Arculli, "The import of a good labour scheme,"South China Morning Post, June 6, 1996. _______________________________ TaiwanCalls for Limits on Foreign Workers The Council for Economic Planning and Development called for a limit on thenumber of foreign laborers in Taiwan. The CEPD reported that imported labor isone of the main factors behind the increasing unemployment in the manufacturingand construction sectors. The Directorate General of Budget, Accounting and Statistics reported thatunemployment was 2.25 percent in March, the highest rate in nine years. The CEPD believes that there are signs that foreign workers are replacingnatives in the labor market. Growing unemployment, the council reports, isclosely related to the increasing numbers of foreign workers on the island. ACEPD official notes that the number of foreign workers has increased sharplysince the beginning of the second half of 1995; at the same time, theunemployment rate has grown significantly. On May 29, a Council of Labor Affairs panel concluded that the ceiling forforeign workers should be cut from the current 65 percent of a company's workforce to 50 percent. The Council of Labor Affairs is also planning to raise the vocationalstabilization fee that Taiwanese employers of foreign workers are charged. Thevocational stabilization fund was set up in August 1992 to raise money to helpunemployed Taiwan workers, and to narrow the wage gap between local and foreignworkers. One manufacturing representative proposed that the government set up aspecial zone where only foreign workers would be hired in order to alleviatelabor shortages. He reported that about 30,000 Taiwan companies have set upoperations on the Chinese mainland to take advantage of the lower labor andland costs there. Some 78,000 Taiwanese emigrated in 1995, versus 42,000 in 1994, mostly tothe United States, Canada, Australia, New Zealand and South Africa. "Labor Council Plans Further Cut in Foreign Worker Quotas," China EconomicNews Service, June 18, 1996. "Labor Council to Raise Fees Employers Pay toHire Foreigners," China Economic News Service, June 15, 1996. "ForeignWorkers, China Economic News Service, June 13, 1996. Philip Liu, "CLACurtailing Foreign Labor Supply," Business Taiwan, June 10, 1996. "Limits onForeign Labor Urged," Business Taiwan, June 3, 1996. _______________________________ MalaysiaHas Skilled Labor Shortages One electronics industry estimate predicts that an additional 50,000qualified engineers will be needed by 2000 in order to sustain the country'sindustrial growth rate. The skills shortage is expected to increase laborcosts. The government argues that foreign companies are exaggerating the laborshortage to persuade the government to allow more foreigners into the country.The government adds that it is ready to admit foreigners to fill highly skilledjobs, such as running wafer fabrication plants, but it is against any widerrelaxation of controls over foreign workers. Some foreign managers complainthat, unless the labor shortages abate, their expansion will slow. Nearly 650 Indonesian illegal immigrants detained in a Malaysian camp endeda 28-hour hunger strike on June 19. The Indonesians were protesting what theycalled a "forced overstay" by the Malaysian authorities. About 3,000 Filipinos are currently in Malaysian jails for illegallyentering the country. Immigration officials, and the Philippine military,which has a joint border patrol agreement with Malaysia, said that up to 100Filipinos enter Malaysia's eastern provinces each day. According to theMalaysian Foreign Affairs Department, there are about 80,000 Filipino nationalsin Malaysia, 90 percent of whom are Muslim Filipinos. Spot checks of night market traders will be conducted in the state ofSelangar in order to reduce the number of illegal immigrants. The Malaysiangovernment has found that a large number of illegal immigrants are conductingbusiness at night markets in Gombak, Jajang and Bangi. Guy de Jonquireres, "Malaysia 1996: Held back by a skills shortage,"Financial Times, June 19, 1996. "Indonesian illegals on hunger strike inMalaysia," Reuters, June 18, 1996. "Some 3,000 Filipinos in Malaysian jails,UPI, June 18, 1996. Ahmad Suffian, "Checks on illegals at night markets," NewStraits Times, June 3, 1996. _______________________________ OTHER _______________________________ AustralianGovernment Reacts to Immigration Poll On June 17, the Australian government announced that it will cut the intakeof refugees and humanitarian migrants from 15,000 to 12,000 in 1997, butmaintain overall immigration at 98,000. The government will increase thenumber of people accepted under family reunification and skilled categories by3,000. The announcement follows the leaking of a confidential Cabinet report thatthe government was considering cutting the humanitarian and refugee to 10,000. In June 16 by-elections in Australia's Blaxland, two anti-immigrationcandidates garnered 22 percent of the vote, up from the 2.5 percent showing inthe federal elections just three months ago. A report in the Sydney MorningHerald says that the vote was not so much anti-immigrant, but an indicationthat the Liberals and the Democrats decided not to contest the election. The report concludes that immigration is not a burning issue in thecountry. Other immigration critics say the results show that the majorpolitical parties are out of step with public opinion on immigration. According to the results of a Herald-AGB poll released on June 19,Australians think their country is accepting too many immigrants, especiallyfrom Asia. About 65 percent of 2,063 people polled thought that immigrationwas too high; three percent favored more immigration. Some 88 percent saidthere were too many Asian immigrants. About 25 percent of immigrants come fromAsia. A government official said that the poll accurately reflects the need toimprove the balance between the skills program and family reunification. According to unpublished government estimates, the number of immigrantsentering Australia under the family reunification program is expected to jumpto 58,000 in 1996, up from 44,500 in 1995. Much of this increase reflects thesurge in spouse or parent sponsorship by former Chinese students whoparticipated in the Tiananmen Square demonstrations. About 37,000 studentswere granted permanent residency in Australia. A recent report by Bureau of Immigration, Multicultural and PopulationResearch shows that 50 percent of all arrivals to New South Wales come fromAsia, primarily Southeast Asia. New South Wales is the most populousAustralian state, home to 33 percent of Australians. In 1992, New South Walesattracted 43 percent of Australia's immigrants. The number of Singaporeans in Australia doubled from 3,176 in 1976 to 6,397in 1992, and the number of Malaysian immigrants increased ninefold, from 9,179in 1966 to 84,000 in 1992. Nearly 80 percent of the Malaysia immigrants areethnic Chinese. Singaporeans and Malaysians typically enter the medical,dental, architectural and engineering professions. The largest group of Asian immigrants are from Vietnam. Most immigrantsfrom Singapore, Hong Kong, and Malaysia arrive as professionals or underbusiness immigration programs. Most Vietnamese came as refugees, and arecredited with bringing Buddhism to Australia. The Vietnamese and Chinesemigrants are in the lower socio-economic groups, and tend to cluster ininner-city areas. A report by Monash University found that an Australian government proposalto block migrants from receiving welfare benefits for two years would reduceshort-term costs, but not prevent a long-term welfare problem. The governmenthas proposed extending its six-month waiting period for immigrants to receivewelfare benefits. Under the proposal, those entering under the refugee andhumanitarian program would still receive immediate access to benefits. The report found that one-third of the recently arrived immigrants dependon welfare payments after entering the country, and at lease 25 percentcontinue to depend on welfare during their second year in the country. The Australian government is trying to pass new laws to stop the HumanRights and Equal Opportunity Commission from telling detained illegalimmigrants about their rights. Currently, the HREOC delivers sealed envelopesto detained illegal immigrants spelling out their rights, including the rightto request an attorney. By law, illegal immigrants can gain access to a lawyeronly if they make a specific request. Paul Chamberlin, "Migrant Reunions at Risk," The Age, June 20, 1996. MarkRiley, "Australia: New Move Against Illegal Immigrants," Sydney Morning Herald,June 21, 1996. Mark Riley, "Doubt over savings to be made on migrant welfare,"Sydney Morning Herald, June 20, 1996. Stepan Kerk Yasharian, "Immigration asneeds be," Sydney Morning Herald, June 20, 1996. Liam Fitzpatrick, "Job fearsspark tough view on immigration," South China Morning Post, June 20, 1996.Michelle Grattan, "Australia: Most Say Migrant Intake is Too High, The Age,June 19, 1996. Michael Millett, "White Australia Alive and Kicking," SydneyMorning Herald, June 19, 1996. Philip Cornford, "Anti-migrant vote nosurprise," Sydney Morning Herald, June 18, 1996. ______________________ ImmigrationAffects New Zealand Elections Polls suggest that New Zealand might elect a part-native Maori, WinstonPeters, as an anti-Asian prime minister, and give a significant number of seatsto the three-year old New Zealand First (NZF) party on October 12, 1996. AJune 1996 poll found that the ruling National Party had 43 percent supportamong voters, NZF 25 percent and Labour 16 percent. Saying that "New Zealand should be for New Zealanders," Peters has calledfor an immigration moratorium and limits on foreign investment. New Zealand, which rarely receives international news coverage, findsitself in the news because of the rise of the New Zealand First party'simmigration policies. The Wall Street Journal, which has carried manycomplimentary stories about the country's fee-market economic policies,recently described New Zealand in an editorial as "the modern face ofanti-immigration discrimination." The number of people applying to migrate to New Zealand fell dramaticallyafter the government changed immigration policies in October, 1995. There wereonly 11 applications in the business investor category between January and May,1996, a 96 percent fall from the 330 business investor applicants for the sameperiod last year. New business investment residents brought $394 million toNew Zealand in 1995, 82 percent was from North Asians. The minimum investmentwas raised to $750,000 last year, and with only 11 applicants, the totalamounts to only $8.2 million. New Zealand officials attribute some of the decline in business immigrantapplications to recent anti-immigrant comments by political candidates and newregulations which require an applicant to own more than 25 percent of theenterprise and pass an English language test. Applicants in the general skills category were down 70 percent to 2,403 inthe first five months of 1996, versus 8,093 applicants in the same period of1995. The number of general immigration applications is increasingmonth-by-month, with 306 in January 1996 to 642 in May. Audrey Young, "New Zealand: Business-base Immigration Slows to a Trickle,"New Zealand Herald, June 21, 1996. Rufus Dawe, "New Zealand: Our XenophobicHeritage," National Business Review, June 21, 1996. Bernard Orsman, "Gov' Slowon Immigration Research," New Zealand Herald, June 17, 1996. Graeme Hunt,"Asia Takes Note of Rising NZ Xenophonia," National Business Review, May 17,1996. WT02-B15-4IA090-000969-B027-187http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/By-Month/MN-Vol-3-96/MN_Aug_96.html 128.120.36.171 19970122205131 text/html 137587HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 20:52:14 GMTLast-Modified: Monday, 22-Jul-96 20:39:42 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 137330 _______________________________ MIGRATIONNEWS Vol. 3, No. 8 August, 1996 Migration News summarizes the most important immigration and integrationdevelopments of the preceding month. Topics are grouped by region: North America, Europe, Asia, andOther. There are two versions of Migration News. The paper edition is about 8,000words in length, and the email version about 15,000. The purpose of Migration News is to provide a monthly summary of recentimmigration developments that can be read in 60 minutes or less. Many issuesalso contain summaries and reviews of recent research publications. Distribution is by email. If you wish to subscribe, send your emailaddress to: Migration News <migrant@primal.ucdavis.edu> Current and back issues may be accessed via Internet on the Migration NewsHome Page--- http://migration.ucdavis.edu There is no charge for an email subscription to Migration News. A paperedition is available by mail for $30 domestic and $50 foreign. Make checkspayable to UC Regents and send to: Philip Martin, Department of AgriculturalEconomics, University of California, Davis California 95616 USA. Migration News is produced with the support of the University ofCalifornia-Berkeley Center for German and European Studies, the German MarshallFund of the United States, and the Pew Charitable Trusts. ISSN 1081-9916 Editor's note. The September Migration News will cover significantmigration developments after July 22, 1996. _______________________________ NORTHAMERICA _______________________________ Congress:Immigration,Welfare, MinimumWages Immigration. In July, Republicans continued to debate amongthemselves whether to try to include the Gallegly amendment in pendinglegislation aimed at reducing illegal immigration. It would give states theright to prevent illegal alien children from enrolling in K-12 schools; BobDole supports the Gallegly amendment, while President Clinton opposesit. After the two Republican Senators from Texas expressed opposition to theGallegly amendment, House Speaker Newt Gingrich asserted that "Until weeffectively control illegal immigration, every state should have the right todecide whether its limited budget should be spent to provide benefits toillegal aliens." Colin Powell also opposed the Gallegly amendment, calling it a"shortsighted" way of dealing with illegal immigration. One of the Californiaauthor's of Prop 187, Ron Prince, came out against the Gallegly amendment,arguing that its inclusion was really a ploy to prevent any immigrationlegislation from passing. As of mid-July, the House had not yet named its conferees to the committeethat will reconcile the House and Senate versions of immigration reformlegislation. Once named, the conference committee has 20 legislative days toreconcile the two bills. It is possible that the House conferees will not benamed until Congress returns from its summer recess in September. The House voted 338-87 in favor of the immigration bill on March 21, 1996,and the Senate approved a similar bill by a vote of 97-3 on May 2, 1996. Immigration is an issue on which Dole and Clinton differ sharply. Dolesupported Proposition 187 in California, while Clinton opposed it. InCalifornia in June, 1996, Dole said "When I am president, there are going to betwo wars declared: a war on illegal immigration and a war on drugs." The Republican National Committee reportedly spent $1.5 million on ads in19 states that asserted that there are five million illegal immigrants in theUS, and then attacked President Clinton for "giving benefits to illegals." TheDemocratic National Committee countered with ads that asserted that "PresidentClinton increased border patrols 40 percent to catch illegalimmigrants." In a New York Times Op-ed on July 11, California Governor Pete Wilsonargued against the 1982 Supreme Court decision, Plyler v Doe, that requires thestates to give public school education to all resident children regardless oftheir immigration status. He said Plyler v Doe was an "unfunded federalmandate" and should be removed. Economist George Borjas countered on the samepage that the best way to deter illegal immigration would be to enforceemployer sanctions, even if that meant the introduction of a national employeeverification system. There are an estimated 700,000 illegal alien children in K-12 US schools,including 355,000 in California--California spends $1.8 billion annually forthe schooling of illegal alien children. Some teacher groups pledged not to enforce the law if it is approved,though school administrators, not teachers, enroll pupils in most USschools. A Gannett News Service poll of 1,027 adults throughout the US on June20-25, 1996 reported that 63 percent of those polled thought all childrenshould be able to attend school. At the same time, the poll found that 71percent of the respondents believed immigrants got too many public benefitssuch as welfare, medical care, and food stamps, even though 83 percent said newimmigrants are very hard-working. About 58 percent of respondents believed new immigrants take jobs fromAmerican workers, and 59 percent thought they drive down wages. Most of thosepolled agreed that new immigrants start businesses that help the economy, andalmost half agreed the newcomers bring needed skills to the US. A Los Angeles Times poll of Orange County Republicans found that 45 percentfavored building a wall along the United States and Mexican border--35 percentof all US residents in this survey favored building such a wall. Minoritiesare 35 percent of Orange county's 2.4 million residents, but they are only 19percent of the county's registered voters. The Orange County Republican Party paid part of a settlement of $400,000 toresolve a lawsuit over a 1988 incident in which the party hired uniformedsecurity guards to police voting places in heavily Latino precincts in SantaAna. Other issues took a distant second place to the Gallegly amendment. Someadvocates took aim at the provision in the House bill that would require USresidents sponsoring the immigration of their relatives to have incomes thatwere at least double the poverty line income for the residents and theirrelatives--the Senate has a 125 percent of the poverty line requirement, upfrom the current 100 percent rule. There were also calls to relax provisions in the new anti-terrorism lawapproved March 1996 that would adversely affect asylees. In signing theAnti-Terrorism and Effective Death Penalty Act in April, 1996, the anniversaryof the Oklahoma City bombing, President Clinton said that "this bill also makesa number of major ill-advised changes in our immigration laws having nothing todo with fighting terrorism," and Clinton urged Congress to make revisions. The anti-terrorism law is being used to detain without bail aliens livingin the US who were convicted of crimes committed in the US. Many immigrantsare caught when they return to the US from trips abroad as when, for example,an INS inspector comes upon data in the computer that show that a permanentresident returning to the US from abroad was convicted of drug possession 20years earlier. Since the anti-terrorism law eliminates waivers of deportation for criminalaliens, even permanent residents married to US citizens and who have US-bornchildren can be detained and deported. The law does not distinguish betweencrimes committed long ago and those committed recently. The INS has asked for more flexibility in dealing with such cases; underthe current law, it cannot stop deportation proceedings. Since 1993, the INShas deported 140,000 foreigners. In presidential politics, former Colorado Governor Richard Lamm announcedon July 9 that he would seek to be the presidential nominee of Ross Perot'sReform party. Lamm has been an outspoken advocate of stricter limits onimmigration to the US; he has proposed reducing the number of legal immigrantsby half, and doing more to stop illegal immigration. The American Friends Service Committee in San Diego is urging Mexicanshoppers to boycott San Diego-area stores the weekend before the August 12-16Republican National Convention in the city to dramatize the Mexican community'sdispleasure with immigration reforms pending in Congress. The House Appropriations Committee July 11 approved a $3.1 billion for theImmigration and Naturalization Service, and increase of $531 million overFY96. Some 25,000 Americans of mixed race demonstrated in Washington on July 20in favor of a "multiracial" category on the 2000 Census. Most minority groupsoppose permitting e.g. the child of a Latino and a White to describe themselvesas "multiracial," in part for fear that the undercount of minorities in thecensus would increase. Welfare Reform. On July 18, the House approved by a 256-170 vote awelfare reform bill that would give states lump sum federal payments that theycould use to assist poor people as they thought best. The head of every familyreceiving cash assistance would have to work within two years or the familywould lose assistance. States would have to require welfare recipients to work to obtain fullfederal payments, and able-bodied adults would have to work at least 20 hourseach week if they want to receive Food Stamps for more than threemonths. The House bill puts a five-year "lifetime" limit on any family receivingcash assistance, and permits states to have shorter limits. The House bill is expected to save $10 billion per year-- one-third of thesavings come from denying food stamps and other benefits to current and futurelegal immigrants--about one million immigrants would lose Food Stamps. Another 500,000 legal immigrants who have not become US citizens and arecurrently receiving payments would be cut from the Supplemental Security Incomeprogram; half of those eliminated from the SSI program have been in the US for10 or more years. Immigrants would be barred from Medicaid until they became US citizens, andalmost all social service programs would have to verify the immigration statusof applicants for benefits. The Senate on July 19 refused to permit legal immigrants receiving SSIpayments to stay on the rolls under its bill. By a vote of 62-34, the Senaterejected a proposal by Senator Bob Graham (D-FL) to allow legal immigrants nowreceiving welfare, food stamps, Medicaid and other benefits to continuereceiving them under the same conditions as US citizens. House Speaker Newt Gingrich emphasized that "Welfare reform must include ageneral ban on welfare benefits for noncitizens." President Clinton favorsrestricting the access of immigrants to welfare by requiring US residents whosponsor immigrants to live up to their sponsorship agreements, not having ablanket bar to their participation written into law. If approved, the ban on welfare for legal immigrants will affect Californiaand other immigrant states most. For example, about 52 percent of the legalimmigrants receiving SSI payments are in California. California counties arecurrently required by state law to provide cash aid and health care to theindigent, so if poor immigrants were removed from federal welfare programs,California state and local governments may have to pick up the tab. About 12.8 million people in 1995 received $22 billion in cash benefitsthrough Aid to Families With Dependent Children --two-thirds are children. Theother two major programs targeted for reform are Food Stamps, which spent $29billion to provide food coupons to 26 million people, and Supplemental SecurityIncome, which served 6.5 million people at a cost of $26 billion in 1995.Since a disproportionately large number of the children of recent immigrantscome from poor families, the cuts will affect them more severely than thechildren of the established American population. Under the Republican plan, there would be a five-year limit on welfare forany family, and states could set shorter eligibility periods. On July 16,President Clinton pledged to require welfare recipients to work after two yearsof aid, with or without new welfare legislation. President Clinton vetoed Republican proposals to reform welfare programs aspart of the budget reconciliation process on December 6, 1995, and as a standalone reform on January 9, 1996. Republicans agreed to consider welfare andMedicaid changes separately, as President Clinton demanded, making it likelythat the welfare bill will be signed into law. Minimum Wages. On July 9, the US Senate approved by a vote of 74 to24 an increase in the minimum wage of $0.90 to $5.15 per hour by July 1, 1997.The minimum wage would rise to $4.75 30 days after the bill is signed, andemployers would be able to pay teenagers the $4.25 hourly wage for the first 90days of their employment. Republicans attempted and failed to keep the minimumwage at $4.25 for the employees of companies that have less than $500,000 peryear in sales. The House approved a similar bill by a vote of 281 to 144 in May 1996, andthe House and Senate must work out differences between their bills beforePresident Clinton signs the wage increase into law. At $4.25 per hour, a full-time 2000 hour per year worker earns $8500; at$5.15, annual earnings are $10,300. In 1995, about 3.7 million US workers 16 or older were paid $4.25 or lessper hour; they represented about 5.3 percent of all hourly paid workers. Teensaged 16 to 19 are about one-third of those paid $4.25 or less; about 73 percentof all minimum wage workers are white. When the minimum wage was last raised, from $3.35 to $3.80 in April 1990,and to $4.25 in April 1991, the percentage of teenagers who were employed fellfrom 47 percent in March 1990 to 40 percent in June 1992--about 43 percent ofUS teens were employed in mid-1996. However, it is not clear how muchdecreased teen employment is due to the higher minimum wage, and how much wasdue to the July 1990-March 1991 recession. The hike in the minimum wage is expected to offset at least partially thewage depression in US labor markets due to the influx of unskilled immigrants.Harvard economist Jeffrey Williams concluded that, between 1870 and 1910,immigration reduced the real wages of unskilled US workers by 10 percent. Themovement of so many workers from southern and eastern Europe to the US alsoreduced global inequality. Williams believes that immigration since 1980 playsa "significant role" in rising inequality in the US. George Borjas agrees that immigration reduces real wages and increasesinequality. According to Borjas, 20 to 30 percent of the drop in the realwages of unskilled workers is due to immigration. David Jaeger of the Bureauof Labor Statistics concludes that immigration is responsible for as much ashalf of the real wage decline of high school dropouts in the US laborforce. A Wall Street Journal analysis of DOL investigations of US firms found thatmany construction and apparel firms unlawfully refuse to pay their employeesovertime wages. One employer group estimates that US workers are unlawfullydenied $19 billion per year in overtime pay. DOL's 800 inspectors open 20,000 investigations each year, mostly followingcomplaints, and wins settlements for workers in about 90 percent of the cases.The largest overtime law violator in recent history was the Food Lion grocerystore chain, which agreed in 1993 to pay $11 million to 21,600 workers. Federal law requires that workers employed more than eight hours daily or40 hours weekly be paid 1.5 times their normal wage--DOL estimates thattwo-thirds of US workers are covered by these overtime rules. But salariedemployees--defined as persons who do not receive hourly pay--who work"independently" are exempt from overtime rules, which leads to confusion--somecourts have held that newspaper reporters are exempt, while others have ruledthat, because the reporters follow editor's instructions, they are covered byovertime laws. On July 16, DOL held a Fashion Industry Forum on sweatshops in the US inwhich mostly immigrant women sew garments. Earlier, the House by voice votetransferred $5 million from the Job Training Partnership Act to DOL's Wage andHour Division's garment industry sweatshop enforcement efforts. The General Accounting Office, in a 1984 report, defined a sweatshop as "anemployer that violates more than one federal or state labor law governingminimum wage and overtime, child labor, industrial homework, occupationalsafety and health, workers' compensation, or industry registration." DOL Secretary Reich asserted that two factors are promoting sweatshops inthe US--the increased concentration in the retail apparel and accessorystores--the 20 largest firms in 1992 accounted for more than 41 percent ofretail sales in all apparel and accessory stores--and the fact that the higherfashion end of the industry that depends on changes in styles is increasinglyreturning to the United States. There were 853,000 workers employed in the US apparel manufacturingindustry in May 1996, down almost 50 percent from the peak 1.45 million in1973. About 70 percent of US apparel workers are women, and their averageearnings of $7.94 are well under the average hourly manufacturing wage of$12.71. More than half of the 22,000 registered sewing shops in the US are believedto be pay their workers below the minimum wage or violate federal overtimeregulations. A DOL survey of apparel manufacturers in Southern California in1996 found that 43 percent of sampled firms had failed to pay some of theirworkers the minimum wage, 55 percent of firms had overtime liabilities, and onethird were not registered--as required--with the state of California. Most garments are sewn in what is known as the "progressive bundle system,"in which each worker specializes in a few of the 20 to 40 operations involvedin making a garment. The bundle system involves large inventories, so thatthere is work available for workers, and it is slow to respond to fashionchanges. The alternative is a modular or team based system in which groups ofworkers assemble a garment, with each worker performing multiple tasks. WalMart, the US retailer originally charged with using children in Hondurasto sew "Kathie Lee Gifford" clothes, promised to use an independent inspectorto ensure that its US sewing shops abide by US labor laws. The sweatshop controversy was set off in May, when a 15-year old Honduranwoman testified that she worked 74 hours weekly for $0.31 per hour to sew"Kathie Lee Collection" clothes for Wal Mart. WalMart stopped buying garmentsfrom the Korean-owned company in Honduras, throwing many of the 600 womenemployed there out of work. The Honduran Maquiladora Association says itsmember firms have stopped hiring workers under 16. Kathie Lee reportedlyreceived $7 million from WalMart. Interviews with women employed in maquiladoras in San Pedro Sula, Honduras,one of whom made the original allegations against talk show host Kathie LeeGifford in May 1996, suggest that the women who work in the maquiladoras aremuch better off than those who do not work in them, even at wages of $0.35 perhour, helping to explain why so many women and girls are lined up waiting forjobs. Honduras is a country of six million with a per capita income of about $600per year. Unemployment and under employment are 30 to 50 percent. About 20percent of the 75,000 garment workers employed in 160 garment shops in Hondurasare unionized. Apparel-making is a $500 million per year business in Honduras. Honduranlaw permits 14 year olds to work up to six hours per day and 36 hours perweek. On July 15, Rep. Christopher H. Smith (R-NJ) introduced a bill that wouldblock the importation of goods made with child labor. The legislation, ifapproved, would require the US government to identify countries that do notprohibit child labor, or that have child labor laws but do not enforce them,and the industries in which child labor is used. To enforce this proposed law,manufacturers could earn an international label that asserts that children werenot used in the manufacture of a product. The ILO estimates that some 73 million children between the ages of 10 to14 are employed worldwide. William Gibson, "Immigration debate poses a clear contrast in views,"Sun-Sentinel, July 21, 1996. Robert Pear, " Senate Votes to Deny Most FederalBenefits to Legal Immigrants," New York Times, July 18, 1996. Larry Rohter,"In Honduras, Sweatshops Can Look Like Progress," New York Times, July 18,1996. Lena Williams, "Terrorism Law Being Used to Deport Immigrants," New YorkTimes, July 17, 1996. Robert Pear, "GOP Plan Would Dramatically Cut WelfareRolls, CBO Says," New York Times, July 16, 1996. G. Pascal Zachary, "Many firmsrefuse to pay for overtime, employees complain," Wall Street Journal, June 24,1996 _______________________________ INS: Enforcement, Asylum, andNaturalization Enforcement. Beginning in 1993, the INS implemented a "preventionthrough deterrence" strategy along the US-Mexican border, seeking to discourageillegal immigrants from entering the US rather than apprehending them afterthey crossed the border. This strategy called for fences, lights, and moreagents visible on the border. In October 1994, the INS launched Operation Gatekeeper along the US-Mexicanborder south of San Diego, doubling the number of agents along 14 miles ofborder, and arraying them in three tiers to make it harder for aliens to eludeapprehension. After 20 months, the INS is apprehending about the same totalnumber of illegal aliens in the San Diego sector. However, in the westernmostImperial Beach sector of the border, where Gatekeeper was concentrated,apprehensions in the first nine months of the fiscal year fell sharply, from138,000 in 1994 to 84,000 in 1995 to 60,000 in 1996. In the eastern sector of San Diego county, apprehensions rose from 1,785 inthe first nine months of FY94 to 21,000 in 1995 to 60,000 in 1996. The INSargued that this eastward shift in apprehensions proved that Gatekeeper isworking--according to the INS, aliens are easier to apprehend in the east. Byone estimate, an alien could slip into a US house or car within 20 minutes ofcrossing the border in the westernmost section of the border, while at least 12hours is required further east. However, several Border Patrol agents in San Diego complained that theirsupervisors encouraged them to under-report apprehensions along the westernmostpart of the US-Mexican border, and to over-report apprehensions further east,in an effort to show that Operation Gatekeeper was pushing illegal aliensattempting entry further east. Aliens were reportedly bussed east to beprocessed, and then returned across the border where they would attemptre-entry, increasing reported apprehensions. In some cases, Border Patrol supervisors allegedly returned aliens toMexico without processing them and removed or shut off buried sensors alongpopular illegal immigration routes on the westernmost stretch of theborder. On July 1, 1996, the INS began an investigation into the charges that theapprehension data were manipulated. As a result of a US-Mexican agreement, Mexicans from the interior of Mexicowho are apprehended in the US can volunteer to be flown home at US expense.Reporters who accompanied a group of Mexicans flown from San Diego toGuadalajara and given bus tickets to their home villages, report that theMexicans had tried at least three or four times to enter the US illegallybefore consenting to go all the way home. One farm worker from Autlan, an area where half of the men usually migrateto the US, expressed surprise at how difficult Operation Gatekeeper has madeillegal entry to the US. The INS extended its Employment Verification Pilot to San Diego in July1996. Under the EVP system, after an acknowledged immigrant is hired, theemployer submits his A-number to INS computers, which return an "authorized" or"not authorized" message. Workers who are "not authorized" are asked tocontact the INS to verify their status. During a seven-month trial of the EVP system in 1995 by 234 employers inLos Angeles and Santa Ana, nearly 3,000 false immigration documents weredetected among 11,400 new hires. The EVP system screens only those whoacknowledge that they are foreigners. Atlanta in Summer 1996 became a mecca for unauthorized immigrants as wellas Olympic athletes and fans. Unauthorized immigrants are particularly drawnto construction and service jobs in the area. INS inspectors have receivedmany tips from US construction workers in the area identifying places thatunauthorized workers are employed. The INS has a total of 54 inspectors inAlabama, Georgia, and North and South Carolina. One unauthorized Mexican worker, detained at a Veteran's Administrationhospital asbestos removal job, expected to work 70 hours each week and send$500 weekly to his family in Mexico. The unauthorized workers who weredetained reported that their employers "knew" that they had presented falsedocuments to get their jobs. There was considerable speculation about whether and how many Cubanathletes might defect during the Olympics, especially after two of Cuba's topboxers defected from their team in Mexico in June 1996. A US-bornCuban-American agent predicted that many members of Cuba's national baseballteam would defect. There are 10,000 athletes from 197 nations in Atlanta forthe Olympics. Asian and Latino immigrants have begun to change the northern suburbs ofAtlanta, with Asian restaurants in Chamblee, and a requirement in Smyrna, with5,000 Latino residents, that all public signs must be in English. The INS continued to be criticized for "deceiving" a seven-memberCongressional delegation visiting Miami June 10, 1995. According to theInspector General's report, INS officials moved detained aliens out ofovercrowded facilities, and authorized overtime at Miami airport, to cause thevisiting Congressional delegation to believe that there was little overcrowdingor delays. The INS union complained after the visit that the Congressmen had obtaineda distorted picture, and INS officials initially tried to cover up thedeception. The Inspector General was able to re-create erased email messagesthat detailed the deception and cover-up. The INS has 33 district offices around the country. The quality of theservices they provide to often anxious immigrants varies considerably.Foreigners in the US wanting to change their temporary permission to permanentresidence or otherwise revise their status must be interviewed at one of theseoffices. INS district offices also administer examinations for naturalizationand arrange naturalization ceremonies. The 33 district directors have different priorities and philosophies, sothat some use their resources to reduce waiting times for those seeking greencards, while others concentrate on other issues. In the Washington DC area,the differences between the DC and Baltimore offices are such that some lawyersadvise their clients to move to Maryland so that they can deal with theBaltimore office. The districts also differ in their philosophy toward asylum seekers--someare reluctant to release asylum seekers who entered the US illegally or withfalse documents. In mid-June, ten illegal alien construction workers were detained by theINS while working for a contractor at Anacostia Naval Station. The contractor,a Portuguese immigrant who won the contract under a government set asideprogram, said that he had carefully checked what turned out to be fraudulentdocuments submitted by the workers. In suburban Chicago, the INS on June 25 raided the Palatine Park Districtand detained 21 landscape workers in one of the rare inspections of localgovernment employees. Since October 1, 1995, the INS in the Chicago area hasconducted 55 employer inspections, and detained 600 illegal Mexicanworkers. Near Eagle Pass, Texas, Mexican drug smugglers are reportedly using illegalaliens to attempt to carry 100 pounds of drugs each in backpacks into the US.Nationally, the US seizes an estimated five percent of the total drug flow fromMexico. In southern Texas, midwives, known as partera, deliver many of the babiesborn to poorer women in their homes, and then prepare birth certificates thatshow the babies were born in the US. In thousands of cases, midwives also sellfalse birth certificates to the parents of children born in Mexico that assertthat a child was born in the US. As a result of an INS investigation, several midwives have been arrested,and Texas is considering tightening its regulations on the issuance of birthcertificates. Illegal Immigration. In 1994, the INS estimated that in October1992 there were 3.4 million aliens present in the US without documentation, andthat the number of illegal aliens settling in the US was increasing by about300,000 per year. Revised estimates suggest that the illegal alien populationwas larger in October 1992--3.8 million, including 1.8 million in California,up from an earlier estimate of 1.4 million--but that the rate of increase inthe illegal alien population was lower--250,000 per year throughout the US. The revised estimates suggest that the illegal alien population in the USincreases by about 1 million every four years and will reach 4.8 million inOctober 1996. Because of potential errors associated with such estimates,another range is provided. Thus, the unauthorized alien population of October1996 is expected to be 4.1 to 4.9 million, within it the range for unauthorizedMexicans is 2.2 to 2.7 million. Most of the revisions increase the estimated number of Mexicans who wereillegally present in the US in the late 1980s, including some who may haveentered in the hope that there would be another amnesty. Asylum. In FY95, some 149,500 foreigners applied for asylum in theUS, up slightly from 146,400 applications in FY94. In the first six months ofFY96, there were 90,700 asylum applications. These data include 147,400applications filed under a court settlement for Central Americans, but not the20,000 to 50,0000 applications filed each year by aliens seeking to avoiddeportation. In July 1996, seven members of the family of the man convicted ofassassinating Mexican Presidential candidate Luis Colosio in Tijuana on March23, 1994 was granted asylum in the US for fear that they would be persecuted bythe Mexican government in Mexico. The seven illegally entered the US in 1994,after the killing, and they are now eligible to apply for permanent residentstatus in the US after a one-year wait. An article in the Washington Post on July 7 compared two asylum cases: aChinese man who used a false Japanese passport to enter the US, and soughtasylum because of China's one child policy, and that of a Togo woman who used afalse British passport to enter the US, and sought asylum because she fearedgenital mutilation in her native Togo. The writer noted that the Chinese manwas released and given a work permit (the INS now requires a 180-day waitbefore issuing work permits to asylum seekers), while the Togo woman was placedin detention. The INS does not have data on the numbers of asylum applicants who aredetained and released, making it hard to detect patterns in detention andrelease decisions. The INS is attempting to develop guidelines to help itsofficers decide which applicants for asylum should be detained. Reportedly, 94percent of the asylum seekers who were released at Kennedy and Miami airportsdid not show up for their asylum hearings. The US asylum system is criticized from many quarters. Restrictionistscomplain that undeserving migrants apply for asylum, and too many then receiveasylum. They note that the prospect of forced abortion or sterilization inChina can be grounds for asylum, as well as the threat of forced female genitalmutilation in Africa. Such policies are easily abused. An estimated 90 percent of the Chineseapplicants for asylum come from three counties in Fujian Province, where aliensare coached in how to satisfy the US requirements for asylum. A Chinese asylumseeker, who was released after applying for asylum, admitted that he came tothe US for economic reasons rather than because of the one-child policy. Afterhis release, he joined a gang that extorted money from other Chineseimmigrants, and was sentenced to 11 years in US prison. Others critics of US asylum policy and practice, use the disparate INStreatment of asylum seekers to argue that release or detention depends on theindividual judgments of mid-level INS officials rather than rationalstandards. The INS has space to hold 8,400 aliens in 13 centers around the US--fourare operated by private firms for the INS. Most of those detained areforeigners who arrive in the US and seek asylum with no papers or with falsedocuments. The INS plans to reopen the Elizabeth, New Jersey detention facility thatwas closed after 315 detained asylum seekers rioted to complain of harassmentand poor conditions on June 18, 1995. The INS will now have a differentprivate firm operating the facility. Some state and local jails are addingcapacity so that they can offer beds to the INS. The York, Pennsylvania countyjail plans to add 500 beds to house foreigners for the $50 per day that the INSpays private contractors. Naturalization. The INS continues to struggle with a record numberof applications for naturalization--there were 1,056,981 naturalizationapplications in 1995, up from 592,000 in FY94. The INS is expected to naturalize one million aliens in 1996, including327,000 in southern California. The INS has authorized six private firms to test immigrants wishing tobecome US citizens in English, and it disqualified one of those firms, SpanishBusiness Services based in Florida, after learning that the firm helpsimmigrants to cheat on the test. About 20 percent of the persons who becomenaturalized US citizens take tests at private firms. Latino activists are launching a nationwide effort, called Latino Vote USA,to register one million new voters by November's general election. About 85percent of Latinos live in nine states that have 202 of the 270 electoral votesneeded to elect a President--Arizona, California, Colorado, Florida, Illinois,New Jersey, New Mexico, New York and Texas. There were about 27 million Hispanics in the US in 1995, including 17million who are 18 or older. In the 1992 election, an estimated 4.2 million ofthe 5.1 million registered Hispanics voted, and 61 percent of the Hispanic votewent to Clinton, 25 percent to Bush, and 14 percent to Perot. In the 1994election, only 3.3 million of 5.2 million registered Hispanic voters castballots. The Texas-based Southwest Voter Registration Education hopes to increasethe number of Latino voters by 20 percent or one million by November1996. Naturalization is open to foreigners who have had the status of legalresident in the US for at least five years, were physically present at least2.5 of these years, are at least 18, and are of "good moral character."Applying for naturalization costs $95. The applicant must take a test todemonstrate that he/she can read and write English, and must answer correctly12 of 20 questions on US history and government (Questions include: What isthe Bill of Rights? Which countries were US allies in World War II? What arethe colors in the US flag? What is Congress? What does July 4 celebrate?) Daniel B. Wood, "Latest Border-Control Effort: Halting Flow ofIllegal Drugs," Christian Science Monitor, July 10, 1996. William Branigin,"Nation's political asylum system draws criticism from both sides," WashingtonPost, July 7, 1996. Matthew Purdy and Cecila Dugger, "Legacy of immigrants'uprising: new jail operator, little change," New York Times, July 7, 1996.Pamela Constable. " Navy Had Screened Workers Arrested by INS at AnacostiaBase," Washington Post, June 22 1996. _______________________________ Mexico/USImmigration It is often asserted that Mexico and the US have the largest wage gapbetween contiguous countries, but the World Bank's World Development Report,released in June 1996, shows Poland had a lower GNP per capita than Mexico in1994, $2410 versus $4180, while Germany and the US each have per capita GNPs ofabout $25,700. This makes the Polish-German ratio 1 to 11, and the Mexico-USratio 1 to 6. (The Polish economy expanded by seven percent in 1995, while theMexican economy shrank by about seven percent). The Czech and Slovak Republics were also poorer than Mexico, with percapita GNPs of $3,200 and $2,250 in 1994. Germany, however, permits Poles to enter Germany without visas, and hasseveral programs through which Poles can work legally in Germany. The USrequires visas or shopping cards from Mexican visitors, and offers relativelyfew temporary work visas. Germany attempts to prevent illegal Polish immigration and employment witha mandatory resident registration system, and extensive labor market controlsthat bear equally on citizens and non-citizens. The US, by contrast, puts mostof its enforcement efforts at the border rather than inside the US. As Mexico moves closer to approving dual citizenship, US think tanks havebegun to study the effects of dual nationality on Mexican and other LatinAmerican immigrants. According to the Tomas Rivera Center, there is no clearrelationship between dual citizenship and naturalization. About 40 percent ofthe immigrants in the US from Latin American countries that offer dualcitizenship have become naturalized US citizens, versus 36 percent of theimmigrants from Latin American countries that do not offer dualcitizenship. Absentee voting rights are also not correlated with US naturalizationrates--about 36 percent of the Latin American immigrants from countries thatoffer absentee voting are naturalized, versus 37 percent from countries withoutabsentee voting. On March 28, 1996, Mexican President Ernesto Zedillo said that Mexiconeeded to distribute income more equally to address the growing gap betweenrich and poor, and between the industrialized north and the rural south. Mexico's income distribution became more unequal in the 1990s, and Mexicohas, according to the World Bank, the sixth most unequal income distribution inthe world outside Africa--the richest 10 percent of Mexican residents received41 percent of national income in 1994, up from 34 percent in 1984. LatinAmerican countries with more unequal income distributions include Brazil andPanama, where the richest 10 percent of residents receive about half of thenational income. According to Forbes, Mexico includes 15 of Latin America's 39 billionaires,even though Mexican's are only 20 percent of the region's population. Forbesreports that there were 447 billionaires in 1995, including 149 in the US, 110in Europe, and 41 in Japan. The poorest 50 percent of Mexican residents receive only 16 percent ofnational income, and the number of Mexicans living in extreme poverty has grownto 22 million, an increase of 5 million since the peso devaluation in December1994. Growing inequality is evident in market activity. Sales ofMexican-produced Volkswagen Beetles fell sharply in 1995, while Mercedes-Benzsales are expected to rise 50 percent in 1996. In Mexico's San Quintin Valley, 130 miles south of Ensenada, some 500 to800 of the 25,000 mostly migrant farm workers broke into businesses andrestaurants in Poblado Lazaro Cardenas for food when they were told that theywould not be paid for the third straight week. Farmer Arturo LomeliVillalobos, one of about 50 large farmers in the area, said he was unable toconvert dollars into pesos fast enough to pay the workers. Most of the farm workers in the San Quintin Valley are Indians fromsouthern Mexico--Mixtecs, Zapotecs, Oaxacans and Triquis. Most speak little orno Spanish, and many work 12 to 15 hours a day for daily wages of 25 pesos or$3.33. The workers have been protesting low wages and poor housing foryears. The Mexican economy is stabilizing--prices are expected to rise between 27percent and 29 percent in 1996. However, real wages in Mexico in 1996 arebelow what they were in 1981, and the Mexicans doing best are those with tiesto the US economy, either via trade or migration. In 1996, a procession of US fruit and vegetable growers have charged that"unfair competition" from Mexico and Central America is hurting them. Firstcame Florida tomato growers, then the California avocado industry and, in May1996, California sugar pea growers complained that Guatemala, which produces anestimated 70 percent of the world's snow peas and snap peas, have an unfairadvantage in lower labor costs and a climate that allows year-round sugar peaproduction. In both Florida and Mexico, tomatoes are picked by migrant Mexican workers.Mixtec Indians from Oaxaca are prominent parts of the tomato work force inSinaloa and California, and Huichole Indians do much of the harvest work inMexico's Nayarit state. On July 2, 1996, the International Trade Commission rejected 4-1 theFlorida growers petition under Section 201 of the 1974 Trade Act. The 201petition sought relief from price-based import surges of tomatoes and peppersfrom Mexico; if the ITC had agreed with Florida growers, President Clintoncould have imposed extra duties on Mexican tomatoes. However, the International Trade Commission on May 16 voted to continue aseparate antidumping investigation on fresh tomatoes from Mexico, as requestedby Florida tomato growers. The ITC found a "reasonable indication" that the USindustry is being materially injured by tomatoes from Mexico that were soldbelow cost in the US. A preliminary Commerce Department determination on dumping is expected inearly September, and a final decision on the antidumping petition is expectedin January 1997. Mexico produces about 45 percent of the world's avocados, some 800,000 tonsper year, but Mexican avocados have been banned from the US since 1914. Some100,000 workers are employed on 8000 avocado farms in Michocan, one the majorstates of origin for Mexican migrants headed to the US. The ban on Mexican avocados is expected to be lifted in November 1996, butCalifornia avocado growers are resisting a lifting of the ban, arguing thatmore study is needed to ensure that imported Mexican avocados do not bringpests with them. USDA regulations on avocado imports require that there be an"absence of infestations of injurious insects known to attack fruits andvegetables" in the area of origin of the fruit during the 12 months beforeimportation. Under proposed USDA regulations, Mexican growers certified to ship avocadosto the US would have to be inspected in Mexico, and then USDA would also checkfor pests in packing plants. Mexican growers would pay for these USDAinspections. Mexican avocados could be sent to only to 19 Midwest andNortheastern states during the months of November to February, when the coldweather would prevent any of the pests from surviving. Canadians pay $0.50 to $0.60 per Mexican avocado in retail stores, while USconsumers often pay $1 each for California avocados. About five percent ofMexico's fresh avocados are exported. Mexicans consume about four times more fresh produce per capita thanAmericans, in part because fewer Mexican have the freezers and microwavesassociated with frozen vegetables. Because of drought, Mexico is expected to import about 12 million tons ofgrain in 1996, one-third of Mexico's grain consumption. During the first 10 months of 1995, Mexican agricultural exports to theUnited States, excluding grains, rose by 42 percent to $ 2.9 billion, while USagricultural exports to Mexico fell 44 percent to $ 724 million. In 1995, Mexico exported $69 billion worth of products to the US andCanada--its NAFTA partners took 86 percent of Mexico's exports. But one halfof Mexico's exports came from maquiladoras, and 70 percent of Mexico's exportswere shipped abroad by 300 companies. Mexico in mid-June began to distribute a 22-page pamphlet to CentralAmericans attempting to enter Mexico illegally that outline their rights,including their right not to be harassed by Mexican police seeking bribes. Thepamphlet explains that it is illegal to enter Mexico without proper documents,but then goes on to say that even illegal foreigners in Mexico have basic humanrights, such as the right to "respectful treatment," and provides telephonenumbers that migrants can call to report abuses. The pamphlet advises migrants who suffer abuse to remember the color of theuniform that the abuser wore, and the license plate number of the vehicleused. Anthony DePalma, "Gap Between Mexico's Rich and Poor Is Widening," New YorkTimes, July 20, 1996. Sam Dillon, "Shadowy Rebels Pose New Problems forMexico," New York Times, July 17, 1996. Gregory Gross, "Hungry and enragedBaja farm workers erupt," San Diego Union-Tribune, July 6, 1996. John WardAnderson, "Guerrero Guerrillas Remain Elusive," Washington Post, July 6, 1996.Jerry Jackson, "Tomato Imports Ruled OK," Orlando Sentinel, July 3, 1996. _______________________________ ImmigrantIntegration In July 1997, several reports on the economic progress of recent Latinoimmigrants were released, and all were pessimistic about upward mobility forLatino immigrants with little education. Many immigrants arrive in the US without English, and largely for thatreason they initially earn less than US-born residents who are similar to themin years of schooling, age etc. Barry Chiswick of the University of Illinoisat Chicago found, in studies completed in the late 1970s and early 1980s, thatimmigrant men initially earned 10 percent less than similar US-born men.However, the extra drive and ambition that prompts immigrants to migrateenabled them to close the earnings gap after an average 13 years in the US, andprovided them with six percent higher earnings after 23 years in the US. George Borjas argued that Chiswick was mixing together the characteristicsof the immigrants, and the general state of the economy. In effect, Borjasargued that Chiswick was generalizing from a unique set ofcircumstances--highly skilled Asian immigrants who arrived during the 1950s and1960s, when the US economy boomed. Borjas argued that immigrants arriving in the 1980s were more likely to berefugees or unskilled workers who would not catch up in earnings to similar USworkers in a slow growing economy in which wages for unskilled workers werefalling. Studies competed in the 1980s and 1990s show that both Chiswick and Borjasare correct, each for some portion of the immigrant population. For example, aRand Corporation study released in July 1996, "The Mixed Economic Progress ofImmigrants", reports that the median weekly earnings of immigrant men fell from99 percent of those of native-born workers in 1970 to 89 percent in 1990,supporting the conclusions of Borjas. However, immigrant men from China, Japan and Korea increased their earningsrelative to US born men between 1970 and 1990, jumping from average earningsthat were 88 percent as much as similar US born men earned in 1970, to 110percent of the earnings of similar US born men in 1990, supportingChiswick. Mexican immigrant men aged 25 to 34 lost ground relative to similar US-bornmen over the past two decades. Those arriving between 1965 and 1969 earned 63percent as much as similar US-born men in 1970. By 1990, the earnings of thissame group of immigrant men were only 57 percent as much as similar US-bornmen. These data suggest that Mexican immigrants enter the US with education,language, and skill disadvantages, and that these disadvantages persist and mayeven widen over time. One reason for the drop in relative wages is that many Mexicans areunskilled, and the earnings of all unskilled workers in the US economy havebeen falling. The earnings of foreign-born men in the bottom tenth of the USwork force--when arrayed by earnings--have fallen to 63 percent of their UScounterparts' earnings from 94 percent in the 1970s and 1980s. According to the Rand study, Mexican immigrants who arrived in the US inthe late 1970s typically earned about half as much as similar US-bornresidents. In 1990, they still earned only about half as much as similarUS-born residents. The Rand study was based on data from the 1970, 1980, and 1990 Censuses, aswell as a 1980-86 survey of 10 and 12th graders. The education data show that80 percent of Asian high school graduates go on to college, versus 50 percentof Hispanic high school graduates. In California, about 25 percent of the 15to 17 year olds born in Mexico were not enrolled in school in 1990, versus fivepercent for other immigrant teens. By the age of 15, many Mexican immigrantshave already been out of school for two years. One critic of the Rand study argued that Latinos are rational when they donot attend school, since the janitorial and service jobs open to them do notrequire much education. He argued instead for raising the minimum wage toincrease Latino earnings. The US Department of Labor released its second analysis of data on the 1.6million persons legalized under the 1987-88 program that permitted persons whowere illegally in the US since January 1, 1982 to become legal immigrants.(The 1.1 million unauthorized aliens who became legal immigrants under theSpecial Agricultural Worker or SAW program were generally much less educated,and were not included in the DOL survey). The report concludes that legalized aliens interviewed in 1992 "faceextraordinary obstacles to achieving the American Dream," in part linked to thefact that, after ten years in the US, about 25 percent do not speak muchEnglish. Despite high labor force participation rates, relatively few of thelegalized aliens were able to move beyond the restaurant and construction jobsthey held as illegal aliens. Legalized aliens were not eligible for most welfare programs for fiveyears, or until 1993. However, when the survey was done in 1992, about 60percent of the newly legalized sample families had assets of less than $1000,which would qualify them for many benefit programs. As the barriers tobenefits fall, the survey found that many of the newly-legalized are beginningto apply for and receive benefits, although the proportion of the newlylegalized receiving benefits is lower than for similarly poor US-bornresidents. DOL surveyed 4,000 legalized aliens in 1989 and 1992, including 69 percentfrom Mexico and 15 percent from Central American countries. About 58 percentof the pre-82 amnesty applicants lived in California, followed by 13 percent inTexas, and seven percent in New York. About 40 percent of the legalized aliens reported that no one in theirfamily had private health insurance. It found heavy usage of emergency,maternal and child health-care programs, and reported that 25 percent of thelegalized families have a child in reduced-price school-lunch programs. According to journalist Robert Samuelson, the US may be "importing poverty"through immigration. He estimates that 25 to 50 percent of the increase in USpoverty since 1970 may be due to immigration--six million of the 15 millionincrease in the number of poor persons between 1973 and 1994 were Hispanic;about 40 percent of the nine million increase between 1987 and 1994 in thenumber of Americans without health insurance were Hispanic, and the proportionof Hispanics among the poorest 20 percent of Americans rose from five percentin 1974 to 12 percent in 1994. According to Samuelson, immigration aggravated rather than caused thesesocio-economic problems; US "indicators of national well-being" are depressedwhen poorly educated immigrants arrive. They and their children may do better,as past waves of immigrants have, but success is not guaranteed. Richard Rothstein, "Labor Market, not schools, will aid Latino Educationwoes," Los Angeles Times, July 21, 1996. US Department of Labor. 1996.Characteristics and Labor Market Behavior of the Legalized Population FiveYears Following Legalization. Bureau of International Labor Affairs. May.Schoeni, Robert, Kevin McCarthy and George Vernez. 1996. The Mixed EconomicProgress of Immigrants. Santa Monica. Rand. Robert Samuelson, "Importingpoverty," Washington Post, July 10, 1996. Thaddeus Herrick, "Immigrant studyfinds poverty shadows many amnesty recipients," Houston Chronicle, July 9,1996/a>. _______________________________ EUROPE _______________________________ BritainDebates Asylum Change The British government has been trying to reduce the number of asylumseekers, and to limit their access to social services while their applicationsare pending. Britain is the only European country in which asylum applicationsare rising, to 44,000 in 1995. The government has attempted this by administrative and legislative means.In January 1996, the British government introduced new rules that would makeimmigrants who did not apply for asylum upon entry ineligible for welfarebenefits. It estimates that such a rule would save at least US $410 millionper year by excluding from benefits those who did not apply immediately. OneJune 21, a British Court of Appeal struck down the rule in unusually ferventlanguage. The government then resorted to legislative means, introducing amendmentsto pending legislation to enact the one-day rule. The House of Lords balked,choosing instead to give applicants three days in which to apply, but on July15, the House of Commons rejected the Lords' amendment and supported thegovernment's more restrictive requirement. On July 15, the Archbishop of Canterbury asked the government not toeliminate welfare benefits for asylum seekers whose applications are pending.The Archbishop warned that the proposed statute would mean that many genuineasylum seekers would suffer unwarranted hardship after losing benefits. Several backbench Tory M.P.'s warned the government on July 11 that if itdid not restore the three-day application period for asylum seekers to obtainwelfare, they would vote against the Asylum and Immigration Bill when it comesup for a final vote. The House of Lords is expected to decide on July 22whether to agree to the one-day limit, or fight further for a three-dayapplication period. "Parliament votes to curb rights for asylum seekers," Agence France Presse,July 15, 1996. Alan Travis, "Carey Pleas for Welfare to Asylum Seekers," TheGuardian, July 15, 1996. Hirit Belai, "A Final Brick in the Wall," Guardian,July 15, 1996. "Asylum challenge for ministers as bill returns," PressAssociation Newsfile, July 11, 1996. Scott Hughes, "From Protector toPersecutor: Britain's Growing Intolerance of Refugees," The Independent, July1, 1996. "Asylum: Troublesome foreigners," The Economist, June 29, 1996. _______________________________ GermanImmigration ReformsExpected/a> Immigration Policy. Cornelia Schmalz-Jacobsen, Germany'sCommissioner for Foreigners, predicted on June 29 that Germany will soon makereforms in immigration law. Before the end of 1998, it will be easier for atleast the children of foreigners born in Germany to become dual nationals, shesaid. According to Schmalz-Jacobsen, most of Germany's 656 members ofParliament are in favor of changing Germany's nationality laws to reduce thewaiting period before a foreigner can apply for naturalization, and to giveforeigners more rights in the naturalization process. Germany's current nationality law, the 1913 Reichs- undStaatsangehoerigkeitsgesetz, allows for the naturalization of foreigners.There were about 200,000 naturalizations in 1993, and 260,000 in 1994. Between1973 and 1994, about 1.5 million foreigners became German citizens. There are two major types of naturalization in Germany. Ethnic Germans,so-called "Aussiedler," are Germans abroad who move to Germany, where they havea right (Anspruch) to German citizenship. There were 233,000 Anspruchnaturalizations in 1994, and 1.1 million since 1973. The overwhelming numberof naturalizations in Germany are naturalizations of people of Germanstock. Other foreigners may become German citizens after residence of at least 15years at the discretion (Ermessen) of the German authorities. Suchnaturalization applications may be rejected if the foreigner has committed afelony (including prostitution), has less than six years of schooling, hasreceived welfare payments, or if German authorities deem naturalization to be"not in the interest of the German state." The fee for naturalization waslowered in 1993 to DM500 per adult and DM100 per child. Foreigners who marryGermans can apply for naturalization after three years of marriage andresidence. Since 1993, foreigners between the ages of 16 and 23, who have livedlegally for at least eight years in Germany, and who have at least six years ofGerman schooling, have been entitled to German citizenship upon request. There were 45,000 such "Ermessen," or discretionary, naturalizations in1993--more than double the 18,000 in 1989. In 1994, the number ofdiscretionary naturalizations fell to 26,000. In most cases, foreigners wishing to become naturalized German citizensmust give up their current citizenship. Most West European nationsautomatically release their citizens when they naturalize, but a few nations,notable Turkey, require the completion of military service before a young mancan give up his citizenship. In the 1990s, of the 450,000 marriages that have taken place each year inGermany, 390,000 have been between two Germans, 10,000 between two foreigners(with at least one partner living in Germany), and 50,000 of a German with aforeigner. In about 25,000 marriages each year, a German woman marries aforeign man--Turks, ex-Yugoslavs, Italians, and Americans together comprisealmost half of the foreign husbands. In another 25,000 marriages each year, aGerman man marries a foreign woman--Poles, Thais, and ex-Yugoslavs together areabout one-third of the foreign wives. The German weekly "Der Spiegel" in June summarized the work of severalGerman researchers under the headline "Germany needs foreigners." The article opened by contradicting German political convention inasserting that Germany is a country of immigration (Einwanderungsland), andthat it is time for Germany to recognize that fact by enacting an immigrationlaw, and creating an immigration department to administer the law. The SPD,FDP, and the Greens have made immigration proposals, although the SPD speaks ofZuwanderung rather than using the common German word, Einwanderung, which has anegative connotation for voters. In each of the political parties' proposed immigration laws, a commissionwould be charged with setting an annual ceiling on the number of newcomers tobe admitted to Germany. Many observers put the "immigration need" of Germany at 300,000 to 400,000newcomers per year. According to a 1994 estimate, 1.1 million foreigners andethnic Germans entered Germany to settle, and 740,000 Germans and foreignersleft, leaving Germany with a net 330,000 newcomers--180,000 ethnic Germans, and150,000 net new foreign residents. Some politicians favor reducing the number of ethnic Germans to make roomfor a larger number of other foreigners. During the Spring 1996 elections insouthwestern Germany, SPD leader Oskar Lafontaine argued that the country couldnot afford to accept 220,000 ethnic Germans each year. The FDP has proposedthat the 218,000 ethnic Germans admitted in 1995 be reduced in future years byabout 10 percent. Several economists argue that Germany's economic miracle is linked itsimmigrants, and that Germany needs more young and mobile foreigners to sustainits welfare state. One estimate is that, in 1992, foreigners and ethnicGermans paid DM32 billion in taxes, and received DM18 billion in tax-supportedservices (there are no data on ethnic Germans, since they enter statisticalsystems as Germans). Another study argued that two-thirds of all foreignerswho found jobs since 1988 took jobs that Germans refused. In one proposed immigration system, employers would bid against one anotherby offering a fee to the government to obtain one or more of a annual quota offoreign professionals. Successful bidders would then receive permission toimport the foreigners that they recruit. Some demographers argue that Germany needs foreigners to keep thepopulation from shrinking, from 82 million in 1996 to a projected 73 million in2020, and 39 million in 2050. In order to keep the German labor force at itscurrent level of about 41 million, it is estimated that Germany will need toaccept an average 400,000 immigrants annually through the year 2000. Aussiedler/Jews. Two groups have special privileges for settling inGermany, ethnic Germans and Jews. In 1939, an estimated 8.6 million ethnicGermans lived outside the German Reich, mostly in Eastern Europe and the SovietUnion. Today, an estimated three to 10 million remain, with most estimates inthe three to four million range. Ethnic Germans (Aussiedler) living in the ex-USSR have the right to enterGermany, but the burden of proof is on them to prove that they are in factdescendants of Germans settlers. Until 1990, ethnic Germans could move toGermany and then prove that their ancestry allowed them to stay. However, whenin 1990 almost 400,000 such people arrived, fears of a mass influx arose andprocedures were changed to require ethnic Germans to prove their ancestrybefore emigrating, and the maximum number allowed to move to Germany was set at220,000 per year. Today, most Aussiedler are from Russian and Kazakstan. They arrive inGermany as Russian and Kazak citizens, and they are permitted to keep theirRussian and Kazak citizenship even after they become German citizens. Somehave returned to Russia and Kazakhstan. Since World War II, Germany has had a policy of accepting Jews from theUSSR/ex-USSR on the ground that the destruction of European Jewry by Germanyimposed a duty to take in Jews suffering discrimination. Recently, Germany'sDevelopment Minister suggested that Germany may no longer need to accept Jewsfrom the ex-USSR, since conditions there have improved for them. Some 45,000 Jews, and 1.5 million ethnic Germans, have migrated to Germanysince 1990. Data on Foreigners. There were about five million foreigners amongthe 79 million residents of united Germany on October 3, 1990, and all but100,000 of them were in what was West Germany. Data on foreigners in Germanyhas since 1959 come from a central register--Auslaenderzentralregister orAZR--that collects data from the local authorities with whom residents registerwhen moving in or out of a city. Some foreigners are believed to have left Germany without de-registering,so the seven million registered foreigners in the AZR in December 1995 may bean overestimate by several hundred thousand. About half of the foreigners in Germany in 1995 had lived in the countryfor 10 years or more, and half of these had lived in Germany for 20 or moreyears. Some 2.5 million foreigners settled in Germany between 1988 and1993. Foreigners are about nine percent of Germany's residents, and theirproportion is rising, mainly through natural increase. About 100,000 or 12percent of the 800,000 births in Germany each year are "foreignchildren." Turks are the largest group of foreigners--the two million Turks are about28 percent of all foreigners in Germany, followed by 1.3 million persons fromex-Yugoslavia, 19 percent; 572,000 Italians, eight percent; 356,000 Greeks,five percent; and 263,000 Poles, four percent. About one-fourth of theforeigners in Germany come from one of the other 14 EU member nations. There were two million asylum-related foreigners living in Germany in 1993,and 1.75 million in 1994. Of the asylum-related foreigners living in Germanyin 1994, only 267,000 were recognized refugees and their families. Another650,000 were "de facto" refugees, 415,000 had pending asylum applications, and350,000 had a temporary safe-haven status in Germany, mostly because of troubleat home. About three-fourths of all foreigners lived in four of Germany's 16 statesin 1994. North Rhine-Westphalia had 1.9 million foreign residents,Baden-Wuerttemberg had 1.2 million, Bavaria had 1.1 million, and Hesse had790,000 residents. Bosnians. There are 320,000 Bosnians in Germany, 86,000 in Sweden,80,000 in Austria, 36,000 in Italy, 28,000 in Denmark, 25,000 in Switzerland,18,000 in Norway, and 15,000 in France. Starting on October 1, 1996, Bosnians in Germany are supposed to return toBosnia, but it now appears that this will be difficult to accomplish. First, the Dayton agreement says that Bosnians have the right to return totheir homes, but up to half of the Bosnians in Germany are Muslims from areasnow under Serbian control. Second, the Bosnian government is demanding thatyoung men who avoided military service pay DM1,000 to DM10,000 in fines, whichmay discourage returns. Off-the-record, German officials complain that they do not want theircountry to be forced into paying three times for Bosnia's civil war--first tocare for Bosnians in Germany, second in contributions to the EU-reconstructionfund, and third in special payments to promote the return of Bosnians inGermany. Vietnamese. On July 5, Germany announced that Vietnam had approvedthe return of 3,000 Vietnamese. Germany submits the names of persons to bereturned, and Vietnam checks to be sure that they are Vietnamese. There is notyet a timetable for the repatriation process. Meanwhile, an article in Reuters said that many illegal Vietnamese want toleave the cigarette-selling underworld of Berlin to return home. Some say theyfear arrest, others worry about the gangs that control the smuggling ofcigarettes. Asylum. In June 1996, there were 8,234 asylum applications, thesmallest number since June 1989. About seven percent of the applicationshandled in June 1996 resulted in a foreigner receiving asylum in Germany, andanother five percent of the foreigners were allowed to stay temporarily inGermany--88 percent of the applications were rejected. In June 1996, it was reported that 74 of Germany's 31,500 Catholic andProtestant churches had become sanctuaries for 230 foreigners, half children,whom the government was seeking to deport. In the "14 steps to the new asylum law," a leading journalist, HeribertPrantl, reviews the history leading up to the narrowing of the right to asylumin Germany. Prantl began with Article 16 of the German Basic Law--persons whoare politically persecuted can obtain asylum--and then noted that, in the guestworker era, there were few asylum applications--5,595 in 1973. As the numberof asylum applicants climbed to 108,000 in 1980, there was talk of asylumreform, but it was relatively easy to reduce the number of applicants byrequiring Turks, who were half of the applicants, to obtain visas before comingto Germany. In 1990, there were 193,000 asylum applications, and Germans began to saythat Germany had too many problems to deal with the burdens of asylum seekers.In 1991, attacks on foreigners began first at Hoyerswerda and Huenxe. Thosewho opposed changing the constitution in a manner that restricted asylum saidthat Germany should not give in to anti-foreigner sentiment stimulated by theradical right. In the spring of 1991, the SPD proposed an immigration law with annualquotas. Because Social Democrats have an historically based interest and sympathyfor people in need of refuge, the SPD was slow to accept the need for a changein the asylum law. The ruling CDU-CSU-FDP coalition wanted to amend theconstitution, but the SPD argued that procedural changes could resolve theissue. In August 1992, foreigners were attacked in Rostock, and the SPD, in afall 1992 meeting, agreed that the constitution must be amended in a mannerthat reduced the number of asylum applicants living in Germany. On May 29, 1993, five Turks were killed in an arson attack on their home inSolingen. On May 26, 1993, the German Parliament approved the asylum reform by a voteof 521 to 132--the individual right to asylum remained in the German Basic Law,but access to asylum in Germany was limited by the "third safe country"clause-- asylum applicants were expected to apply for asylum in the first safecountry they entered. Germany is surrounded by safe countries. Thus, the burden of proof is verygreat for applicants from countries recognized as generally safe. Airportrules permit an accelerated hearing on applications from persons arrivingwithout documents at German airports. If they fail the test, they can be sentback immediately. The new asylum law went into effect on July 1, 1993, and was approved bythe German constitutional court on May 14, 1996. Germany spent a record DM15billion on asylum seekers in 1992; in 1995, the cost of operating the asylumsystem was about DM8 billion. About 2.3 million of Germany's 36 million households received welfareassistance at the end of 1994, including 450,000 foreigners. The number offoreigners receiving welfare payments dropped by 200,000 between 1993 and 1994because of changes effective July 1, 1993 that prevented many asylum applicantsfrom receiving cash assistance. Residence and Work Permits. All foreign residents need anAufenhaltsgenehmigung, or residence permit. There are four majortypes--Aufenthaltsbefugnis, or Duldung (toleration) to stay in Germany grantedfor humanitarian reasons, a status that can be revoked at any time;Aufenthaltsbewilligung, or the right to stay in Germany for a specific purpose,such as to study; Aufenthaltserlaubnis, or permission to stay, usually for oneyear; and, Aufenthaltsberechtigung, or permanent residence status. Most foreigners must live in Germany one year before obtaining a workpermit, and most foreigners initially obtain one- to- three year work permits(allgemeine Arbeitserlaubnis) after the local employment office certifies thatthere are no unemployed local workers available to fill the job for which theforeigner is seeking permission to fill. The work permits usually restrict a foreign worker to a specific job with anamed employer. Other work permits restrict the localities, industries andoccupations in which the permit-holder may work. Most foreigners must live inGermany for at least eight years before they can be self-employed. Work permits can also be unlimited, or "unbefristet," in time, which meansthat the foreigner is allowed to work in Germany as long as she has a validresidence permit, and special, or "sonder," which means that the foreigner canwork for any employer and in any job without the labor office first certifyingthat unemployed workers are not already available. In 1994, some 2.2 million foreign workers were employed and enrolled in theGerman social security system, including 605,000 Turks, 420,000 from formerYugoslavia, and 203,000 Italians. Another 400,000 foreign workers wereunemployed, including 21 percent of the Turkish workers, and 18 percent of theItalian workers. Most of these employed foreign workers are employed inmanufacturing (884,000) or services (573,000). In 1994, an average 16 percentof foreign workers were unemployed, versus nine percent of all workers inGermany. Labor Market. In mid-June, the German construction employersassociation withdrew from the umbrella German employers' association to protestthe umbrella association's failure to approve a minimum wage for all workers onconstruction sites in Germany. The construction employers wanted the minimumwage rule to discourage the employment of an estimated 150,000 cheaper British,Irish, and Portuguese workers; the employers' association was afraid of settinga precedent for an industry-wide minimum wage. Many German construction firms have gone bankrupt, and more bankruptciesare feared. There are about 200,000 non-German EU workers employed in the Germanconstruction industry. In a critical report, the German newspaper DerTagespiegel, on July 1 reported that many of the Poles working legally onGerman construction sites under Werkvertraege (subcontracting arrangementsbetween German general contractors and foreign subcontractors) do not haveworkers' compensation insurance--if they are injured on the job, they aredismissed, so that they lose their right to work in Germany, and they wind upbeing responsible for their hospital bills. According to some Polish workers, contracts are signed in Poland justbefore the workers' departure for Berlin, so that the workers are unaware oftheir rights. Many Werkvertrag workers are expected to work 60 hours per week;hourly wages range from DM6 to 7, far less than the DM15.73 minimum for a WestGerman construction worker, and DM11.86 in the East, but far more than Polishwages, which average about DM350 monthly or DM2 per hour. According to worker advocates, if the foreign workers honestly report theirlong hours and low wages during inspections, they are fired, and thus losetheir work permits. About 22,000 Polish workers were working in mid-1996 under Werkvertraege,half of them in construction. There are another 7,000 Hungarian workersemployed in Germany under Werkvertraege, 5,900 Turks, 5,100 Croats, 4,200Romanians, 2,900 Czechs, 1,700 Bulgarians, 1,600 Slovakians, and 1,000Bosnians. The German union federation DGB estimates that, for every legal workeremployed under a Werkvertrag, there are another six to 10 illegal foreignworkers. In addition, foreigners may enter Germany to work seasonally--defined as astay in Germany of up to 90 days. Some 140,000 Polish seasonal workers wereemployed in Germany in 1995. An estimated 550,000 residents of the former East Germany commuted to jobsin the former West Germany (340,000) or West Berlin (210,000) in November 1994,down from 600,000 in November 1993, but still almost three times more than inNovember 1990. The commuting workers have average earnings of DM2,300 permonth, versus DM2,000 for non-commuters. About 30 percent of the commuterslive in what was East Berlin. There seems to be considerable movement into and out of commuter status. In1994, 150,000 former East German residents stopped commuting, and 100,000 begancommuting. About one in seven East German commuters is employed in West Germanconstruction. On July 1, 1996, 236,000 east German manufacturing workers began to receivethe same wages as their west German colleagues. However, workers in the eastwill continue to work 39 hours each week, four hours longer than in thewest. A recent report from the Hessen state labor office indicates that most ofthe jobs in the underground economy (Schwarzarbeit) are filled by Germancitizens, not foreigners. There are an estimated 2.6 million unregistered jobs in Germany. Unionsblame high taxes and living costs for increased Schwarzarbeit. Berlin. The 400,000 foreigners in Berlin are about 11 percent ofthe city's 3.5 million residents. The foreigners include 138,000 Turks, 70,000persons from ex-Yugoslavia, 26,000 Poles, and 46,000 residents from other EUcountries. Berlin has more foreigners than any other German city. According to one projection, Berlin will grow slowly to 3.8 millionresidents by the year 2010, but the number of foreigners will increase faster,to 575,000, and amount to 15 percent of Berlin's population. Most of Berlin's foreigners are in the former West Berlin--350,000 or 90percent--making foreigners 16 percent of the former West Berlin's population.Most of the foreigners live in so-called Altbaugebieten (neighborhoods of oldapartment buildings) in a few sections of West Berlin--Kreuzberg (33 percentforeigners), Neuklln, and Wedding (27 percent). Among major German cities, Frankfurt has the highest percentage offoreigners, 192,000 or 28 percent; followed by Stuttgart with 142,000 or 23percent; Munich with 287,000 or 22 percent; and Cologne with 187,000 or 18percent. In 1995, for the first time, more than half the applicants for publichousing in Frankfurt were foreigners. The Frankfurt housing office is requiredto provide two apartments to Germans for each apartment awarded toforeigners--the foreigners' quota of scarce public housing is 30percent. Turks in Berlin have an unemployment rate that is twice the rate for Germannationals. In Berlin and surrounding Brandenburg, a special task force (GemeinsameErmittlungsgruppe Schwarzarbeit or GES) that includes representatives of thepolice, labor department, tax office, health authorities, and customs wasestablished in 1994 to check employers for unauthorized foreign workers andother violations in the underground labor market. About 9,300 persons werefined in 955 businesses, including 3,400 foreigners. "Unreported Second Jobs Reach Record Level in Germany," This Week inGermany, July 12, 1996. "Vietnam 'Cigarette Mafia' peddlers want to go home,Reuters, July 5, 1996. Adrian Edwards, "Germany reports progress in Vietnamrepatriation," Reuters, July 5, 1996. "Lowest numbers of asylum-seekers inGermany since 1989," Agence France Presse, July 4, 1996. Claus-Dieter Steyer,"Die Sklaven von nebenan," Der Tagespiegel, July 1, 1996. Alexander Zeiger,"Asyl in Deutschland: Todesangst am Flughafen," Sueddeutsche Zeitung, June 13,1996. Heribert Prantl, "Asylurteil des Bundesverfassungsgerichts Verfolgtemuessen sehen, wo sie bleiben. Die vierzehn Schritte bis zum 14. Mai 1996,"Sueddeutsche Zeitung, May 11, 1996. Ecos. 1995. Berlin: Zuwanderung,gesellschaftliche Probleme, politische Ansaetze. December. _______________________________ ForeignWorkers in/a>EasternEurope As European countries such as Germany reduce illegal immigration and accessto asylum, migrants from Asia and Africa are being stranded in Eastern Europe.An estimated 20,000 to 40,000 Sudanese, Bangladeshis, Sri Lankans, Kurds andother foreigners are in Romania--35,000 foreigners have been caught trying tocross Romania's borders illegally since 1990. Most of the foreigners are men trying to reach Germany and work--wages inRomania average only about $100 per month. However, Romania complains that itcannot afford to repatriate the foreigners whom it apprehends, since the costof flying an illegal immigrant home is often $5,000, while Romania spends only$1,000 per year to detain illegal immigrants. The Czech Republic has 10.3 million residents, and five million workers,including 160,000 foreign residents, and 150,000 foreign workers. The 112,000foreign workers with work permits include 60,000 from Slovakia, 27,000 fromUkraine, and 12,000 from Poland--there are also 37,000 "independent" foreignworkers in the Czech republic--the largest group are 7,700 Vietnamese. The number of foreigners in the Czech Republic with permanent or long-termresidence permits has risen almost fivefold in the past five years. In 1995,6,674 foreigners were granted permanent residence--31 percent were Poles. In neighboring Poland, there are believed to be 50,000 to 200,000foreigners illegally working, and only 11,000 legal foreign workers. In 1995,4,000 foreigners applied for permanent residence in Poland. Poland's economy is booming--the economy expanded by seven percent in1995--and unemployment, at 14 percent, is down from a peak 16 percent. Over 35 percent of all work permits for foreigners in Poland went tomanagers in 1995, and another 15 percent to teachers and trainers. Accordingto reports, Poland welcomes foreign language teachers, but applications forother professionals are scrutinized carefully. The Polish Employment Department has only 16 inspectors for the entireWarsaw district, making it difficult to locate illegal foreign workers. Polishemployers can be fined zl 5,000 ($1,850) for each undocumented worker, but mostforeign workers refuse to fill out the appropriate paper work and simplydisappear, according to department officials. Since July 1995, the enforcement department has found only 100 illegalworkers. After being detected, it is estimated that half of the illegalworkers return to their home countries, 25 percent find other jobs, and 25percent apply for work permits to make themselves legal workers. In 1995, 841 foreigners sought asylum in Poland, and 600 requested asylum nthe first five months of 1996. About 20 percent of those who request asylum inPoland are permitted to stay, versus less than five percent in Germany. Bogdan Preda, "Refugees seeking new lives in west are stranded in EasternEurope," Associated Press, July 21, 1996. "Number of Long-Term ForeignResidents on the Rise," CTK National News Wire, July 8, 1996. TadeuszMarkiewicz, "Foreign Workers: The American Dream...In Poland," Warsaw Voice,June 30, 1996. _______________________________ AsylumSeekers in theNetherlands Since January 1995, there have been over 80 suicide attempts, 20 of themsuccessful, by asylum seekers in the Netherlands. The European refugeeorganization, Participating Refugees in Europe, says that the suicides show howheavily the mental strain weighs on refugees in uncertain status. The Netherlands' justice state secretary reported that of the 141 asylumseekers who were ordered to a repatriation center in a northern province, 65did not show up. Of the 76 who did register at the center, 27 disappearedshortly afterwards. The center prepares asylum seekers whose applications havebeen processed and rejected for repatriation. Many have no identity papers. On June 28, the Netherlands Justice Minister announced new measures toprevent smugglers from profiting from smuggling asylum seekers into thecountry. About 75 percent of the asylum seekers arriving in the Netherlandshave paid a travel agent between 5,000 to 30,000 guilders. The government plans to raise the current prison sentence for humansmuggling from one to four years, and impose fines on airlines and othertransport companies that bring foreigners without the proper documentation intothe country. Currently, 60 percent of asylum seekers have false or nodocuments. "Over 80 Suicide Attempts by Asylum Seekers since 1995," ANP English NewsBulletin, July 16, 1996. "Nearly half failed asylum Seekers disappear beforerepatriation," ANP English News Bulletin, July 15, 1996. "Govt to Clamp Downon 'Frontier Runners,'" ANP English News Bulletin, July 1, 1996. _______________________________ ASIA _______________________________ ThailandOffersAmnesty The Thai Cabinet approved new regulations that will allow currently illegalworkers from Myanmar, Laos and Cambodia who entered Thailand before June 25,1996 to become legal migrant workers for two years in two sectors--waterwaystransportation and manufacturing. Thai employers will be allowed to have up to50 percent foreigners in their work forces. Under Thailand's 1978 Foreigners' Work Act, illegal foreign workers can beemployed in Thailand after they are registered. The foreign workers receive acard similar to the one given to workers awaiting deportation. Thai employers with illegal immigrant workers must register them as"illegal workers" with the local police, bail them out, and then register themat the provincial labor office between July 1996 and June 1997. The foreignworkers with permits are to be paid the same wages, and have the sameprotections, as Thai workers. All are expected to leave Thailand after twoyears. The regulations apply to an estimated 700,000 illegal immigrant workers in39 of Thailand's 76 provinces--Kanchanaburi, Krabi, Kamphaeng Phet, Khon Kaen,Chanthaburi, Chachoengsao, Chon Buri, Chiang Rai, Chiang Mai, Chumphon, Tak,Trat, Trang, Nakhon Pathom, Nakhon Sawan, Nakhon Ratchasima, Nakhon SiThammarat, Narathiwat, Prachuab Khiri Khan, Pattani, Phangnga, Ayutthaya,Phetchaburi, Phitsanulok, Phuket, Mae Hong Son, Ratchaburi, Rayong, Ranong, LopBuri, Suphan Buri, Samut Prakan, Samut Sakhon, Samut Songkhram, Surat Thani,Songkhla, Satun, Uthai Thani, and Bangkok. As soon as the amnesty was announced, several agents began advertising inBurma, offering to help workers find jobs in Thailand. The Thai Labor Congress threatened a nationwide strike if the governmentdid not reverse its plans to legalize foreign workers. The Labor Congress saidthat the amnesty will result in hundreds of thousands of Thai workers losingtheir jobs, and lead to social problems. The Thai Chamber of Commerce disagreed, saying that giving illegalimmigrants work permits could ease the country's labor shortage, and not affectlocal workers, because the foreigners only took jobs that Thais refuse. Thaiemployers argue that the country is short 1.4 million workers. The Thaigovernment denied it had plans to allow employers to recruit additionalunskilled foreign workers. A National Security Council official expressed worries that immigrationcould threaten Thailand's national security. One official claimed thatimmigrants destroyed natural resources along the border, raised crime andprostitution rates, and created pockets of minorities, all while carryingmalaria and elephantiasis. The National Security Council plans to force all illegal workers out of thecountry by 1998. The NSC hopes that stepped up border enforcement andsanctions to be place within the next three months, and reduce illegal entry.The Task Force of Commerce and Industry Council has recommended to the Thaigovernment that illegal immigrants pay a 10,000 baht surety to discourage themfrom settling in urban areas. Thai migrant workers returning home from the Middle East are buying "cheapgold" in Dubai markets as the most convenient way to bring back their earnings,competition keeps margins on gold at two to three percent. South Africankrugerrands are then sold by migrants in Bangkok. Thailand and Laos have been unable to agree on the fate of about 2,000Laotian refugees in Thailand who do not meet US resettlement criteria.Thailand wants to forcibly deport the Laotians, but the Laotian government hasruled out deportation, while Thailand threatens to stop sheltering and feedingthe Laotians. Over 1,000 illegal Cambodian immigrants being detained in Thailand will bereturned to Cambodia by bus on June 17. "Thailand allows laborers from neighboring countries," Xinhua News Agency,July 16, 1996. "Thailand: Chamber Chairman Says Thais Won't be Affected,"Bangkok Post, July 12, 1996. "Thai union protests legalizing foreign labor,"Xinhua News Agency, July 8, 1996. "Thailand, Laos differ on refugeedeportation," Xinhua News Agency, June 20, 1996. "Thailand to deport illegalCambodian entrants," Xinhua News Agency, June 4, 1996. "Thailand: Resolution onIllegal Labour 'Poses Security Risk,'" Bangkok Post, July 8, 1996. Errol deSilva, "Dubai: Thai Workers Cash in on Dubai Goldmine," Bangkok Post, July 8,1996. Charoen Kittikanya, "NCS Denies change on Foreign Labour," Bangkok Post,July 8, 1996. _______________________________ Campsfor VietnameseClose On June 30, 1996, most of the camps for boat people from Vietnam wereclosed, ending a 20-year saga--the camps were originally supposed to be closedin 1995. However, there are still about 31,000 Vietnamese in camps, including18,000 in Hong Kong. Hong Kong has until June 30, 1997 to return theVietnamese in its camps. After the Vietnam war ended in 1975, some 1.5 million people fled Vietnam,Cambodia and Laos, including 1.2 million who were resettled in the US. ManyVietnamese fled Vietnam in small boats, and wound up in camps in nearbycountries. Of those who fled Vietnam, some 760,000 were resettled in thirdcountries. Under the Comprehensive Plan of Action adopted in 1989, persons who lefttheir countries of citizenship after March 14, 1989 were no longer presumed tobe refugees fleeing political persecution. Instead, they were housed in camps,and interviewed by countries willing to resettle them to determine if they wereeconomic or political refugees. About 80,000 Vietnamese were repatriated since1989; most agreed to return voluntarily with a $240 integration grant and $50in pocket money from the UNHCR. The UN High Commission for Refugees has spent $350 million on theVietnamese in the camps since 1989. Some of the Vietnamese have been in camps for seven to 10 years, and theymust return to Vietnam in order to apply to join families in the US, Canada,and Australia. The Philippine government will allow 1,800 Vietnamese asylum-seekers whohave been living for eight years in a detention camp to remain in thePhilippines. The Center for Assistance to Displaced People has promised tocare for and help resettle those who do not want to return to Vietnam. TheCatholic Church in the Philippines argued strongly against forcedrepatriation. It is estimated that half of the detained asylum-seekers reportedly wouldrather return to Vietnam than remain in the Philippines. Vietnam receives an estimated $600 million annually in remittances fromVietnamese abroad. However, overseas Vietnamese, known as Viet Kieu, haveinvested little in Vietnam--they want the government to deal with the return ofproperty confiscated after 1975 when North Vietnamese forces took control ofSaigon, prompting an exodus of some two million people. Vietnam has denied that it will restrict visas for travel to the country.Visitors to Hanoi's embassies and consulates around the world reported thatvisas were not being given out for travel to Vietnam in June. The halting ofvisas coincides with the Eighth Communist Party congress in Vietnam. In 1991,during the last party Congress, some foreigners were asked to leave thecountry. About 6,000 Laotians are still registered as refugees in Thailand with theUNHCR, despite the resettlement of more than 300,000. Almost 260,000Cambodians were resettled or repatriated before elections held in Cambodia in1993. There are believed to be about 100 Vietnamese and 300 Chinese workinglegally in Laos, and hundreds more illegal Vietnamese. On December 2, 1995,Laos launched a major crackdown on illegal workers--mostly Vietnamese. The minimum wage in Laos is 2,000 kip per day, but Vietnamese willreportedly work for 1,000 kip. Lily Dizon, "Asia: Philippine Opens Door and Hope to Vietnamese Migrants,"Los Angeles Times, July 13, 1996. "Hanoi says door still open to foreigners,"Reuters, June 6, 1996. _______________________________ FemaleMigrants/a>in Asia The International Labor Office (ILO) estimates there are at least 1.5million female workers from Asia employed outside their country of citizenship,most of whom work as domestic servants. There are an estimated 700,000 illegalfemale migrants. An estimated 320,000 Asian women leave their country each year for jobs,mostly to the Middle East and Singapore and Hong Kong. Most of the women leaveSri Lanka, the Philippines, Indonesia, Thailand and India. Women are the majority of workers leaving many of these countries. About69 percent of Sri Lanka's migrants, 65 percent of Indonesia's migrants, and 55percent of Filipino migrants, including 500,000 maids, are women. There are believed to be at least 150,000 maids in Hong Kong, including100,000 Filipinas employed legally. Only Egypt, Morocco, the Philippines, Seychelles, Chile, Mexico and SriLanka have signed the International Convention on the Protection of the Rightsof Migrant Workers and their Families, unanimously approved in 1990 by the UNGeneral Assembly. The convention must be ratified by 20 countries beforecoming into force. A UN expert group meeting on Violence against Women Migrant Workers inManila in May 1996 concluded with a call for governments supplying or employingmigrant labor to sign agreements that provide better protection for womenworkers against abuse and exploitation. Sending countries have had little success preventing their nationals fromworking in particular countries, or setting minimum wages and other conditionsfor them. Many countries specifically exclude domestic work from their laborlaws. The Philippines announced that Filipina maids in Singapore could give theirpassports to their employers for safekeeping, reversing an earlier decision tohave the maids, and not their employers, hold onto their passports. Singaporeemployers argued that they needed to hold the maids passports to safeguardtheir S$2000 bond. On May 13, 1996, the Philippines announced new guidelines for Filipinamaids in Singapore, including a minimum monthly salary of at least $300 and aworkday of 16 hours or less. The going salary for maids in Singapore is $210per month. Singapore employers must in addition pay a $231 per monthgovernment tax for each foreign maid they employ. The Philippine government reported that the Migrant Workers and OverseasFilipinos Act of 1995 resulted in a 60 percent drop in illegal recruitment inthe Philippines. Some Philippine labor officials are recommending that thegovernment redirect overseas workers from Hong Kong to Spain--there are about100,000 Filipinos in Hong Kong, and 90,000 in Spain. Monthly wages average$1,200 in Spain, versus $700 in Hong Kong. The Philippines has been exporting workers since 1974, when then PresidentFerdinand Marcos sent workers abroad to earn hard currency and reduceunemployment. "Philippine official says send workers from Hong Kong to Spain," DeutschePresse-Agentur, July 9, 1996. Johanna Son, "Women migrants fall through hugeholes in protection net," Inter Press Service, June 24, 1996. _______________________________ Japan:Foreign Residents, OppositionUp The Japanese Justice Ministry announced on July 7 that the number offoreign residents registered in Japan reached a record high of 1.36 million in1995, up 0.6 percent from a year earlier. Nearly 70 percent of all theforeigners registered are Asian, with Koreans composing the largest share,followed by Chinese, Brazilians and Filipinos. A survey conducted by the daily newspaper Yomiuri Shimbun on June 22 and23, 1996, found that a growing number of Japanese want their country to reducethe number of foreign workers because of the economic situation. Only 58percent of the respondents said Japan should accept foreign workers, down 14percentage points from a similar poll in May 1991. Another 37 percent, said Japan should never accept foreign workers, up 15percent from the May 1991 poll. In a July raid on an aluminum building materials maker, 250 investigatorsand police were deployed to detain 75 Japanese-Peruvians who were believed tohave stayed too long in Japan. "Foreign Residents in Japan hit a Record 1.36 million," Jiji Press TickerService, July 8, 1996. "Growing number of Japanese want fewer foreign workers:poll," Agence France Presse, July 2, 1996./a> _______________________________ OTHER _______________________________ AustraliaCuts Immigration 10Percent The Australian government announced the first week of July that it plans tocut 1996/1997 non-humanitarian immigration by 10 percent, to 74,000 peryear. The Australian government also proposed admitting 700 family reunionmigrants if they agree to settle in specially designated areas. The plan wouldrequire migrants to pay a A$30,000 bond which would be forfeited if they movedto Sydney, Melbourne and parts of Queensland, where many migrants have settledin the past. Approximately 45 percent of Australia's new migrants now settlein Sydney. The proposed program would also impose a two-year waiting period on newmigrants applying for Social Security benefits, saving the government $600million over three years. In addition, migrants would be required to pass anEnglish language test. Migrants paying the bond will be able to immigrate quicker. An additional500 places would be set aside for a trial program to match up skilled migrantswith employers in regional Australia. The government said that the bond systemwould apply to a new category of 1,200 visas that is being developed. Ethnic groups said the new program violated the UN Convention on HumanRights and harkened back to the past "white Australia" policies. The Asiancommunity is concerned that the English language skills required could reducethe number of immigrants from non-English-speaking countries. The Immigration Restriction Act of 1901 excluded non-European migrantsduring Australia's gold rush, and lasted for 70 years. The 20,000 Chinese students who were in Australia during the TiananmenSquare crackdown on June 4, 1989 were give Australian passports, and they havenow become very desirable marriage partners for Chinese in China. Some havereturned to China for visits, and been offered up to $30,000 for a marriage ofconvenience that would enable their "spouse" to migrate to Australian. Authorities say it is hard to determine how many bogus marriages haveoccurred, but they note that the number of applications for spouse visas hasballooned by more than 30 percent in the past 12 months. Australia plans toadmit up to 50,500 members of settled residents' families in 1995-96, most ofthem spouses and fiancees. Almost half of the immigration prosecutions in the first half of 1996involved immigration marriage fraud. In 1994-95, Australian authoritiesrejected 1057 applications for marriage visas on the grounds that therelationships were not genuine. In July, 1996, a Sydney-based migration agent was sentenced to 18 monthsjail and fined $283,200 for arranging bogus marriages. The agents introducevisiting Chinese to Australians, then arrange the marriage and completeimmigration forms for a fee of up to $16,000. Surinder Singh, "New Aussie immigration plan comes under fire," StraitsTimes, July 10, 1996. "Bonds for Migrants," Sydney Morning Herald, July 10,1996. Gareth Boreham and Niki Savva, "Premier Says Migrant Plan Unfair forSkilled," The Age (Melbourne), July 9, 1996. Julie Delvecchio and StephenHutcheon, "China: Marrying into Australia," Sydney Morning Herald, July 6,1996. Surinder Singh, "Aussie plan for migrants who don't mind the bush,"Straits Times, July 9, 1996. Michael Millett, "Carr Backs Migrant Bond," SydneyMorning Herald, July 9, 1996. Michael Dwyer, "Migrants to Lose Bonds if TheyDon't Leave," Australian Financial Review, July 8, 1996. "Asian groups expressconcern about immigration cutbacks, Agence France Presse, July 4, 1996. _______________________________ PalestiniansLose Israeli Jobs Until 1994, some 70,000 residents of Gaza's one million residents, one ofthe world's most densely populated places, commuted daily to jobs in Israel.However, several bombings led Israel to reduce the number of daily commuters to20,000, and to close the border for 11 of the past 24 months, including thetime since February 25, 1996. According to UN estimates, Gaza residents lose $5 to $6 million daily whenthe border is closed, or about $75 per worker per day, including the multipliereffects of Gaza workers spending the $20 to $40 per day that they typicallyearned in Israeli fields and construction sites. Some Gaza workers said that,even after paying $300 bribes for work permits, being employed in Israel stillgenerated higher earnings than employment in Gaza. Instead of Palestinians, Israel is importing Romanian, Thai, and otherforeign workers. There are about 100,000 legal foreign workers in Israel, andan estimated 100,000 illegal foreign workers. A recent police report indicates that the Romanian, Thai and other foreignworkers imported to work in Israel have contributed to a steady rise inviolence, alcoholism, prostitution and crime. The Romanian Tourism Minister charged that Romanian workers are beingmistreated while they are in Israel. Romanians, he said, receive half thesalary of Israelis performing similar jobs and have intolerable livingconditions. Dan Perry, "Historical Links in Middle East Draw Thousand of Israelis toRomani," Los Angeles Times, July 7, 1996. Serge Schmemann, "In Gaza Strip,Palestinians Mainly Want Their Jobs in Israel Back, International HeraldTribune, July 10, 1996. Haim Shapiro, "Israel urged to improve foreignworker's conditions," Jerusalem Post, July 1, 1996. _______________________________ Lebanon'sForeignWorkers The Arab Labor Organization announced on July 9 that there are 1.25 to 2.25million foreign workers in Lebanon, a country of 3.8 million. The ALO did notrelease the countries of origin of the foreign workers, but there have beencomplaints by Lebanese that their jobs have been taken by Syrians. Local press reports indicate that there may be between one to three millionSyrians in Lebanon. The ALO says that many of the foreign workers findunofficial temporary employment on building sites or as seasonal agriculturalworkers, and do not pay taxes. The Lebanese president recently complained that the Lebanese were "lazy,"abandoning their farms for "elegant" jobs in the city. "Lebanon has 2.25 million foreign workers," Xinhua News Agency, July 9,1996. "Foreign workers in Lebanon total 1.25 million: Arab League," AgenceFrance Presse, July 9, 1996. _______________________________ RESOURCES _______________________________ US-Mexican Cooperation onImmigration?/a> A June 14-15 conference organized by Frank D. Bean, Rodolofo de la Garza,Bryan Roberts, and Sidney Weintraub and the University of Texas at Austin askedwhat the US and Mexico might do to respond to the apparent US "crisis" overespecially illegal Mexican migration to the US. Three background facts seem important: 1. The number of especially illegal Mexican immigrants seems to beincreasing despite new Border Patrol operations meant to discourage illegalentrants, or at least push them to attempt entry in areas where apprehension iseasier. The number of Mexican-born persons in the US increased by 400,000between March 1994 and March 1995, a period in which legal immigration wasabout 100,000. By one calculation, at least 200,000 Mexicans become illegalresidents each year--160,000 who entered without inspection, and 40,000 whooverstayed visas. 2. Mexico is in the midst of an economic crisis that has been accompaniedby a jump in unemployment and falling real wages, which is one reason why itappears that over half of the unauthorized Mexican immigrants headed for the UScome from Mexico City. At the same time, beatings of Mexican nationals in theUS, and crashes involving smugglers, have made the Mexican government verysensitive to the treatment of some Mexican nationals in the US. 3. There was much praise for the consultations on migration issues thathave already taken place, and hopes for more such discussions. However, thereseemed to be less consensus that the US and Mexico could "negotiate" a solutionto the migration crisis. For example, there was no agreement on what theultimate aim of any bilateral migration negotiation would be, and what, ifanything, each side would "give up" to persuade the other side to agree to itsposition. Most US participants were "friends of Mexico," and most argued that Mexicomust "do more" to help prevent unauthorized Mexican migration from souring theUS-Mexican partnership. Many disagreed with the "official" Mexican position onillegal migration to the US: "the Mexican constitution prohibits the Mexicangovernment from preventing exits, and Mexico respects the right of the US tocontrol its borders. Mexico only asks that the US respect the human rights ofall persons within its borders." Many US and Mexican participants urged Mexico to, for example, reconsiderits policy of using police to help prevent criminals from preying on aliens,but not to prevent the exit of the aliens who are the prey of the criminals.Some Mexicans countered that the US should do more to offset "anti-Mexicanhysteria" in the US by educating the public about the "facts," although therewas not always agreement on what the facts are. Perhaps the most realistic perspective on what appears to be a migrationhump--a temporary increase in migration from Mexico--is that it is in theinterest of both Mexico and the US to stick with Mexico's current stabilizationpolicy, and hope that it will soon accelerate Mexican economic growth enough toencourage Mexicans to stay home. It was widely agreed that the current Mexicanstabilization policy is beginning to restore economic and job growth, and thatit would be best to stay the course rather than change policies. Among the other highlights of the conference: * Mexico's population growth rate has slowed sharply--for the first time,fewer babies will be born in 1996 than were born in 1995. However, there willcontinue to be about 1.5 million Mexicans turning 16 every year for the nextdecade. * Control over illegal immigration can facilitate legal immigration, bothat the border, and in terms of "closing the back door to keep the front dooropen." * Just as wage gaps do not have to disappear to eliminate incentives forMexico-US migration, so illegal immigration over the southern border maypersist, but its level must be reduced to "tolerable levels" to minimizeadverse US reactions. * There are few models of "cooperation on migration" that might guide anyUS and Mexican negotiations. For example, the EU's integration of southernEuropean nations was brought up many times, but it was noted that e.g.,emigration from Portugal and Spain was "under control" when negotiations for EUentry began, that both countries had established social safety nets, andreceived EU assistance, to help persons displaced during economicrestructuring, and that gaps were not as wide as in North America--populationgrowth had already converged, and both Portugal and Spain had per capitaincomes that were about one-fourth of French and German levels in themid-1980s. Even so, the EU insisted on a seven-year wait before Portuguese andSpanish workers got full freedom to seek work in the EU rights. * Both US and Mexican participants may have read too much into Prop. 187 inCalifornia, and the incidents involving aliens along the border. First, it wasnoted that the NUMBER of illegal aliens in the US appears to be increasing evenas estimates of the number shrink--in the early 1980s, there was talk of 12 to20 million illegal aliens in the US, versus current estimates of 3.2 million inOctober, 1992, and increasing by 300,000 per year. Second, it was emphasizedthat Prop. 187 has not been implemented, and that efforts to reduce LEGALimmigration levels in the current Congress were not successful. * There may be more of a "class" than a country-wide worry aboutimmigrants. The perception is that unskilled immigrants are adding to thepoverty population in the US and, while they may arrive with a work ethic, andnot be eligible for welfare benefits, many are employed in high-turnover andshort-career industries, such as agriculture and meatpacking. Thus, if the UScontinues to accept large numbers of poorly educated immigrants, it seemspoised to reduce their access, as well as the access of US-born poor people, towelfare benefits. Just as US refugee policy was made in part by the budgetpolicy of reducing the period of federal reimbursement for benefits, so USimmigration policy may be set indirectly by budget policies. * Some participants thought that the best way to deal with the migrationhump would be to have a guest worker policy for Mexicans, either with the quidpro quo that Mexico help to manage emigration, or independent of Mexicancooperation on border control. It was emphasized that there would beconsiderable opposition to such a policy in the US, and that it has proven verydifficult for the US to develop mechanisms to certify labor shortages, ensurethat US employers look seriously for US workers and abide by the terms ofworker contracts, and prevent temporary workers from becoming permanentresidents. * There is plenty of blame for the current migration patterns. Forexample, the SAW program legalized about one in six adult men in rural Mexico,and the program's designers asserted that SAWs would keep their families inlow-cost-of-living Mexico, and commute to seasonal US farm jobs. However, theUS granted Mexicans immigration status, which allowed Mexicans to unify theirfamilies in the US, so that when Mexico accelerated the transformation of itsrural sector in the early 1990s, many SAWs decided to unify their families inthe US. A book that includes background papers presented at the conference will bepublished as On the Border: Mexico and U.S. Immigration Policy. 1997 Boulder:Rowan and Littlefield. For further information, contact Frank Bean at theUniversity of Texas-Austin, fdb@prc.utexas.edu WT02-B15-5IA090-000969-B027-221http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/By-Month/MN-Vol-3-96/MN_Sep_96.html 128.120.36.171 19970122205159 text/html 134021HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 20:52:52 GMTLast-Modified: Saturday, 31-Aug-96 00:30:39 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 133762 MIGRATION NEWS  MIGRATION NEWS Vol. 3, No. 9 September, 1996 Migration News summarizes the most important immigration and integrationdevelopments of the preceding month. Topics are grouped by region: North America, Europe, Asia, andOther. There are two versions of Migration News. The paper edition is about 8,000words in length, and the email version about 15,000. The purpose of Migration News is to provide a monthly summary of recentimmigration developments that can be read in 60 minutes or less. Many issuesalso contain summaries and reviews of recent research publications. Distribution is by email. If you wish to subscribe, send your emailaddress to: Migration News <migrant@primal.ucdavis.edu> Current and back issues may be accessed via Internet on the Migration NewsHome Page--- http://migration.ucdavis.edu There is no charge for an email subscription to Migration News. A paperedition is available by mail for $30 domestic and $50 foreign. Make checkspayable to UC Regents and send to: Philip Martin, Department of AgriculturalEconomics, University of California, Davis California 95616 USA. Migration News is produced with the support of the University ofCalifornia-Berkeley Center for German and European Studies, the German MarshallFund of the United States, and the Pew Charitable Trusts. Editor: Philip Martin Managing Editor: Cecily Sprouse Department of Agricultural Economics, University of California, Davis Davis CA 95616 Tel (916) 752-1530 Fax: (916) 752-5614 ISSN 1081-9916 _______________________________ NORTHAMERICA _______________________________ WelfareOverhaul and Minimum WageChanges In August, President Clinton signed into law two bills that will haveimportant effects on immigrants. The Personal Responsibility and WorkOpportunity Reconciliation Act of 1996 makes most legal immigrants ineligiblefor federally-funded welfare benefits, such as Supplemental Security Income andfood stamps. The Small Business Job Protection Act of 1996 increases theminimum wage from $4.25 to $4.75 hourly on October 1, 1996, and to $5.15 perhour on September 1, 1997. Welfare Overhaul. On August 22, 1996, President Clinton signed intolaw an 800-page welfare reform bill that makes most legal immigrants noteligible for most federal means-tested assistance programs. President Clintonsaid he was "deeply disappointed" that Congress attached provisions "that willhurt legal immigrants in America, people who work hard for their families, paytaxes, serve in our military." Clinton pledged that he would try "to remove bureaucratic roadblocks tocitizenship to all eligible, legal immigrants" to minimize the effects of theimmigrant bar. Clinton directed the INS to try to swear in all persons whoapply to become US citizens within six months of applying. Clinton vetoed the first two efforts to reform US welfare policies. Thebill that became law was approved July 18, 1996 in the House by a vote of256-170, and approved in the Senate on July 23, 1996 by a vote of 74-24. TheHouse approved the final version of the bill July 31 by a vote of 328 to 101,and the Senate approved the final version on August 1 by a vote of78-21. Immigrant Provisions. The new law prescribes the stages in whichthe exclusion of legal immigrants from federally funded assistance is to takeplace. Immigrants who arrive in the US after August 22, 1996 will be refusedbenefits from the start. Over the next 12 months, all currentrecipients--including an estimated 900,000 immigrants currently receiving foodstamps, and 500,000 receiving SSI-- must be reviewed by state authorities, and"unqualified immigrants" are to be removed from the rolls by July 1,1997. Three categories of immigrants are exceptions, and will continue to beeligible for assistance--refugees in the US less than five years, those in orveterans of the Armed Services, and non-US citizens who worked at least 10years in the US. The new welfare law permits immigrants to continue to participate in HeadStart, job training, and higher education loan programs, under the theory thatsuch programs help the immigrants to help themselves. Immigrant children mayalso continue to participate in school breakfast and lunch programs. The new federal law encourages state governments to deny assistance tolegal immigrants. Beginning January 1, 1997, states may--but neednot--eliminate cash assistance and Medicaid (health aid) for non-US citizens.States are prohibited from providing state or local assistance to "unqualifiedimmigrants" unless they pass a new law after August 1996 that explicitly grantsbenefits to e.g. unauthorized aliens. Most immigrants coming to the US under family unification preferences mustbe "sponsored" by a relative already in the US. US citizens can sponsor theirspouses, children, and parents for entry, and these relatives can enter withoutwaiting, but only rarely do we know whether the US citizen sponsors arenative-born or immigrants who became naturalized US citizens. The welfare law includes a provision similar to the provision in thepending House immigration bill that requires US sponsors of immigrants to earnan income of at least 200 percent of the poverty line, for the US sponsor andthe immigrant(s) being sponsored taken together. The INS by November 1996 isto develop a new affidavit of support form that will permit federal, state, andlocal agencies to sue sponsors who refuse to provide support for theimmigrant(s) they sponsored. Sponsors will have to keep the INS notified ofchanges of address. The GAO examined the birthplace of immigrant sponsors, and found thatUS-born persons sponsored about 77 percent of the spouses who immigrated inFY85, while naturalized US citizens sponsored 96 percent of the parents whojoined immediate families in the US. The effects of denying benefits will be considerable. Proponents of thewelfare overhaul expect that it will save about $54 billion over six years,with about 45 percent of the savings coming from denying benefits to non-UScitizens. About 1.5 million legal immigrants are now estimated to receive federalwelfare benefits. In the 1990 Census, about 3.6 percent of native-born personsreported receiving AFDC payments, as did 3.9 percent of immigrants and theirchildren. About 6.7 percent of the native-born received Food Stamps, and eightpercent of immigrants and their children did. About 40 percent of theimmigrants receiving federal welfare assistance live in California. The exclusion of immigrants from federal welfare programs may be reversed.President Clinton promised to send "corrective legislation" to Congress in 1997that would permit at least some immigrants to obtain federal welfare benefits.On August 23, Clinton ordered USDA to give states that request waivers one yearto re-certify current recipients of Food Stamps to determine their status, sothat legal immigrants are not suddenly removed from the rolls. In states thatrequest waivers, eligible legal immigrants could continue to receive foodstamps until August 22, 1997. Critics of the welfare overhaul argued that excluding immigrants fromfederal welfare programs amounted to "taxation without representation," was"unfair" to cities such as Los Angeles and New York in which immigrants areconcentrated, and provided an inappropriate reason for immigrants tonaturalize. General Provisions. The new welfare law ends the open-ended federalcommitment to provide cash payments to poor US residents by converting the Aidto Families with Dependent Children program--which currently spends $25 billionper year--into a $16 billion per year block grant program called TemporaryAssistance for Needy Families for states. States can then provide cashassistance to poor people as they wish. The new law also limits "lifetime" cash assistance to five years perfamily, requires most welfare recipients to work after two years of cashassistance, and prohibits persons convicted of drug felonies from obtainingcash benefits and food stamps. Food stamp benefits are reduced from thecurrent $0.80 per meal to $0.66 per meal. States may provide benefits for more or less than five years for up to 20percent of recipients. There are about 4.6 million adults receiving cash welfare assistance,including 650,000 who are working or in training. In 1995, about four percentof the women receiving AFDC payments were working full time. An estimated 2.3million largely unskilled and poor adults now receiving cash assistance may beadded to the US labor force. States are required to have 25 percent of the adults receiving assistanceworking at least 20 hours weekly by 1997, and 50 percent working at least 30hours weekly by 2002. The average adult receiving cash assistance haseighth-grade skills. Most current welfare-to-work programs place 20 to 40 percent of thoseenrolled in jobs. About 49 percent of welfare recipients who have been on the rolls more thanfive years are African American, 25 percent are non-Hispanic whites, 19 percentare Hispanic, and seven percent are in other racial or ethnic groups. State Reactions. State and local governments have begun to draw upplans to deal with poor immigrants who will be removed from welfare rolls astheir cases are reviewed between August 1996 and August 1997. About 40 percent of the legal immigrants receiving welfare benefits live inCalifornia, and state analysts estimate that $6 billion in federal spending fornon-immigrants will be eliminated over the next six years, including $3.7billion in SSI payments. There were 322,000 legal immigrants in Californiareceiving SSI benefits in December 1995, and an estimated 173,000 will losethem. About 43 percent of the legal immigrant SSI recipients were in LosAngeles county, followed by seven percent each in Orange and San Diegocounties, and six percent each in San Francisco and Santa Claracounties. The new welfare law may also re-kindle interest in Proposition 187, whoseimplementation was stayed in a November 1995 ruling. The welfare law includesprovisions that require the US Attorney General, by January 1998, to develop asystem for social service providers to verify immigration status. States thenhave an additional 24 months, until January 2000, to implement thisverification system. Furthermore, the new welfare law bars state and local governments fromproviding benefits to illegal aliens, and nullifies state and local laws thatprevent state and local government agencies from contacting the INS aboutpotential illegal aliens--Los Angeles has such a law. Illegal aliens arelimited to emergency health care, immunization and the treatment ofcommunicable disease, school lunches, soup kitchens and short-term disasterrelief. On August 27, 1996 California Governor Pete Wilson, in a "first step toimplementing federal welfare reform," issued an executive order instructingstate agencies and state-supported colleges and universities to determine whatassistance they provide to the estimated two million to 2.5 million illegalimmigrants in the state, and to make plans to halt those benefits. Illegal aliens currently have access to about 20 state-funded programs,including prenatal care programs (70,000 illegal alien women currently receiveabout $1,000 each in prenatal benefits each year); state assistance to familieswho adopt handicapped or developmentally disabled children; child abuseprevention programs; and supplemental disaster relief programs. In addition,the executive order is designed to prevent illegal aliens from obtainingprofessional and commercial licenses, such as those required of beauticians andlandscapers. If not halted by courts, local agencies are expected to begin implementingWilson's order within 30 to 60 days. California agencies are exploring theidea of using one statewide intake form, and forwarding welfare applications tothe INS's Systematic Alien Verification for Entitlements (SAVE) system forverification. SAVE received about four million requests from throughout the US to verifyimmigrant status in 1995. About 20 percent or 800,000 inquiries have to beresearched by hand by INS when the first computer check does not confirm thevalidity of the A-number submitted. Wilson's executive order does not affect illegal alien children attendingK-12 schools, and the access of illegal immigrants to emergency healthcare. California is grappling with whether to maintain medical care coverage forpoor immigrants. If local governments step in to maintain benefits forimmigrants that are now provided or reimbursed by the federal government, thenthe welfare bill could wind up shifting costs from federal to state and localgovernments. Some county officials in the San Joaquin Valley, where one-thirdof the population is on welfare, and unemployment rates in the winter monthstop 20 percent, think that the ban on welfare for legal immigrants, plus theneed to put long-term recipients to work, will bankrupt countygovernments. In Fresno county, an estimated 25,000 legal immigrants now receive $70million per year in federal benefits. In the Imperial Valley along the borderwith Mexico, one third of the recipients of the Aid to Families With DependentChildren program are legal immigrants. California state law obliges the 58 counties to help the poor, and theyspent $460 million to help 160,000 poor and unemployed adults throughcounty-funded General Assistance programs in 1995. About three million California residents received $2.5 billion worth ofFood Stamps in 1995, or an average $68 worth of coupons each month, includingone million recipients receiving $875 million in Los Angeles county. Inaddition to removing legal immigrants from the rolls, the new welfare lawlimits childless adults to three months of Food Stamp benefits every 36months. Minimum Wage. Many recent immigrants earn the minimum US wage,which is $4.25 hourly. On August 20, President Clinton signed legislation thatwill increase the minimum wage to $4.75 hourly on October, 1, 1996, and to$5.15 on September 1, 1997. This is the 16th increase in the federal minimumwage, which was set at $0.25 in 1938. Some 10 million US workers are expected to see their wages rise by 12percent on October 1, 1996. Employers may pay $4.25 an hour to newly-hiredworkers under the age of 20 for the first 90 days of employment. Minimum wage workers employed 2,000 hours per year will see their annualearnings rise from $8,500 to $10,300 by 1998. On August 2, 1996, the House approved the increase in the minimum wage by avote of 354-72, and the Senate approved by a vote of 76-22. David Lesher and Patrick McDonnell, "Wilson Calls Halt to Much of Aid forIllegal Immigrants," Los Angeles Times, August 28, 1996. Patrick McDonnell andMark Gladstone, "Welfare Bill Revives Plans for Prop. 187," Los Angeles Times,August 24, 1996. Dina Milbank, "Welfare law's work rules worry states," WallStreet Journal, August 5, 1996. Tony Perry, Maura Dolan, and Mark Arax,"Counties Fear Financial, Social Impact of Reforms," Los Angeles Times, August2, 1996. Robert Pear, "Clinton to sign welfare bill that ends US aid guaranteeand gives states broad power," New York Times, August 1, 1996. _______________________________ Immigrationand OfficialEnglishLegislation Immigration. The House has not yet officially appointed its membersto the Conference Committee that must work out the differences between theHouse and Senate versions of legislation designed to reduce illegalimmigration. Once the House appoints its members, the Conference Committeemust finish its work within one month. Much of the Congressional discussion of immigration in August was amongRepublicans, and it centered on whether the Gallegly amendment that wouldpermit states to deny public education to unauthorized children should be inthe final version of legislation expected to become law in 1996. The Galleglyamendment is in the House bill, but not the Senate version. Three options were debated: Congress could require or allow states toeducate unauthorized children (current practice), ban them (original Galleglyproposal), or bill them for educational services (compromise). In early August, Gallegly agreed to a compromise to permit previouslyenrolled illegal students to remain in US schools for up to seven years, allowillegal immigrants to pay tuition and remain in US schools, and subject thisprovision of the immigration law to congressional review twice during the nextfive year. If the Gallegly amendment becomes law, the General AccountingOffice would study its educational and crime consequences, and then it could berepealed by a vote of Congress, the same as the procedure included in IRCA torepeal employer sanctions if the GAO found that they led todiscrimination. With the acceptance of these modifications by Sen. Arlen Specter (R-PA),the Republicans were believed to have enough votes to keep the Galleglyamendment in the final immigration bill that is expected to emerge from theHouse-Senate conference committee. However, on August 2, President Clinton threatened to veto the immigrationbill if it contained the Gallegly amendment in any form: "the proposedcompromise... will still...permit states to exclude those who cannot afford topay tuition--is as objectionable as the original provision... If theimmigration bill contains this provision [the Gallegly amendment], I will vetoit." Official English. On August 1, the House approved HR 123, theLanguage of Government Act, which designates English to be the officiallanguage of the United States, by a vote of 259-169. The bill also repeals thebilingual ballot requirements of the Voting Rights Act. The House Economic and Educational Opportunities Committee approved the"English-only" bill by a vote of 19-17 along party lines on July 23, withRepublicans arguing that the bill was needed to prevent "languageghettos." According to proponents, the bill seeks to "help immigrants betterassimilate" and "empower" them with new language and literacy skills bydesignating English as the official -- and sole permissible -- language of USgovernment, with exceptions for security, diplomacy, and public safety. Ifenacted into law, there would be no more non-English tax materials or votingforms. House Speaker Newt Gingrich argued for the bill, noting that Californiapublic schools teach academic subjects in more than 80 languages, and Chicagoschools teach in 100 languages. He warned that a continuation of such trendswould lead to "decay of the core parts of our civilization." However, theEnglish-only mandate would not apply in the case of language education, meaningthat bilingual education programs would not be affected. Democrats countered that the most pressing need was for more classes forimmigrants who were eager to learn English. A similar bill, S. 356, is pending in the Senate. President Clinton, whosigned an English-only law as governor of Arkansas, has not indicated what hewill do if official English legislation is approved by Congress. Across theUS, 23 states, 41 counties, and 15 cities had passed official English laws asof August 1996. William Branigan, "Education Clause Delays Illegal Immigration Bill,"Washington Post, August 3, 1996. Brian Blomquist, "Changes in illegalimmigration bill don't satisfy Clinton, Nation, August 3, 1996. Marc Lacey,"Illegal-Immigrant Bill Gets a Key Ally," Los Angeles Post, August 2, 1996.Eric Schmitt, "House Panel Approves Bill Making English Official Language," NewYork Times, July 25, 1996. ____________________________ PresidentialPolitics andImmigration In July and August, Republicans and Democrats ran campaign ads inCalifornia promising to get tough on illegal immigration. The Republicans' adsshowed aliens running into the US under spotlights, and accused PresidentClinton of spending money on illegals while wages for US workers drop. TheDemocrats showed criminal aliens being removed from the US, and emphasized thatPresident Clinton had kept his promise to combat illegal immigration. The Republican Party platform criticizes President Clinton for opposingProposition 187 in California in November 1994, and includes the statement thatthe party supports "a constitutional amendment or constitutionally validlegislation declaring that children born in the United States of parents whoare not legally present in the United States or who are not long-term residentsare not automatically citizens." On August 23, 1996, Bob Dole said that he does not support this plank ofthe Republican Party platform. On August 14, Jack Kemp denounced the plank inthe Republican Party platform that commits the Republican party to end"birthright citizenship" asserting, if you are "born in America, you're anAmerican." If the ban on "birthright citizenship" were to be approved, the 130-yearinterpretation of the US constitution would be changed: the 14th Amendmentguarantees US citizenship to "all persons born or naturalized in the UnitedStates, and subject to the jurisdiction thereof." The purpose of the 14th Amendment was to overturn US Supreme Court rulingsthat held, in the Dred Scott decision, that blacks who were "imported into thiscountry and sold as slaves," as well as their descendants, could not becomecitizens of the United States. In the debate over the 14th Amendment in 1866,one Senator asked "Is the child of the Chinese immigrant in California acitizen?" and received the answer, yes, "The children of all parentagewhatever, born in California, should be regarded and treated as citizens of theUnited States, entitled to equal civil rights with other citizens." The US and many other immigrant nations follow this jus soli (law of thesoil) principle of granting citizenship, while many emigration nations,including Germany, follow the jus sanguinis (law of blood) method of grantingcitizenship to persons born of citizen parents, wherever they were born; thisis why the children of legal Turkish immigrants born in Germany are foreigners,while the children of ethnic Germans in Russia are German. Some countries,including France, have a hybrid system, granting citizenship upon applicationat a certain age to persons born in the country. The original US Constitution did not define citizenship; there was nodefinition of citizenship until the 14th Amendment was ratified in 1868. In1898, the US Supreme Court held that a child born in San Francisco to Chineseparents was a US citizen, even though the parents were prohibited by theChinese Exclusion Act from ever becoming US citizens. Republicans assert that100,000 babies are born to illegal aliens each year in California. Peter Schuck and Rogers Smith of Yale Law School wrote a 1985 book,Citizenship without Consent: Illegal Aliens in the American Polity,which argued that the constitution PERMITS Congress to decide whether the USshould grant citizenship to babies born within its borders. When illegalimmigration is "under control," then Schuck and Smith thought that "birthrightcitizenship" could be eliminated. Demographer Jeff Passel estimates that 700,000 or almost 20 percent of thefour million births each year in the US are to foreign-born mothers. Most ofthese foreign-born women are in the US legally and, of the illegal mothers,relatively few are believed to come to the US specifically to givebirth. In his acceptance speech, Dole said that "a family from Mexico who arrivedhere this morning, legally, has as much right to the American dream as thedirect descendants of the Founding Fathers." Dole warned that the "exits,which are clearly marked," are for those who have joined the Republican partybecause they hoped that Republicans would shut the door to immigrants. Kemp reversed an earlier position, and said that he now supports theGallegly amendment to the pending immigration bill that would permit states tocharge illegal alien children tuition to attend K-12 schools. Kemp also saidthat, if elected, a Dole administration would "do its best to stop illegalimmigration." The Reform Party may inherit anti-immigrant Republicans. Kemp wascriticized within the Republican Party for not banning illegal immigrants frompubic housing when he was secretary of the Department of Housing and UrbanDevelopment, for not supporting Proposition 187 in 1994, and for not agreeingin 1996 to urge lower levels of illegal immigration. Former Colorado Gov. Richard D. Lamm, who opposed Ross Perot to be thepresidential candidate of the Reform Party, used his concession speech to urgethe Reform Party to tackle immigration issues. Ross Perot has not said muchabout immigration, although he cited the prospect of increased Mexico-USimmigration as a reason to oppose NAFTA. Perot won the Reform Party'spresidential nomination with 65 percent of the 49,000 votes cast. Lamm ranks with Pat Buchanan as the Presidential candidate most in favor ofmore immigration controls. According to Lamm, the US is "at a crossroads onthe question of immigration. We can either import large numbers of low-skilled workers or we can reach down and train our own underclass. We cannotdo both.... No other nation in the world has the delusion that it can ignoreits own poor while importing a whole generation of poor people everyyear." Lamm said that there is "no essential difference...between exporting a joband importing a worker." In the first US Census in 1790, four millionresidents were counted; in 1994, the US had about 260 million residents, andLamm asked "how many people...in a world of limited resources...can we acceptin the United States?" Immigration control advocates used the Republican convention in San Diegoon August 12-15, 1996 to spotlight illegal immigration issues. San Diego isthe "least minority" large city in southern California--its 1.8 millionresidents are two-thirds white, and 25 percent Hispanic. FAIR held a widely-publicized Immigration Reform Awareness Week thatculminated in a conference August 10, 1996 urging that legal immigration levelsbe reduced, a position rejected by Congress in 1996. Dick Lamm, one of thespeakers, asserted that, "If we have to choose between our 'huddled masses' andthe rest of the world's 'huddled masses,' I'm going to chose our 'huddledmasses'." Many of those attending the FAIR conference said that they feared thatSpanish is supplanting English in California and the Southwest. Some believethat the US is being "invaded" by Mexicans who are intent upon creating Aztlan,a mythical homeland of the Mexican people. Others decried the current UScitizenship surge, fearing that immigrants were naturalizing for "the wrongreasons," and Mexican proposals that would permit Mexicans living in the US tovote in Mexican elections. Those favoring closer ties with Mexico emphasized that the SanDiego-Tijuana region has three million residents, many of whom moved to theregion from elsewhere, and many of whom commute across the border legally tojobs. Ronald Brownstein, "Kemp Now Backs Immigrant Curbs," Los Angeles Times,August 14, 1996. Patrick McDonnell, "Activists See Dire Immigration Threat,"Los Angeles Times, August 11, 1996. Robert Pear, "GOP Panel Backs Change inConstitution on Citizenship," New York Times, August 7, 1996. Lamm, Richardand Gary Imhoff. 1986. The Immigration Time Bomb: The Fragmenting of America.New York: E.P. Dutton. _______________________________ SOSin otherStates In November 1994, California voters approved Proposition 187, the so-called"Save our State," by a margin of 59-14 percent. Proponents of immigration restrictions immediately launched similarinitiatives in Florida and Arizona, and most experts wrongly expected theseinitiatives to be put on the ballot, and to be approved by similarly largemargins. For example, about 430,000 signatures are required to put an initiative onthe Florida ballot but, as of Summer 1996, organizers for the Save our StateCommittee, and the FLA-187 Committee, had collected only 10 to 20 percent ofthe required signatures. The SOS initiative could bar unauthorized aliens fromreceiving most state services; the 187 Committee's initiative would go further,and require state agencies to report suspected unauthorized aliens who seekservices to the INS. An Arizona "Save our State" initiative similar to California's Proposition187 failed to win a place on that state's ballot in November, 1996 because itdid not collect the required 112,941 signatures by the July 4 deadline. Inaddition to having state agencies screen for unauthorized aliens, the Arizonameasure would have made employers found to have undocumented workers liable tofines, and would have created a state verification center to help determinewhether job applicants were in the country legally. In Oregon, Oregonians for Immigration Reform proposed an initiative thatwould require all public education institutions to verify the legal status ofall students, and require publicly-funded institutions to report suspectedillegal aliens to the INS. In California, the group that spearheaded Prop. 187 in 1994 plans to placean initiative before voters in 1998 that would make it a crime to rent or sellproperty to illegal immigrants, and allow California businesses to suecompetitors who knowingly hire illegal immigrants, including companies that useindependent contractors who employ illegal immigrants. According to backers, this would end the sanctuary movement, the practiceof some churches sheltering unauthorized migrants. The initiative would doublepenalties of $3,000 to $5,000 if the landlord was a tax-exempt or nonprofitgroup. Immigration control forces in California are attempting to qualifyadditional initiatives to put before voters, including the California LawfulEmployment and Residency (CLEAR) initiative, that would impose criminalpenalties for renting, leasing or selling property to illegal aliens, and theStop Sucking Oxygen Out of Our State Initiative (SSOOOS). The SSOOOS wouldrequire the countries of origin of illegal immigrants to replace the oxygenthat illegal immigrants take from California-- one quarter of a cubic foot ofoxygen per breath, multiplied by .0001888 to account for compression, times anaverage of 21,613 breaths in a 24-hour period. Bobbi Murray, "How to Clear the Hot Air on Immigration; Taking awayschools, services and the right to own property isn't punishment enough," LosAngeles Times, August 9, 1996. Patrick McDonnell, "Plan Similar to Prop. 187Falls Flat in Arizona, " Los Angeles Times, July 14, 1996. ____________________________ INS:Enforcement, TPS andNaturalization Enforcement. The number of aliens apprehended along the US-Mexicanborder in June 1996 was 117,000, or about 4,000 per day, down slightly from120,000 in June 1995, but up from 81,000 in June 1994. Demographer Tom Espenshade notes that the variable of interest is not who"failed" to enter the US--apprehensions--but the number of aliens who eludeapprehension. His analysis suggests that the estimated number of illegalaliens in the US is about 2.2 times the number of apprehensions, and thatchanges in apprehensions are closely correlated with changes in the stock ofillegal aliens in the US. Governor Wilson (R-CA) argued that Proposition 187's denial of services toillegal immigrants would discourage illegal aliens from coming or remaining inCalifornia. UC Irvine telephone interviews with 160 illegal alien women inOrange county, however, found that nearly two-thirds of the illegal aliensinterviewed hope to remain in the United States, with or without services. About 23 percent of Orange county residents are Hispanic, and illegal alienLatinas--whose median age was 27, with two children-- are about four percent ofwomen 18 and older in the county. Many of the illegal alien women hadhousecleaning and child care jobs. The UCI researchers, whose findings willappear in the International Migration Review, argue that 94 percent of Latinosin Orange county have telephones. The INS and local police unveiled a "car stopper," an electrical chargethat disables a car's electronics and stops it. The car stopper will be usedto stop vans suspected of carrying illegal aliens in an effort to avoid thechases that have killed 10 illegal immigrants and injured 39 since April1996. The INS found no evidence of data manipulation in San Diego. Supervisorsthere were accused by the Border Patrol agents' union of manipulatingapprehension data along the San Diego border to prove that Operation Gatekeeperwas successful in pushing aliens attempting illegal entry from west toeast. The multi-agency Border Patrol Corruption Task Force also found no evidenceof corruption in an October 3, 1990 incident in which a customs supervisorallowed a gas tanker later found with four tons of cocaine into the UnitedStates. After a heated exchange with inspectors, the tanker was stopped, thedriver fled to Mexico, and the cocaine was found. On August 29, the INS announced that it had deported or excluded 54,362criminal and other illegal aliens so far in FY96, the highest number ever. Ofthose aliens removed so far in FY96, about 54 percent committed crimes in theUS. About 74 percent of those removed or excluded so far in FY96 were Mexicans,followed by the Central American countries of Honduras (4 percent), El Salvador(4 percent), and Guatemala (3 percent). Aliens deported from the US commit felony crimes if they return to theUS. The INS stationed an agent at the Anaheim city jail in a two monthexperiment, and found that 37 percent of the 1,900 people arrested were bornabroad. There were 451 illegal aliens among those arrested, or 24 percent ofthose arrested, including 410 who had no criminal records. Most were arrestedfor being drunk and other minor offenses. On August 8, the INS announced that 27 poultry processors with 41 plantsand 35,000 employees in seven states would join INS's employee verificationpilot system, joining the major meatpackers who signed up for EVP in May 1996.Under the EVP system, employers hire workers and then submit the A-numbers ofnewly hired non-US citizen to INS computers, which tell the employer whetherthat particular number has US work authorization. The employer must hire the worker before submitting the worker's A-numberto INS computers--pre-screening an applicant prior to employment is prohibitedas discriminatory. If the first check fails, there is a secondary check, andthen the employee is permitted to keep working for 30 days, but is asked to goto INS and check out the problem with the A-number. In a test of EVP between September 1995 and June 1996, some 239 employers,including Disneyland, sent 18,600 "non-US citizen" verification queries to INS.About 22 percent or 4,000 of the newly-hired workers were asked to go to INSand straighten out their records, but only 60 showed up at INS--about 1.5percent. Many observers were surprised by how many apparently illegal workersapplied for jobs even when they knew that their A-numbers would be submitted tothe INS for verification. The major loophole in the system is that, if a job applicant claims to be aUS citizen, she is not checked under the EVP system. Some 350 employers with 200,000 employees, plus the state of Florida with95,000 employees, participate in EVP. The largest participating poultryprocessor is Fiedlale Farms in Georgia, with 4,300 employees. Florida Gov. Lawton Chiles and federal immigration officials unveiled a newprogram to crack down on the state's illegal immigrants. The new enforcementplan gives law-enforcement officials computer access to federal databases thatallow police to check the status of immigrants arrested for aggravatedfelonies. In addition, private companies sanctioned for knowingly hiringillegal immigrants would be prohibited from getting state contracts. The INS has stepped up its work-place enforcement. The INS fined 8,459 USemployers during the first nine months of FY96, versus 11,917 in the 12 monthsof FY96. There have been 55 employer inspections in the Chicago area so far inFY96, in some cases taking away half of the workers from landscapingcompanies. On July 24, 1996, a Los Angeles garment sweatshop owner was sentenced tosix months in federal prison--the maximum sentence--for employing about 20illegal immigrants. The New York Times on August 18 highlighted corruption at the INS'Newark office, where a raid on a cleaning company led to the indictment of thethird-ranking INS official for selling papers that allowed smugglers to bringillegal aliens into the US. The article noted that, with immigrants willing topay $20,000 to $30,000 to enter the US, the temptation for corruption isgreat. On July 24, 1996, the House approved an added $543 million to the $2.5billion INS budget for FY97. TPS. On July 29, the INS extended Temporary Protected Statusfor nationals of Bosnia-Herzogovina until August 10, 1997, and TPS for Somaliswas extended until September 17, 1997. Naturalization. The INS received 1,012,769 applications fornaturalization in FY95, and applications are running about 30 percent higher inFY96--some 810,000 applications were received in the first eight months of FY96and, at this rate, there will be about 1.2 million applications in FY96. Of the naturalization applications acted on, five to 10 percent aredenied. Americans Abroad. The US Department of State estimated that, as ofMay 1, 1993, some 2.6 million US citizens lived abroad, including 522,000 inMexico, 335,000 in Canada, 215,000 in the United Kingdom, 160,000 in Germany,131,000 in the Philippines, 125,000 in Israel, and 103,000 in Italy.Additional legal immigrants who are not US citizens live in othercountries. Anne-Marie O'Connor," Border Task Force Ends Probe; No Charges Filed," LosAngeles Times, August 22, 1996. John Sullivan and Clifford Levy, "ImmigrationDepartment's Eyes Are Still on Troubled Newark Office," New York Times, August18, 1996. William Branigin, "Immigrant Job Checks to Expand," Washington Post,August 9, 1996. John Kennedy, "State Getting Tougher on Illegals," OrlandoSentinel, August 2, 1996. Larry Kaplow, "Police Able to Access ImmigrantDatabases," Palm Beach Post, August 2, 1996. Dick Kirschten, "Crossing theLine," National Journal, August 3, 1996. Accord in Mexico Aims at ExpandingDemocracy and Eliminating Fraud," New York Times, July 27, 1996. "Garment ShopOwner Sentenced for Hiring Illegal Immigrants," Los Angeles Times, July 25,1996. _____________________________ HispanicUnemployment-ImmigrantSelf-Employment Historically, the African-American unemployment rate has been about twicethe white rate, and the Hispanic unemployment rate has been closer to the whitethan the African-American rate. But the Hispanic unemployment rate in the1990s has climbed, and is now closer to the African-American than the whiterate. In July 1996, when the overall unemployment rate was 5.4 percent, theunemployment rate for whites was 4.7 percent, the unemployment rate for Blackswas 10.5 percent, and the unemployment rate for Hispanics was ninepercent. There are several explanations for the rising Hispanic unemployment rate.First, about one-third of the nation's 23 million Hispanics in 1990 lived inCalifornia, where the 1990-92 recession was most severe. California also hassome of the fastest-growing low-wage industries, many of which experienceperiodic layoffs. California has 140,000 of the nation's 950,000 garmentworkers, for example, versus 94,000 in New York City, and some 800,000individuals are employed sometime each year on California's farms. A 1994 Census report, "The Hispanic Population in the United States: March1993," (Series P20-475) reported that 28 percent of employed Hispanic maleswere in operator, fabricator, and laborer occupations, while 29 percent ofnon-Hispanic white males were in managerial and professional specialtyoccupations. Hispanic males in 1992 had median earnings of $20,054, about 63percent of the $31,765 earned by non- Hispanic white males. In 1993, there were about six million Hispanic males and four millionHispanic females employed in the US. Of the 10 million Hispanic workers, 6.4million were of Mexican origin, 1.6 million were of Central and South Americanorigin, 891,000 were of Puerto Rican origin, and 533,000 were of Cubanorigin. Second, Hispanics tend to be less educated than whites and AfricanAmericans, making them more likely to lose jobs in recession, and making itharder for them to find new jobs in recovery. A Rand study released in July,1996 stressed the low educational levels of Mexican immigrants to explain whytheir median weekly earnings fell between 1970 and 1990 relative to the medianearnings of US-born workers. Third, discrimination against Hispanics may have increased in the wake ofProp. 187 and other anti-immigrant drives. Many economists note that Hispanics are young and poorly educated, whichhelps to explain their persistently high unemployment rates. About 80 percentof white adults and 70 percent of African Americans had graduated from at leasthigh school 1990, but only 53 percent of adult Hispanics and 46 percent ofMexican-Americans were high school graduates. About 60 percent of the nation's Hispanics are of Mexican origin, 12percent are Puerto Rican, six percent are Central American, and five percenteach are from Cuba and South America. Hispanic unemployment rates may drop as the California economy recovers.California's unemployment rate is still higher than the US rate, but job growthin California in 1996 is once again much faster than US job growth, a result ofjobs created by trade, entertainment, and high-technology to replace jobs lostin construction and defense industries. The revival of job growth and legal and illegal immigration has renewedinterest in the interaction of newly-arrived immigrants and settled unskilledworkers. Roger Waldinger notes that most 1970s and 1980s research that triedto find negative effects of immigrants on US-born Black workers--depressedwages or displacement-- found no smoking gun link, in part because manyAfrican-Americans work for government, for which foreign nationals are noteligible. For example, one-third of the African Americans in the labor forcein New York City in 1990 work for the government. Public sector jobs remain attractive to US-born workers. In Los Angeles inJuly 1996, some 25,000 persons showed up to apply for 100 entry-leveljanitorial and laborer jobs offered by the city government, suggesting thatthose at the bottom of labor market prefer public to private employers. Thestarting wage for these stable jobs is $18,000 per year, or about $9 per hour,plus health and other benefits. In the private sector, however, immigrant networks have combined withemployer attitudes and expectations to make Hispanic immigrants preferred toUS-born unskilled workers. Mexican immigrants in Los Angeles have proven to be better than unskilledAfrican-Americans in winning jobs at the bottom of the labor market. Accordingto Waldinger, Mexican immigrants were over represented in 53 of 82manufacturing sectors in 1990. Information about job openings flows longdistances over immigrant networks to Mexico rather than within the inner cityareas surrounding the factories where the immigrants work. Furthermore, according to Rand, Mexican immigrants begin their US journeyearning lower wages than similar US-born workers, and the gap widens over time.Unlike Asian immigrants, who initially earn less than similar US workers, butcatch up and surpass US-born workers within seven to 12 years, Mexicanimmigrants do not catch up, and sometimes lag further behind comparable USworkers the longer they are in the US. For example, the average earnings ofimmigrants from Mexico and Central America were 25 to 40 percent lower thannatives' earnings in 1970, and 50 percent lower in 1990. Many immigrants begin small businesses. Is immigrant self-employment asign of immigrant success or failure? Many sociologists regard immigrantself-employment as a sign of success, and some have suggested thatconcentrating immigrants within particular cities permits "enclave economies"to flourish. Leading economists, on the other hand, argue that "there is noevidence that immigrant entrepreneurs are particularly successful" (Borjas,1990, 163) despite stories of Korean and Latino grocery stores. Self-employed immigrants work more hours and earn more than immigrants whowork for wages or salaries, but the self employed also tend to have more humanand financial capital. For example, among immigrant Korean men in 1979, theself employed earned an average $23,400, while immigrant wage and salaryKoreans earned an average $16,600. However, the self employed worked morehours--2,400 versus 2,000--and were more likely to have migrated earlier--70percent immigrated to the US before 1975, versus 48 percent of the wage andsalary workers. Portes and Zhou used data from the 1980 Census to examine the determinantsof earnings for men 25 to 64 in 1979, and found that economists who control foreducation, experience, and hours worked are correct when they assert thatself-employed immigrants do not earn more than similar men with the samequalifications. But Portes and Zhou emphasize that there are more "outliers"among the self employed, meaning that the most successful self-employedimmigrants earn far more than average, and that, in some cases, successfulself-employed immigrants also become community leaders. Will education eliminate the Hispanic-White unemployment gap? The Randstudy analyzed Census data and data from a US survey of 21,000 15- and 17-yearolds, and concluded that most immigrants generally do well in the USeducational system. However, Mexican immigrants lagged behind otherimmigrants. In 1990, only 74 percent of the 15- and 17-year olds living in theUS who were born in Mexico were in US schools, versus 95 percent of US bornyouth and other immigrant youth. Many Mexican youth stop going to school after the seventh grade, so that,if a Mexican youth arrives in the US at age 15, she may have already been outof school for two years. Roger Waldinger, "The jobs immigrants take," New York Times, March 11,1996. R. Drummond Ayres, "California's economy shows signs of regainingglitter," New York Times, December 19, 1995. James Bornemeier, "Study paintspositive picture of immigration," Los Angeles Times, December 11, 1995."Hispanic employment rate lagging behind economy," San Jose Mercury News,November 19, 1995. _______________________________ Regulatingthe Immigrant Labor Market For the first time, the US Department of Labor has run out of H-1B visasfor foreign professionals to enter the US to work for up to six years. Amaximum 65,000 visas are available each year, and on August 28, 1996, DOLannounced that US employers requesting H-1B workers would have to wait untilthe new federal fiscal year begins on October 1, 1996. In FY96, about 55,000H-1B workers were admitted. It is difficult for the government to regulate the admission of legalimmigrant and non-immigrant foreign workers, and to prevent unauthorizedworkers from being employed. On July 24, 1996, a federal district court struck down DOL regulations thatwould have required US employers wanting to hire foreign professionalsunder the H-1B program to take more steps to protect US workers. DOL inDecember 1994 laid out in regulations how US employers must calculate anddocument the "prevailing wage" that they offer to US and H-1B workers. The Court's ruling was narrow, only agreeing with complaining employersthat DOL had not given them enough time to comment on the proposed rules. DOLindicated that it believed that fundamental reforms were needed in the H-1Bprogram to protect US workers. Microsoft has been one of the most aggressive users and defenders of theH-1B program, which permits employers to "attest" that they tried and failed tofind US computer programmers and other professionals, and then foreignprofessionals arrive and remain for up to six years. The Gannett News Service did a series of articles in August 1996 thatconcluded that the US system for certifying that a US employer "needs" foreignworkers is broken. There are two types of labor certification--for employers requestingimmigrants, and for employers requesting temporary workers. US employersrequire that DOL certify their need for immigrant workers, and for unskillednonimmigrant or temporary workers. There is no labor market test for USemployers who want H-1B professionals--US employers only attest that they arepaying prevailing wages. Echoing the DOL Inspector General report issued in June 1996, Gannett saidthat the $270 million spent by employers on labor certification, and the $50million spent by the federal government to certify employer requests forforeign workers, is largely a going-through-the-motions exercise for USemployers who are, in many cases, already employing the foreign worker while"searching" for US workers. According to Gannett, between 1988 and 1996, many non-professionals wereadmitted as permanent immigrants for US employers who claimed that they couldnot find US workers. Some 40,000 housekeepers, nannies and domestic workerswere admitted as immigrants, plus 15,000 cooks and chefs, 3,000 auto repairworkers, 252 fast-food workers, 199 poultry dressers, 173 choral directors, 156landscape laborers, 122 short-order cooks, 77 plumbers, 68 doughnut makers, 53baker's helpers, and 38 hospital janitors. DOL has issued new regulations that would allow the agency to check onemployers of H-1B foreign workers without waiting for a complaint to be filedwhich asserts that the US employer was violating his promise to pay prevailingwages, but a provision in the pending immigration bill would limit unannouncedDOL checks to employers where more than 25 percent of employees areimmigrants. The INS does not notify H-1B nonimmigrants when their work permits areabout to expire, and does not check to ensure that they leave the US. Underpending immigration legislation, nonimmigrants who remain in the US too longwould be denied re-entry for at least a year. In recent years, about 90,000 legal immigrants per year have been admittedto the US on the basis of their skills and US labor market needs, well underthe 140,000 per year limit. CIR Commissioners Hill and Morrison, in an August5, 1996 article, criticized the lobbyists of high-tech firms who blocked aCIR-recommended reform that would have traded faster access to immigrantworkers for a reduction in the annual quota to 100,000, and a fee that would beused to train US workers. Since Hewlett-Packard complained in May 1996 that labor certification costs$15,000 and takes 22 months, Hill and Morrison advocate a pilot program inwhich firms willing to pay $10,000 are exempt from labor certification. The federal government and many state governments have special enforcementprograms that aim to prevent unauthorized workers from finding jobs, or, ifemployed, prevent US employers from violating labor laws. The federalgovernment issues a Garment Enforcement Report each quarter, and it noted that2,500 garment workers were owed $700,000 in the April-June quarter of1996. "U.S. Reaches the Limit on Special-Work Visas," Wall Street Journal, August28, 1996. Stuart Silverstein, "Report Details Fines, Back Pay in Crackdown,"Los Angeles Times, August 24, 1996. Robert Hill and Bruce Morrison, "Give meyour skilled workers," Legal Times, August 5, 1996. Jim Sprecht, "Governmenthas little control over job-based immigration," Gannett News Service, August4, 1996. Omar Gallaga, "High-tech firms rely more on new breed of tempworker," Wall Street Journal, July 31, 1996. G. Pascal Zachary, "Labor rulesmaking it hard for firms to hire foreign nationals are rejected," Wall StreetJournal, July 25, 1996. _______________________________ EUROPE _______________________________ FrenchPolice Remove Immigrants fromChurch On August 23, 1996, French police removed 98 men, 54 women, and 68 childrenwho took refuge in Saint Bernard's Church near Montmartre in Paris two monthsago in an attempt to remain in France after they were ordered to leave. Theforeigners, mostly from Mali, had their applications for asylum rejected; werethe spouses of legal immigrants but not entitled to live in France; were visaoverstayers; or, were persons born in France of foreign parents. Since 1993,persons born in France are not entitled to automatic French citizenship. Some of the immigrants began a hunger strike that attracted widespreadpublicity and support in June 1996. The immigrants demanded one-year workpermits to give up the hunger strike, but the government, under criticism fornot being "tough" on illegal immigration, promised only an individual review ofeach immigrant's deportation order. The government announced that all of thehunger strikers would be deported. On August 24, 57 Africans were flown home, including four who were removedfrom the church, although local airport workers in Africa refused to unload theplane. Most of the other immigrants removed from the church were freed bycourt order, although many received orders to leave France by September 12.The government announced that those sent back to Africa would receiveresettlement aid, and that 30 to 40 of those in the church would receiveresidence permits. In protest, over 10,000 people demonstrated in support of the immigrants.Most commentators noted that the French government succeeded in angering theleft by entering the church, and the right because many of those in the churchwere set free by courts. President Chirac said that he hoped the police action would send themessage to illegal aliens that "there is no more chance for you inFrance." The immigrant protest began in another church in March 1996. The churchhad been occupied by 300 African migrants since June 28, 1996, and the interiorministry gave permission for 48 to stay in France--those who had children bornin France before the law changed January 1, 1994. After January 1, 1994, children born in France have to apply for Frenchcitizenship between the ages of 16 and 21 as a way of demonstrating theirgenuine desire to become French, and young people with criminal records can berefused naturalization. Before 1994, foreigners born in France could becomeFrench citizens automatically at the age of 18. Foreigners who married Frenchnationals after 1994 had to wait 12 rather than six months for residencepermits, and illegal alien spouses have to return to their countries of originto obtain visas. As the Africans gained publicity with their hunger strike, their occupationof the church became a test of the French government's "toughness" on illegalimmigration. On August 12, police entered the church to remove 10 hunger strikers. Thehunger strikers were taken to a nearby hospital for check-ups; most returned tothe church the same day. A parade of celebrities, including the widow offormer president Mitterrand, visited the hunger strikers in the church aftertheir release from the hospital. Supporters of the Africans ringed the churchin an effort to prevent the police from entering. The Interior Ministry announced that, in the first six months of 1996,7,362 aliens were forcibly removed from France, versus 5,868 in the first sixmonths of 1995. There are nearly 3.6 million foreigners living legally in France, a countryof 57 million. The number of illegal foreigners is estimated to be 100,000 to400,000. According to an article in the September/October Foreign Affairs, Francehas four to five million Muslim residents--half French citizens. With almost10 percent of the French population being Muslims, Islam has become the secondmost important religion in France. According to the article, "France's Muslimcommunity is probably the first in history that has contemplated integrationinto a Christian society," an integration that France encourages with rationsin accord with Islamic dietary law to believers in the military and inprison. National Front leader Jean-Marie Le Pen, who criticized the government fornot expelling the African immigrants, also criticized the French soccer teamfor recruiting players from outside of France and "baptizing" them as French.Since 1945, 15 percent of the French professional soccer players have beenforeign-born. Currently, all the players are French citizens, but one was bornin Ghana, another has dual Portuguese/French citizenship, and others haveItalian, Algerian or Tunisian parents. The Count of Paris made a rare public comment on July 10 saying that "Ifimmigrants, no matter where they are from, settle in our country, then theymust adopt our civilization and bend to our rules, habits andlifestyles." Craig Whitney, " Illegal Immigrants Free Again in France," New York Times,August 27, 1996. Gail Russell Chaddock, "Standoff in Paris Church HighlightsImmigrants Plight," Christian Science Monitor, August 19, 1996. Julian Nundy,"French stars rally round migrants in church refuge," Daily Telegraph, August20, 1996. "French ruling party threatens to expel most of paperless," XinhuaNews Agency, August 19, 1996. "Rightist says 'chuck out' illegal immigrants,"Agence France Presse, August 14, 1996. Craig Whitney, "Hunger-StrikingAfricans are Briefly Ejected from Paris Church," New York Times, August 13,1996. John Follain, "French raid sparks widening of Africans' protest,"Reuters, August 13, 1996. "Pretender to French throne criticizes immigration,"Reuters, July 10, 1996. "France Eases Law on Immigrant Parents," ReuterEuropean Community Report, July 11, 1996. Milton Viorst, "The Muslims ofFrance," Foreign Affairs, September/October, 1996. _______________________________ Bosniansand Construction inGermany Dieter Spranger, Christian Democratic Union finance minister of the stateof Baden-Wurttemberg, said on August 15 that the Bosnians are overstaying theirwelcome in Germany, and that they should return to Bosnia immediately to helpwith reconstruction. Most of the 350,000 Bosnians in Germany are Muslims. TheUN estimates that 70 percent of the Bosnians in Germany are fromSerbian-controlled areas, and that most will not be re-admitted to theiroriginal residences. Bosnians were to scheduled to leave Germany for Bosnia on July 1, 1996, butthe 16 state or Laender, who make expulsion decisions, agreed not to forceBosnians to leave on that date. The new date to begin repatriations is October1, 1996. One state, North Rhine Westfalen, is planning to offer departingBosnians DM600 per adult and DM300 per child as start up assistance. The German asylum office is scheduled to be reduced from 3,400 to 2,500employees, as the number of asylum seekers continues to remain at about 9,000per month. Most asylum applications are rejected within eight to 10 weeks. A UN study criticized Germany for not providing adequate treatment tochildren fleeing war. The report concluded that especially unaccompaniedchildren were hurt by the passage of third-country legislation effective July1, 1993 that said that persons passing through "safe" countries en route toGermany had to request asylum there. The study was based on interviews withsome of 10,000 asylum-seeker children in Hamburg, of whom 3,000 areunaccompanied children. About 1,400 foreigners per month were caught trying to sneak into Germanyso far in 1996, down from an average 1,700 per month in 1995. There was a wave of firebombings of Turkish-owned businesses in Germany andSwitzerland in late July in support of Kurdish hunger strikers in Turkishjails. On July 28, the Turkish prisoners abandoned their 69-day old hungerstrike after 12 prisoners died. About 300 people at 43 jails for politicalprisoners were on what they termed a "death fast." There are an estimated 2,000 leftist political prisoners in Turkey, plusanother 4,000 prisoners held on charges of supporting Kurdishseparatism. German police broke-up a smuggling network which brought thousands ofAfghanistanis and Lebanese to Germany. The cost of passage to Germany runsabout $10,000 for an individual, and $33,300 for a family. German police alsoarrested a resident from Mongolia who sold forged residence permits toforeigners for DM150 to DM250 each. Foreign firms now do 15 percent of the building in Germany, up from twopercent in the early 1990s. Increased foreign competition is expected to causeup to 25 percent of Germany's 76,000 construction businesses to go bankruptbecause of their high costs. There are about one million construction workersin Germany, of whom about 185,000 or 18 percent were unemployed in June 1996.There are believed to be 400,000 foreign construction workers in Germany, halfillegal. On August 23, 1996, the union IG Bau and the two leading constructionemployer associations agreed to request a minimum hourly wage of DM17 for WestGermany, and DM15.64 for East Germany, down from earlier plans for minimumwages of DM18.60 and DM17.11. The Social Democrats have called for limits on the number of "DM 590 jobs."Jobs that pay less than DM 590 per month are exempt from social security andother payroll taxes that add over 40 percent to wage costs. "Bonn minister says Bosnian refugees must go home," Reuters, August 16,1996. Ian Traynor, "Minister Demands Speedy Repatriation," The Guardian,August 17, 1996. "Police break up illegal immigration network," Agence FrancePresse, August 11, 1996. Matt Marshall, "Germany's construction headachesbuild," Wall Street Journal, August 9, 1996. "Police detain three after attackon hostel," Reuters, August 8, 1996. Ramesh Jaura, "Refugees: New ReportCriticizes Treatment of Refugee Children," Inter Press Service, August 9, 1996.Alan Cowell, " Bonn Fears Attacks on Turks May Be Spurred by Hunger Strikers,"New York Times, July 25, 1996. _______________________________ Hungarian/CzechForeignWorkers Hungary is simultaneously exporting and importing labor, with Hungariansgoing to work, often illegally, in neighboring Austria, while Ukrainian,Romanian and Yugoslav migrants fill jobs in Hungary. The result is that wagesvary by location within Hungary. Construction wages are eight to 10 timeshigher near Austria than along the Romanian border. The Hungarian Central Statistical Office reported that 200,000 foreignerswere living legally in Hungary in 1994--including 105,000 Romanians, and 16,000persons from the ex-Yugoslavia and the ex-USSR. Hungary granted citizenship to25,000 foreigners in 1994. Most of the foreigners living in Hungary are not permitted to work--therewere 15,000 to 45,000 valid work permits in effect sometime in 1994. Half ofthe foreign workers were in Budapest. Many of the foreigners without work permits are Hungarian-born Romanianswho work in construction and on farms in eastern Hungary. Some 120,000 Hungarians were living abroad in 1994. In the Czech Republic, rapid economic growth is fueling demand forconstruction workers. As in Hungary, many native workers are seekinghigher-paying jobs in Austria and Germany, and foreign construction workers arestreaming into the Czech Republic, mostly from Slovakia and the Ukraine. InJune 1996, there were an estimated 100,000 Ukrainian workers employed inPrague. "Construction Firms Set to Build Profits in Near Future," Prague Post,August 14, 1996. "Foreign Workers in Hungary and Vice Versa," MTI Econews,August 2, 1996. _______________________________ Moscow'sForeigners There are reportedly 350,000 legal foreign workers in Russia, including60,000 in Moscow, where foreigners are one percent of the capital's work forceof seven million. One third of the foreign workers in Moscow are from Ukraine,15 percent are from Turkey, and six to seven percent each are from Georgia,Moldova and Belarus. About 65 percent of the foreign workers in Moscow are employed inconstruction; another eight percent are employed in transit. There are believed to be 400,000 illegal foreign workers in Moscow, mostfrom nations created out of the ex-USSR. The Russian Federal Migration Servicesaid that "Moscow cannot do without [a] foreign workforce." In 1992, the Russian government established procedures for recognizingrefugees, and invited the UNHCR to establish an office and facilities in Russiato house refugees. Since 1992, more than one million foreigners haveregistered with the Federal Migration Service seeking refuge in Russia. About60 percent come from Afghanistan. Most others come from countries whereAeroflot tickets can be bought cheaply, such as Somalia, Iraq, Angola andEthiopia. There are four UNHCR-supported accommodation centers in the Moscow regionfor asylum seekers and refugees, housing 830 people. There is continued concern about the fate of persons who were madeforeigners when "borders moved across people" when the ex-USSR broke up. Thereare about 20 million ethnic Russians outside the Russian Federation, and about26 million non-Russians inside Russia. The Russian government reports that the Latvian Republic is attempting toforce the assimilation of Russians who are living permanently in Latvia. Aproposed law will close all schools in Latvia that teach in Russian. Fiveschools in Riga, the capital of Latvia, have already been closed. The Russiangovernment also reports that Russians in Latvia face job discrimination and arebarred from filling certain jobs, such as firefighters and pharmacists. "Foreigners plug gaps in Moscow labour market," British BroadcastingCorporation, July 26, 1996. Katy Daigle, "Aiding Refugees in Russia," MoscowTimes, June 20, 1996. _______________________________ PolandDrafting RefugeeBill Poland is in the process of drafting a law on refugees, which the UNHCRcriticizes as too restrictive. The UNHCR worries that the bill will notguarantee asylum seekers proper appeals, and may keep UNHCR from observing thedecision-making process. Over 50 percent of the foreigners currently seeking refugee status inPoland have been returned from Germany to Poland under the terms of thebilateral agreement on readmission. Between January and mid-July, 1996, thePolish government received over 800 applications for refugee status, many fromcitizens of Sri Lanka, Armenia, Afghanistan, India and Iraq. In 1995, 106foreigners were granted refugee status in Poland. Over 5,000 foreigners were studying at Polish colleges and universities in1995-96. Many of the students come from Russia, Bulgaria, Palestine, Syria andthe Yemen to study languages, social sciences, economics, biology and naturalsciences. The Polish government has begun collecting a fixed fee from foreigners whowish to buy property in Poland. The fee, about US $390, was previously onepercent of the property's value. "Real estate purchase fee goes down," Polish New Bulletin, August 2, 1996."Foreigners to pay fee for application to buy property in Poland," BBC, August8, 1996. "More and more foreigners study in Poland," PAP News Wire, August 3,1996. "Poland Reluctant to Assist Refugees," Polish News Bulletin, July 26,1996. _______________________________ ASIA _______________________________ ThailandTo Legalize Illegal Foreign Workers Thailand in August announced regulations to implement the legalizationprogram it announced on June 25, 1996 for an estimated 700,000 illegalimmigrants from Myanmar (Burma), Laos and Cambodia. The regulations include arequirement that Thai employers must follow Thai labour laws when employingnewly-legalized workers, which means that the newly-legalized should get thesame wages as Thai workers. According to the National Security Council, permitting currently illegalworkers to work legally for two years will reduce illegal immigration. Several Thai newspapers, however, noted that the police were often inleague with alien smugglers, so that illegal immigration may increase. Oneemployer with rubber plantations and construction firms in Phuket reported thatlocal officials paid 350 to 500 baht for each illegal worker they delivered.Many newspapers questioned how police who had failed to prevent the entry ofillegal aliens would ensure that they return after two years. In northern Thailand, coyotes want 5,000 kyats to enter from Myanmar, andbrokers there charge 3,500 baht for the trip to Bangkok. About 100 Myanmarnationals are said to cross the Moei River into Tak, Thailand illegally everyday. Tak has 25 immigration officers who have to cover five borderdistricts. Thai employers have up to 180 days, starting September 1, 1996, to registerthe illegal immigrants who went to work for them before June 25, 1996. Workerswho are registered can get two-year work permits. Employers must pay a5,000-baht bond and a 1,000-baht fee for each foreign worker that they want tolegalize. In March 1992, Thai employers were allowed to legalize unskilled foreignworkers in four provinces bordering Myanmar. Local employers "did notcooperate," and illegal foreign workers spread to other sections of Thailand.The government extended permission to hire foreigners to 43 provinces includingBangkok. The 1996 legalization is intended to get employers to cooperate byidentifying and registering illegal workers so that they can be removed fromThailand after their two-year work permit has expired. Minimum wages in August 1996 for unskilled workers are 145 baht per day inBangkok and five surrounding provinces, 126 baht in six provinces, and 118 bahtin the remaining 63 provinces--Thailand has 76 provinces, includingBangkok. Under the regulations announced in August, newly-legalized workers can beemployed in the manufacture of shrimp paste, fish sauce, tobacco, or for jobssuch as drying cassava in the sun and milling rice. They can also be employedin farming, fisheries, construction, mining, salt-farming, brick-making andworking as household servants. An academic, Tiang Phadthaisong of the Community Medicine Department atChiang Mai University, charged in a recent paper that family planning has beentoo successful, reducing the number of children by 50 percent in a decade, andcausing labor shortages. According to one estimate, some 450,000 Thais work overseas, including150,000 in Taiwan, and the Thai migrants reportedly remit over $1 billionannually. Sinfah Tunsarawuth, "Illegals must be paid as much as Thai workers,"Straits Times, August 7, 1996. "Top security official defends policy onaliens' employment," Bangkok Post July 31, 1996. Ampa Santimatanedol,"Thailand needs baby boom," Bangkok Post July 22, 1996. _______________________________ Japan:No to Unskilled Workers In December 1995, the Japanese government agreed to accept more skilledforeign workers, but announced that it would continue to ban the admission ofunskilled foreign workers. Some Japanese companies are extending lifetimeemployment to their professional foreign workers. A July 3, 1996 survey reported that the number of Japanese opposed toallowing unskilled foreign workers into Japan rose by 15 percentage points overthe past five years. Japanese employers get around the ban on hiring unskilledforeign workers by employing ethnic Japanese from South America, students andtrainees, and illegal workers. Some employers have 20 percent foreign workers. In Oizumimachi, GunmaPrefecture, foreigners, many of them of Japanese descent and hired by small andmedium-sized businesses, exceed 10 percent of the town's totalpopulation. In May and June 1996, a concentrated enforcement action against illegalaliens resulted in the removal of 4,069 foreigners, 90 percent of whom wereworking illegally. Over one-fourth of those removed from Japan were SouthKoreans, followed by 700 Chinese and 500 Thais. Most of the men were employedin construction, and the women were employed as bar hostesses. In 1995, some 55,740 illegal aliens were removed from Japan, down 16percent from 1994. In Japan, illegal aliens are often apprehended when they turn themselves into authorities to get the exit permit needed to leave the country. About 60percent of those apprehended in May-June turned themselves in. Two Japanese owners of a manpower service company were arrested for sendingfour Japanese-Brazilians to engage in manual labor between April and July 1995,and for sending another 300 Japanese-Brazilians to 40 companies in Tokyo andfour neighboring prefectures to illegally work. Private employment servicefirms are prohibited from recruiting or deploying manual workers inJapan. In July, illegal Chinese and Myanmarese workers were found working in theTsukiji fish market in Tokyo. The Chinese workers earned some 12,000 yen perday, or about $114 per day or $14 per hour, for handling fish and processingthem from 11 PM to 7 AM. A growing number of Chinese and other foreigners, mostly Asian, are workingillegally in the Japanese fish industry. Kawasaki City, south of Tokyo, in April 1996 announced plans to permitnon-Japanese to apply for all local civil service jobs except fire departmentjobs. In May 1996, a Tokyo court upheld a national law that requires civilservants to be Japanese. The court ruled against a second-generation Koreannurse who was denied a management job because she was not Japanese. However,Kawasaki City plans to eliminate its nationality requirement so that ethnicKoreans can hold civil servant jobs. There are about 630,000 Koreans who are not Japanese citizens living inJapan. Until the peace treaty of April 1952, Koreans living in Japan were Japanesecitizens. In 1953, the Japanese government decreed that "public servantsinvolved in the formation of the national will or in the exercise of nationalauthority must be Japanese nationals." Despite the ban on non-Japanese holding civil service jobs, about one-thirdof Japanese cities do not require applicants for jobs to prove that they areJapanese citizens. Miki Tanikawa, "Japan's Lifetime Jobs: Foreigners Qualify Too," New YorkTimes, August 25, 1996. "Number of illegal immigrants in Japan on decline,"Agence France Presse, August 2, 1996. "2 nabbed over illegal work byJapanese-Brazilians," Japan Economic Newswire, July 31, 1996. " Foreignerskept at arm's length," Daily Yomiuri, July 30, 1996. _______________________________ Hong Kong: Crime andAirportWorkers Illegal immigrants from China are blamed for a rash of violent crimes inHong Kong. Most of the crimes committed by illegal immigrants are in the NewTerritories, where an average of 64 Chinese are apprehended every day. TheHong Kong police report that some illegal immigrants have been caught 100times, and have become "professional" border crossers. The number ofmultiple-entry illegals in 1996, up from a figure of 27 percent in 1994. About 150 Chinese immigrate to China every day: most are the wives andchildren of Hong Kong men. Labor troubles are plaguing the Hong Kong airport construction project.Contractors claim that they are so short of workers that, if they cannot importadditional foreign workers, the airport will not be finished. However, localunions counter that employers prefer foreign to local workers. Several of Hong Kong's legislators have recommended that an independentcommittee study the importation of foreign workers for airport constructionjobs. Some foreign workers went on strike to protest irregular payrolldeductions. According to one Hong Kong legislator, wages have fallen because of foreignconstruction workers. Government data indicate that the average wage for anforeign craftsman is about HK $15,000 per month, half of the HK $30,000 a localcraftsman expects. The contracts of many foreign workers expire at the end of 1996, but HongKong employers want to import replacements. Each year, about 11 percent of theaverage 30,000 displaced manufacturing workers go into construction. The old Hong Kong airport is being used as a transit center for smugglingimmigrants from China to Canada, the US and other destinations. US authoritiesreport that, although boat smuggling has decreased, airline smuggling is on therise. There were 341 cases in 1995 of people destined for Canada trying toboard flights with suspicious or forged travel documents. Hong Kong Governor Chris Patton estimates that over 8,000 ethnic minoritiesin Hong Kong will become homeless after the 1997 turnover. The Australian foreign minister confirmed that up to 95,000 Hong Kongresidents could be allowed into Australia after the turnover, mostly personsborn in Hong Kong who have multiple-entry visas to Australia. They would beallowed to stay in Australia for up to three months, then apply for permanentresidency. There are also about 20,000 Hong Kong students in Australia who could applyto remain, and another 50,000 Hong Kong Chinese who carry Australian passports. "When the airport is over," South China Morning Post, August 18, 1996.Peter Stein, "Violent crimes by illegal immigrants are fraying nerves in HongKong," Wall Street Journal, August 18, 1996. "Gangs use Hong Kong airport ascenter for illegal Chinese," Agence France Presse, August 4, 1996. Stella Lee,"Flood of IIs feared before handover," South China Morning Post, July 10, 1996.Catherine Ng, "Panel calls for watchdog on airport labour," South China MorningPost, July 6, 1996. Lindsay Murdoch, "Refugee Concern over Hong Kong," The Age(Melbourne), July 5, 1996. Glenn Schloss and David Wallen, "8,009 facebecoming stateless next year," South China Morning Post, July 6, 1996."Patten: Protecting HK 'moral imperative,'" UPI, July 5, 1996. _______________________________ PhilippinesMaid Returns Home Philippine maid Sarah Balabagan came home to a hero's welcome in August,after being jailed in the United Arab Emirates for nearly two years for killingher 85-year-old employer in self-defense. Instead of being hanged, Balabaganwas given 100 lashes and made to pay $40,000 blood money. Balabagan says sheis 17, although her documents say she is 30. Balabagan is now a millionaire, having received more than a million pesosfrom a French non-government group called "Save Sarah Balabagan Movement." AGerman movie company has offered her $5 million for the rights to herstory. The ILO office in Manila reportedly estimates that there are 4.5 millionFilipinos employed abroad, half working as illegals. An additional two millionFilipinos live permanently abroad, including 1.1 million in the US, accordingto the International Alliance of Filipino Migrant Workers, known by its acronymMigrante. The ILO, in a recent report, noted that Filipinos are likely to continue toemigrate for decades: even if "macro-economic recovery was quick, robust andsustained, the time taken to come within sight of the turning point in thedomestic labor market might have to be measured in decades, not years." The Philippine economy grew by almost six percent in 1995, and the countrycreated 500,000 to one million new jobs for the 700,000 work force entrants.The unemployment rate is officially eight percent. In 1994, some 775,000persons joined the labor force, while 719,692 persons left for workabroad. The ILO estimates remittances to be $3 billion per year, equivalent to morethan 20 percent of export earnings, and as much as four percent of GDP. According to Migrante, there have been at least 40,000 documented cases ofabuse of Filipino migrant workers. Migrante says there are 400 Filipinos inSaudi jails, including 40 on death row, although the government reports thatthere are only 50 Filipinos in foreign prisons, and only 10 sentenced todeath. There are over 500,000 Filipino workers in Saudi Arabia, including 160,604who were deployed there in 1995. Most are professionals or skilled andsemi-skilled workers--about 15 percent of the Filipinos in Saudi Arabia, or75,000, are maids. In 1995, some 51,701 Filipinos were deployed to Hong Kong, followed byTaiwan, 50,538; United Arab Emirates, 26,235; Japan, 25,032; Malaysia, 11,622;Singapore, 10,736; Qatar, 9,961; Kuwait 9,852; and, the US, 7,456. The Philippines first began to encourage migration for employment abroad in1974. The Department of Labor and Employment (DOLE) is now discouragingFilipino women from going abroad as maids by requiring that they be least 25years of age. The Philippines in August implemented new guidelines for the recruitment ofmaids to work in Singapore. On August 8, 160 Singaporean recruitment agentswere briefed on Manila's new guidelines for the deployment of Filipino domesticworkers. The recruiters, all members of Local and Foreign Workers Employment AgentsAssociation of Singapore, signed an agreement with the Philippine OverseasLabour Office in Singapore, pledging to deposit S$5,000 as a security bond withthe Philippine Embassy. Violations of the new rules will lead to a forfeitureof the bond and possible loss of accreditation. The recruiters predict that the number of Filipino domestic workers inSingapore will increase 50 percent after the new guidelines are in place. Some of the agents reportedly fear that Singaporeans who want to hire maidswill recruit them privately, via maids already working, and bring them in astourists to avoid the bond. In Hong Kong, plans to require employers of Filipino maids to post a HK$200deposit with the local consulate were reportedly delayed by too few staff tocollect the fee. Hong Kong employers currently pay HK$425 to the consulate toprocess contracts, and the extra HK$ 200 was to be used to authenticatecontracts. Nirmal Ghosh, "Manila briefs 160 Singapore recruiters on new guidelines onmaids," Straits Times, August 9, 1996. "Filipina maids' number in Singapore torise 50 percent recruiters," Agence France Presse, August 8, 1996. JasonGutierrez, "Migrant workers' woes haunt Philippines," United PressInternational August 9, 1996. Johanna Son, "Balagaban returns, many more lookabroad," Inter Press Service, August 1, 1996. _______________________________ Singapore:ManagingMigration Singapore is widely regarded as a controlled society that can manage withprecision the foreign workers who are about one-sixth of the island's laborforce. However, there are at least weekly reports of illegal aliensapprehended in Singapore's construction industry. Construction represents a special problem. Since 1992, Singaporeanconstruction employers have been permitted to have five foreign workers foreach local worker. Special rules apply to workers from non-traditional sourcecountries. Many construction employers do not register their foreign workers to avoidpaying a levy or tax of S$440 per month for unskilled foreign workers. Forexample, an inspection of 139 construction workers in August turned up 66 withno or false documents. Foreign students are increasingly caught working illegally as bar andkaraoke lounge hostesses, laborers, shop assistants, sales promoters, andwaiters. In 1994, 48,883 student passes were issued to students from China andother Asian countries, and 38,383 were issued in 1995. Chinese students nowneed to be interviewed in Beijing, and have a local Singaporean sponsor post aS$5,000 bond. Foreign students are prohibited from working in Singapore, and thoseapprehended can be jailed for up to six months and fined S$1,000, but most aresimply deported, and required to forfeit security deposits of S$1,000 to S$5,000, depending on their country of origin. Employers found with illegalstudent workers are fined two to four years worth of foreign worker tax (levy),or S$ 200 to S$ 450 per month. Singapore has averaged nine percent economic growth over the past 30 years.In August, the Monetary Authority of Singapore attributed 1.5 to two percent ofthe country's economic growth to the increased number of foreign workers since1992, and more particularly since December 1994, when quotas wereincreased. However, the economy is expected to grow by only six percent in 1996because of a slowdown in electronics, which account for 15 percent of GDP, and52 percent of manufacturing output. Increased economic competition in industries such as shipbuilding fromother nations that, in some cases, use foreign workers after they have leftSingapore, are threatening the image that Singapore can "manage migration."Singapore produced $2.5 billion worth of ships in 1995, but Middle Easternnations such as Dubai are increasingly effective competitors, and they employin some cases foreign workers after they have left Singapore. "Foreign labour lifts growth potential," Business Times, August 22, 1996."Singapore shipyards warned of competition," Agence France Presse, August 13,1996. Raoul Le Blond and Choo Li Meng, "More foreign students caught workingillegally," Straits Times, August 11, 1996. _______________________________ MalaysianEconomic Growth and ForeignWorkers The Seventh Malaysia Plan (1996-2000) projects continued growth in one ofEast Asia's miracle economies, led manufactured exports produced with the helpof foreign workers. In 1995, the Malaysian government offered incentives topromote key industries such as micro-electronics, automotive, aerospace,automated manufacturing, bio-tech and information technology, in line withMalaysia's "Vision 2020" goal of becoming a developed country in 2020. Malaysia's economy grew at a rate of 9.5 percent in 1995, and is projectedto expand by over eight percent in 1996. Malaysia has an estimated 1.2 to 1.7 million foreign workers, with perhapshalf having legal status. A Malaysian youth group in August approved aresolution calling for a law that would "prohibit foreign workers, especiallyBangladeshis, from marrying Malaysian women." The Deputy Human ResourcesMinister urged employers to police the hostels that house especially femalemigrant workers, since many allegedly moonlight as prostitutes. Malaysia has no minimum wage legislation, so workers frequently move fromjob to job in search of higher pay, better benefits, or more amenablesupervisors. As rural Malays migrate to cities for manufacturing jobs, manyfind that they cannot afford housing. A low-cost house has a selling priceunder 25,000 ringgits (US $10,000), and 500 to 700 square feet. However,manufacturing wages are typically 450 ringgits (US $180) per month, plusadditional overtime pay of another 200 ringgits (US$ 80) per month. High housing prices and low salaries encourage many internal migrants andforeign workers to "squat," either by building their own accommodations, or byputting large numbers of residents in one house. M. Sahibullah, "Ensure foreign workers obey the law," New Straits TimesAugust 29, 1996. Gwen Benjamin, "Malaysia seeks developed statushood, spurnscheap-labour industries," Deutsche Presse-Agentur, August 9, 1996. " Womenadvised not to fall for foreign workers," New Straits Times August 2,1996. _______________________________ TaiwanFreezes WorkerImports Taiwan's Council for Economic Planning and Development, the Ministry ofEconomic Affairs, and the Council of Labor Affairs moved on August 11, 1996 tohalt foreign worker imports after 280,000 permits have been approved since1989. The approved permits for foreigners who have not yet arrived will begiven to employers who hire more of Taiwan's aborigines, and employers who buypermits that are auctioned off to raise funds for vocational training andunemployment pay. The foreign worker freeze is meant to counter rising unemployment, whichaveraged 1.8 percent in 1995, the highest rate since 1988, and topped twopercent in 1996. Among the foreign workers in Taiwan, 60 to 70 percent or about 200,000 arefrom Thailand, 20 percent are from the Philippines, about 10 percent areMalaysians, and 10 percent, or 2,000 to 3,000 are Indonesians. There is aquota of 8,000 foreign maids in Taiwan, and 4,000 are said to be Indonesians.The Indonesian government is interested in increasing the number of workers inTaiwan. Taiwan's Council of Labor Affairs announced that it may reduce the ratio offoreign to native workers, from the current 35 percent to 30 to 33 percent.Taiwan grants employers the right to hire foreign workers on anindustry-by-industry basis, and six of the 74 industries approved to hireforeign workers will lose that right in November 1996. On the other hand, a local government announced plans for a 5,500 hectareindustrial park in southwestern Taiwan, noting that the park could accommodate350,000 people, "including 122,500 foreign workers under the current laborregulations." Taiwan in mid-August announced that foreign professionals and techniciansno longer need permits to come to Taiwan for short working visits--they needonly register with the appropriate government agency. Taiwan plans to allow some foreigners to become permanent residents. Adraft of the immigration law will be submitted to the Cabinet in December1996. On August 15, the Taiwan government announced that new regulations toprotect the rights and interest of foreign domestic workers has been drafted.Under the proposed rules, foreign maids are given a day off every week, orovertime pay if they work on their day off. After one year of work, they areentitled to a seven-day paid vacation. Maids be will able to apply for 30 daysof sick leave per year at half pay. Employers will be required to buy healthinsurance policies for maids. Taiwan has about 30,000 foreign maids, most fromthe Philippines. James Peng, "Taiwan tackles 10-year high jobless rate," Reuters, August 23,1996. "Taiwan to freeze new foreign worker applications," Reuter Asia-PacificBusiness Report, August 14, 1996. "Taiwan drafts regulations to protect therights of foreign maids," Agence France Presse, August 15, 1996. Lilian Wu,"Indonesian Workers on the Rise," Central News Agency, August 2, 1996."Taiwan: Foreign Workers," China Economic News Service August 9, 1996. "Taiwanto grant permanent residence to foreigners," Deutsche Presse-Agentur, July 3,1996. _______________________________ OTHER _______________________________ Israeland Jordan Debate ForeignWorkers The new Israeli government of Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu isattempting to reverse Israel's growing reliance on foreign workers. Acommittee recommended in mid-August that the number of legal work permits bereduced from 103,000 to 83,000, and that the estimated 50,000 to 150,000foreigners working with expired tourist permits be apprehended and deported. At its weekly meeting on August 23, the Israeli Cabinet considered aproposal by the Labor and Welfare Minister to establish an Authority forForeign Workers that would have the responsibility of detecting and expelling1,000 illegal foreign workers each month. At this rate, authorities estimatethat it would take more than eight years to expel all of the 100,000 foreignersworking in Israel without a permit. On July 12, the Jerusalem Post ran a major story headlined "importingtrouble." Some Israelis warn that there is nothing more permanent thantemporary workers--importing foreign workers may not be reversible, as Israeliyouth abandon farm, construction, and service jobs. The United Torah JudaismParty, part of the coalition government, is pushing for the expulsion offoreign workers. The US is pressuring Israel to expel illegal aliens to make room forPalestinians who need jobs. After the closure of the West Bank and Gaza inFebruary 1996, Israel prevented 60,000 Palestinians from working in thecountry, and granted work permits to an additional 50,000 foreign workers.Some 40,000 Palestinians are currently authorized to work in Israel, down froma peak 180,000 in 1989. The Palestinian Authority estimates that each day that Palestinians cannotwork in Israel, the West Bank and Gaza lose $6 million--the 60,000 Palestiniansemployed in Israel have a weekly payroll of about $15 million. Palestinianssay that there were 180,000 commuters to Israel in January 1995, before theclosures began, 100,000 legal workers, and the rest illegal workers. The unemployment rate is 65 percent in the Gaza Strip, and 45 percent inthe West Bank. In the mid-1980s, there were few foreign workers (excluding Palestinians)in Israel, in 1990, 16,000, and in 1996, there are 200,000 to 250,000, halfillegal, and 70 percent in the Tel Aviv area. In south Tel Aviv, there are30,000 to 40,000 construction workers from Eastern Europe and Turkey, and theyhave average earnings of about $800 per month. Many of the foreign workers are concentrated in south Tel Aviv, whereovercrowding is common, and both beer halls and brothels have emerged to servethem. According to one estimate, 60,000 of Tel Aviv's 440,000 residents areforeigners (14 percent). Israel's state comptroller, Miriam Ben-Porat, asserted that "The practiceof using foreign workers delays technological development and marketoptimization, hurts the employment potential of Israelis seeking work, reducesthe need for Israelis to enter into the fields that the foreign workers enter,and creates a dependence on cheap labor and is bound to create socialproblems." As the number of foreign workers increases, so do reports of legal migrantworkers switching from the employer who brought them to Israel to jobs that paymore, and thus a growing number of illegal workers. In mid-August, it wasreported that there were at least 100,000 illegal foreign workers in Israel,and the government announced that it was establishing a detention center forthose apprehended. There are an estimated 17,500 Thai workers employed on one-year contractsin Israeli agriculture--a Thai worker was killed in July 1996 by a Palestinianallegedly upset about being displaced. Most of the Thai workers live in mobilehomes, and at least $700 is transferred directly by Israeli farmers to theirThai workers' accounts at the Bank of Bangkok. Foreigners are using a number of ruses to enter Israel in search of work.One group of Nigerians tried to enter Israel with forged papers indicating thatthey were UN peacekeeping troops. Under one proposed private employer agreement with the government of Kenya,for example, up to 15,000 Kenyan workers could come to Israel but, if theKenyan worker abandons his job, he will forfeit a $3,000 bond. If the workercannot be found, then the Kenyan government will collect the $3,000 from hisfamily in Kenya. Reports of foreign worker abuse are increasing. A television report inmid-August told of six Turkish workers who were locked in a shack on an Israelifarm by the employer. Many foreign workers live in squalid housing, which onepolice officer likened to a ghetto. City authorities, especially in Tel Aviv,complain about the social, health and crime problems created by the foreignworkers. There are 300,000 Arab and other foreign workers in Jordan, up from 250,000from 1995, and 10 percent are unemployed. On August 3, the governmentannounced plans to tighten controls on foreign workers in the country. Underthe plan, the passports of foreign workers would be stamped with the name ofthe foreigner's Jordanian employer and the duration of the work permit. Employers and landlords are required to register foreigners at the localpolice station within 48 hours of the foreigners' arrival, or risk fines of50-100 dinars ($70-$140) per day. Work permit fees are being raised from 300 dinars or $520 to 1,200 dinarsor $1,680 to discourage foreign workers from entering Jordan. The new feesrepresent an increase of 10 to 25 percent for Arab laborers in agriculture, 100to 150 percent for other Arab laborers, and 300 to 400 percent for non-Arabforeign workers. The purpose of the new regulations and fees is to "halt the flow of foreignlabor to create employment opportunities for Jordanian workers." Unemploymentis officially 15 percent, and informally believed to be at least 30 percent.About 135,000 persons, 36 percent of all Jordanians, are employed by thegovernment. Jordan plans to introduce a minimum wage, which will be at least thepoverty line, which was 132 dinars ($185) per month in 1994. Many Jordanians work abroad. In 1990, Saudi Arabia expelled Jordaniandiplomats and migrant workers after Jordan refused to condemn Iraq's invasionof Kuwait. Jeffery Heller, "Israeli Minister Targets Illegal Foreign Workers,"Reuters, August 23, 1996. Neil MacFarquhar, " Israel's New Poor: ForeignLaborers," New York Times, August 19, 1996. "Israel to set up detention centerfor illegal workers," Agence France Presse, August 13, 1996. "Jordan to raisework-permit fees for foreign workers," Xinhua News Agency, August 7, 1996.Allison Kaplan Sommer, "Importing Trouble," Jerusalem Post, July 12, 1996. _______________________________ GulfStateForeign Workers Foreign workers sent $17.2 billion to their countries of origin in 1995, upfrom $15.2 billion in 1994. Between 1990 and 1995, remittances from foreignworkers in Saudi Arabia totaled about $ 100.3 billion, an average of $ 16.7billion annually. In emigration countries such as India, Morocco, Pakistan, Tunisia, Turkeyand Yemen, remittances exceed official development assistance by 20 to 40percent. Egypt received $4.7 billion in remittances in 1995, up from $ 4.6billion in 1994, while Jordan received $1.3 billion in 1995, up from $1.1billion in 1994. From 1990 to 1995, Jordan's total hard-currency earnings fromremittances was $ 5.2 billion. A new labor law effective at the end of the year in Kuwait requiresemployers to pay an annual fee of US $330 for each foreign employee. The feewill be paid by the employer, not the employees, and will increase theministry's revenue by 60 percent. Kuwait had 1.25 million foreigners from 130 countries among its 1.95million residents in 1995, and 600,000 foreign laborers employed in the privatesector. Two-thirds of foreign workers are Asian, and one-third are Arab.About 17 percent of the foreigners in Kuwait were unemployed in 1995, versus1.4 percent of Kuwaitis. Kuwait gives medical tests to the 12,000 incoming foreign workers eachmonth and, in the first seven months of 1996, some 480 of 89,123 foreignworkers were not allowed to enter because they had "infectiousdiseases." Kuwait announced after the Gulf War that it would never again allowforeigners to outnumber natives, and the Kuwaiti government plans to haveKuwaitis be 50 percent of the population in the year 2000. However, in 1995,the 708,000 Kuwaitis were only 36 percent of the population. In May 1996, Iraq signed an agreement with the UN that will allow it tosell $2 billion worth of oil over six months to buy food. However, 30 percentof the proceeds from Iraqi oil sales are to go to the UN CompensationCommission, which is expected to begin dealing with $134 million in claims from50,000 migrant workers forced to leave Iraq or Kuwait when Iraq invaded inAugust 1990--each migrant is expected to receive at least $2,500. "Kuwait deports 480 foreign nationals due to health reasons," Xinhua NewsAgency, August 10, 1996. "Kuwait employers to pay annual fee for foreignlaborers," Xinhua News Agency, May 12, 1996. WT02-B15-6IA090-000969-B027-253http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/By-Month/MN-Vol-3-96/MN_Oct_96.html 128.120.36.171 19970122205235 text/html 158965HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 20:53:10 GMTLast-Modified: Wednesday, 02-Oct-96 18:23:11 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 158705 MIGRATION NEWS  MIGRATION NEWS Vol. 3, No. 10 October, 1996 Migration News summarizes the most important immigration and integrationdevelopments of the preceding month. Topics are grouped by region: North America, Europe, Asia, andOther. There are two versions of Migration News. The paper edition is about 8,000words in length, and the email version about 15,000. The purpose of Migration News is to provide a monthly summary of recentimmigration developments that can be read in 60 minutes or less. Many issuesalso contain summaries and reviews of recent research publications. Distribution is by email. If you wish to subscribe, send your emailaddress to: Migration News <migrant@primal.ucdavis.edu> Current and back issues may be accessed via Internet on the Migration NewsHome Page--- http://migration.ucdavis.edu There is no charge for an email subscription to Migration News. A paperedition is available by mail for $30 domestic and $50 foreign. Make checkspayable to UC Regents and send to: Philip Martin, Department of AgriculturalEconomics, University of California, Davis California 95616 USA. Migration News is produced with the support of the University ofCalifornia-Berkeley Center for German and European Studies, the German MarshallFund of the United States, and the Pew Charitable Trusts. ISSN 1081-9916 Editors' note: We are pleased to announce an expanded web page athttp://migration.ucdavis.edu, with links to additional migration materials. Wewill soon be adding a search engine to expedite the retrieval of informationfrom past issues of Migration News. _______________________________ NORTHAMERICA _______________________________ ImmigrationOverhaul On September 25, 1996, by a vote of 305 to 123, the House approved a billaimed at reducing illegal immigration and reducing access of legal immigrantsto welfare. In the Senate, the immigration bill was included in a spending proposalneeded to fund government operations, and the Clinton administration andDemocratic Senators were thus able to remove several provisions of theHouse-passed bill that would have tightened the access of legal immigrants towelfare services. The House on September 28, 1996 approved the final version of theimmigration and budget bill by a vote of 370-37. The Senate approved the billon September 30, 1996 by a vote of 84 to 15. President Clinton signed the bill into law immediately. Between the first and second House votes, there were intense negotiationsbetween the White House and Congress over provisions in the bill that wouldhave made legal immigrants deportable if they received more than 12 months ofwelfare benefits, and raised the income needed for US citizens to sponsor theirimmediate relatives for admission. The deportation-for-use-of-benefitsprovision was dropped, and the sponsor-income requirement was reduced. In a separate vote on September 25, 1996, the House also passed theGallegly amendment, which would permit states to deny newly-enrolled K-12children free public education, by a vote of 254 to 175. The Senate did notconsider the Gallegly amendment. Some commentators saw the new immigration bill as an echo of Proposition187, the California initiative approved by a 59-41 percent vote in November1994 that would have created a state-run system to prevent illegal immigrantsfrom gaining access to social services, including K-12 education. Others stressed that the 1996 legislation originated in the budget and lawenforcement committees rather than the immigration committee. The welfareoverhaul law came from budget committees, and the anti-terrorism law fromenforcement committees. Provisions. The immigration bill includes three major sets ofmeasures to reduce illegal immigration and reduce the access of legalimmigrants to welfare. First, it provides for stronger border enforcement, adding 1,000 BorderPatrol agents per year for five years, bringing the total from 5,175 in 1996 toalmost 10,000 by the year 2000. The new immigration law also requires INS tobuild a 14-mile triple fence on the US-Mexican border south of San Diego, andincreases penalties for smuggling aliens into the US and for using falsedocuments to obtain US jobs or welfare assistance. The new law adds 1,200 INS investigators, the agents who inspect US workplaces for unauthorized workers, and apprehend and deport criminalaliens. Second, it introduces a pilot telephone verification program to enableemployers to verify the status of newly-hired workers, and social serviceagencies to determine the legal status of applicants for benefits. However,employer participation in the verification program is voluntary, and nonational worker eligibility verification system that mandates employerparticipation could be established without new legislation. The Commission on Immigration Reform in 1995 called a mandatory nationalverification system "the linchpin" of efforts to reduce illegal immigration. The new law includes incentives for states to develop counterfeit-resistantdriver's licenses and birth certificates. The conference committee deleted a provision in the bill that would haveadded 350 labor inspectors, and set higher penalties for companies thatrepeatedly violate employer sanctions laws. The new legislation makes it easier for employers to defend themselvesagainst suits from job applicants who believe that they were discriminatedagainst by employers checking their legal status. Job applicants who believethat employers checking their legal status discriminated against them must nowprove that the employer intended to discriminate. Third, the immigration bill expands and reinforces restrictions on theaccess of LEGAL immigrants to welfare benefits. Non-US citizens were barredfrom Food Stamp assistance and Supplemental Security Income by the welfare lawenacted in August 1996, but that law left it to states to decide whether topermit legal immigrants to participate in Medicaid, medical assistance for thepoor. President Clinton's last minute negotiations preserved the right of statesto offer Medicaid to non-US citizens, including for the treatment of AIDS.Persons with AIDS are not allowed to immigrate but, once in the US, Medicaidcan pay for their treatment. Clinton also got a provision dropped that would have subjected todeportation immigrants who received means-tested federal welfare assistance,including AFDC and Medicaid, for more than 12 months during their first sevenyears in the US. Under the House-approved bill, legal immigrants would have been ineligiblefor Medicaid benefits during their first five years in the US. If they appliedin year six, their applications could be rejected if the immigrant's income andassets together with those of his/her sponsor exceeded certain limits, anapplication of "deeming" that the immigrant has access to her sponsor's incomeand assets. Deeming is meant to shift the cost of maintaining needy immigrantsfrom the taxpayers to the sponsors who agreed to support them in the US. To make it less likely that immigrants will request welfare assistanceafter their arrival, US sponsors will have to have higher incomes. Sponsors of immigrants now have to have an income at least equal to thepoverty line, $15,569 for a family of four in 1995. Under the new immigrationlaw, US citizens who want to bring spouses and minor children into the US willhave to have incomes that are 125 percent of the poverty line, $19,461, downfrom 140 percent in the House-approved bill. Sponsors are allowed to includethe partial value of assets such as cars and homes to reach thislevel. In 1994, about 36 percent of the sponsors of immediate relatives hadincomes that were less than 140 percent of the poverty line, and 44 percent ofthose who sponsored parents and adult siblings had incomes less than 200percent of the poverty line. New systems will be put in place to deal with foreigners convicted ofcommitting crimes in the US, including the establishment of a national databaseof such persons. Foreigners convicted of entering the US illegally, oroverstaying a previous visa, will be denied new visas to enter the US for 10years. An INS officer will decide whether a person seeking asylum at the US borderis granted asylum. A negative decision would have to be appealed within sevendays to an immigration judge, and then further appeals are possible. The chairman of the House immigration subcommittee, Lamar Smith (R-TX),said that the new immigration bill "secures America's borders, penalizes aliensmugglers, streamlines removal of criminal and illegal aliens and endsnon-citizens' abuse of the welfare system." The 13 Democratic legislators on the conference committee were excludedfrom the negotiations that settled differences between the House and Senatebills, and many attacked the conference bill as "fatally flawed." Among theprovisions subject to such criticism: under the new immigration law, an INSdecision would be reviewed only if the US Supreme Court agreed to consider it,and the INS would be exempt from environmental laws when building roads andbarriers along the border. According to many Democrats, the new immigration law sends the messagethat, if a foreigner can get into the US, it will still be easy to find a job,but it will be more difficult to obtain welfare benefits. Gallegly amendment. A 5-4 US Supreme Court decision in 1982, Plylerv Doe, requires states to provide K-12 education to illegal alienchildren. California's Proposition 187, if implemented, would end free publiceducation for illegal alien children, and the Gallegly amendment would haveoverturned the Supreme Court decision thus allowing it to happen. President Clinton in August 1996 threatened to veto any immigration billthat would "kick children out of school and onto the streets." RepublicanPresidential candidate Bob Dole, with the urging of California Governor PeteWilson, strongly supported the Gallegly amendment, asserting that "thewonderful California quality of life is being threatened by the flood ofillegal immigration." In an attempt to make the amendment acceptable, several modifications wereoffered. Rep Elton Gallegly (R-CA) in August proposed that illegal alienscurrently in K-12 schools could remain in classes, but states would have beenallowed to charge them tuition if they continued from elementary to secondaryschool. Rep. Brian P. Bilbray (R-CA) offered a compromise on September 12 thatwould have left in place the obligation of states to educate illegal alienchildren, but would have shifted the cost to the federal government. The costof educating the estimated 700,000 illegal alien children in K-12 USschools--almost 400,000 in California-- is thought to be about $4 billion peryear. On September 24, the Gallegly amendment was modified again to permitillegal alien children enrolled in US schools on July 1, 1997 to graduate, andwas set for a separate vote. Road to Reform. The Immigration Control and FinancialResponsibility Act of 1996 began in the House and Senate in 1995 ascomprehensive bills aimed at reducing illegal and legal immigration, asrecommended by the Commission on Immigration Reform in June, 1995. However, the Clinton administration, most Democrats, and interest groupsthat ranged from high-tech companies to church groups to ethnic lobbies opposedreductions in legal immigration, and changes in the legal immigration systemwere therefore removed from both bills in Spring 1996. On September 11, 1996 the House appointed its 19 members to theHouse/Senate conference committee responsible for working out the differencesbetween the House and Senate immigration bills. The Senate appointed 11members in August. The conference committee was scheduled to meet on September 17, but themeeting was canceled because of disagreements between Republicans over theGallegly amendment. After the conference committee reported the bill, and the House approvedit, the Clinton Administration demanded and secured modifications of theprovisions affecting the access of legal immigrants to welfare benefits in theSenate. What Next? Most commentaries on the new immigration law werevariations on one of three themes. First was the party politicalinterpretation--Republicans closely linked to businesses that benefit fromimmigration do not want to really stop the influx, but they do want to preventimmigrants from gaining access to welfare benefits and schools. In Spring 1996, a coalition of immigration admissionists, civillibertarians, high-tech companies, and libertarian think tanks successfullyopposed proposals originally made by the Commission on Immigration Reform, andendorsed by the Clinton administration, that would have reduced legalimmigration and imposed new fees on US employers who wanted to bring immigrantsinto the US to fill vacant jobs. Second were accounts that said 1996 marked a tougher attitude on illegalimmigration, and a new skepticism of legal immigration, as exemplified bySenator Diane Feinstein (D-CA), who says that "people want a slowdown" inimmigration. President Clinton and Republican candidate Dole have been sparring instates such as California and Florida about who is tougher on illegalimmigration. Clinton touts his administration's addition of Border Patrolagents, and the streamlining of deportations of criminal aliens. Dole agrees,and goes further, arguing states should be allowed to keep illegal alienchildren from attending K-12 schools, and favors restricting family unificationto immediate family members. Dole does not favor ending the current practice of birthright citizenship,under which babies born in the US are US citizens, even though endingbirthright citizenship is a plank in the Republican platform. Some observers credit Republicans Pete Wilson and Pat Buchanan for layingthe groundwork for stepped up measures against illegal immigration, and forreduced legal immigration. These politicians, the argument runs, havebroadened a narrow focus on the economic impacts of immigration to a concernabout broader effects on welfare, language and identity. Third are commentaries that say that 1996 showed that the US was gettingtougher on both illegal and legal immigration. Indeed, many immigrantadmissionists predicted that the next target of restrictionists would benaturalization, following stories that unqualified immigrants are allowed tonaturalize. Finally, some speculate that future immigration policy-making may startwith tough legislation, followed by softer corrective legislation. For example, pressure is building to modify a provision of theanti-terrorism bill signed into law by President Clinton in April 1996--thatwhich calls for the deportation of any immigrant who has been convicted of afelony--"one strike and you're out." Stories of immigrants who committedcrimes 20 or 40 years earlier, served their sentences, and then became subjectto deportation when they returned from a trip abroad, or otherwise came to theattention of INS, convinced many people of the need for someflexibility. The anti-terrorism law provides no judicial discretion--there is no appealfrom deportation for convicted immigrant criminals detained by INS. Whensigning the law, President Clinton said that he would send Congress correctivelegislation to permit relief from deportation in some cases. Marc Lacey, " Toned Down Bill on Immigration Passes in House," Los AnglesTimes, September 29, 1996. Gerald Seib, "Backlash over immigration has enteredmainstream this year," Wall Street Journal, September 27, 1996. Marc Lacey,"Immigration Bill Logjam Broken, Sources Say," Los Angles Times, September 24,1996. Eric Schmitt, " Immigration Bill Poses a Dilemma for GOP," New YorkTimes, September 21, 1996. Michael Doyle, "Presidential Politics ShapeImmigration Bill Debate," Sacramento Bee, September 18, 1996. Eric Schmitt,"Dole's Immigration Stance Splits GOP in Congress," New York Times, September13, 1996. Adam Clymer, "Dole's Moves Sidetrack a Treaty and a Bill," New YorkTimes, September 13, 1996. Herbert Sample, "Gingrich sees immigration reformvictory," Sacramento Bee, September 11, 1996. _______________________________ NaturalizationControversy In FY96, some 1.1 to 1.2 million immigrants are expected to become Americancitizens, more than doubling FY95's record 445,852 naturalizations. Theprevious record was 441,979 naturalizations in 1944. Seventy-five percent of the new US citizens are in or near the cities ofNew York, Los Angeles, Chicago, San Francisco, Miami and Houston, and most areexpected to vote Democratic in 1996 elections. There are about eight million immigrants in the US who are eligible tonaturalize. The INS projects that another 1.1 million foreigners willnaturalize in FY97. The upsurge in naturalizations prompted some Republicans to charge that theDemocratic Clinton administration is cutting corners to get more Democraticvoters. Each newly-naturalized citizen receives a packet that includes a voterregistration card and a letter from the president. The presidential letter begins: "Dear Fellow American: I want tocongratulate you on reaching the impressive milestone of becoming a citizen ofour great nation. As you enjoy the benefits of American citizenship and assumethe responsibilities that accompany it, you follow the many brave men and womenwho have sacrificed to establish and preserve our democracy over the last twocenturies." On September 10, 1996, a US House of Representatives subcommittee heldhearings on allegations that some private firms certified to test the Englishskills of applicants for naturalization were approving applicants who could notspeak English. Republicans unveiled a memo written by Vice President Gore's office thatsays: "INS warns that if we are too aggressive at removing the roadblocks to[naturalization].... we might be publicly criticized for running apro-Democratic voter mill." A Chicago Alderman wrote a letter to Mrs. Clinton urging an acceleratednaturalization program to "provide the Democrats with a strategic advantage" inthe 1996 elections. Vice President Gore launched a "Citizenship USA" drive in April 1995,speeding the elimination of the backlog of 600,000 immigrants who had requestednaturalization, and promising new applicants naturalization within 90days. On September 24, 1996, several Immigration and Naturalization Serviceemployees testified that the INS was naturalizing immigrants who had committedcrimes in the US, usually a bar to US citizenship. An INS agent charged that5,000 of the 60,000 immigrants naturalized during mass ceremonies in LosAngeles in August 1996 had criminal records. Since Citizenship USA began, some327,000 persons have been naturalized in Los Angeles, including 60,000 onAugust 7-9 and August 14-16,1996. INS officials insisted that such statements were misleading, and that nomore than 69 of the 5,000 immigrants with criminal records would have beendenied naturalization. Many of the crimes were violations of immigration law,which the INS does not consider sufficient reason to disqualify applicants fromUS citizenship. INS promised to revoke the US citizenship of anyone naturalized improperly,although the INS admitted on September 25 that because it had not yet decidedwhat procedures to use, it had not yet taken back the citizenship of anyoneimproperly naturalized in Los Angeles in 1996. The INS denaturalized throughfederal courts 15 people in FY94, 11 in FY95, and two people in FY96. On September 26, California's Secretary of State ordered county voterregistrars not to permit non-citizens to vote in the November 1996 elections,after it was revealed that 727 non- citizens in Los Angeles county had filledout the voter registration form attached to the driver's license applicationunder the new "motor voter" law. In applying for the license, they had signed the form on which thesignatory asserts, under penalty of perjury, that he/she is a US citizen atleast 18 years old and thus eligible to vote. The INS is drafting regulations for "administrative denaturalizations" thatare possible within one year of naturalization. Under the draft regulations,newly naturalized citizens who are accused of concealing criminal records willbe given 30 days to respond to the charges. There are many explanations for the upsurge in naturalizations. One factoroften cited is the passage of Prop. 187 in November 1994 in California,followed by the August 1996 welfare law that makes many legal immigrantsineligible for welfare benefits. A second factor was the INS requirement that many immigrants had to visitINS to replace their old green cards. They were reminded that, for $20 more,the immigrant could become a naturalized US citizen. A third factor which will remove a deterrent to naturalization is Mexico'spending introduction of dual citizenship--Mexican-born persons are aboutone-fourth of US immigrants. The rush of new voters may not change the political dynamics of immigrantdistricts. The 33rd Congressional District in southeast Los Angeles County,represented by Lucille Roybal-Allard (D-CA), has had the fewest registeredvoters of any US Congressional District--76 percent of the registered voters inthis district are Democratic, and newly-naturalized citizens are registeringDemocratic at a 2 to 1 rate. In a September 1, 1996 speech to the United Farm Workers convention,Housing and Urban Development Secretary Henry Cisneros asserted that 70 percentof the legal immigrants who would lose benefits under the new welfare law wereeligible to become US citizens. About 300,000, one-fourth of all immigrants naturalizing in FY96, will begiven tests in English and history by private firms rather than the INS. Oneprivate firm, Naturalization Assistance Services, is accused of "guaranteeing"that the immigrant passes the test in exchange for a $850 fee. The INS closed25 private centers that provided naturalization services for a fee in 1995,including 17 operated by Naturalization Assistance Services. Some of the NAS graduates reportedly did not understand the instruction to"please take your seat" at their naturalization ceremony. On September 17, more than 10,000 immigrants were sworn in as US citizensin Dallas, Texas, the largest-ever naturalization ceremony in Texas. Duringthe ceremony, a plane carrying a banner with the note "Felicidades. VotaDole-Kemp," flew overhead. Texas is considered a critical state forRepublicans in the November election. About half of the immigrants sworn inwere Mexican. Santa Clara county, which includes Silicon Valley, hired a "naturalizationczar" to coordinate the activities of community-based organizations andvolunteers who are helping some of the 18,000 eligible immigrants tonaturalize. County officials believe they are the first in the nation toapprove such a program. A naturalization ceremony in San Jose, California washeld September 18 for 11,000 immigrants from 104 countries. If Mexican immigrants naturalize in great numbers, it will mark a change:The INS in 1992 reported that only 17 percent of the Mexicans who entered theUS legally in 1977 sought to become naturalized citizens during the next 15years. Hector Tobar and Jeffrey Rabin, "Massive Tide of Naturalized CitizensSwells Voter Rolls," Los Angeles Times, September 29, 1996. Jeffrey Rabin,"700 Noncitizen Voters Dropped," Los Angeles Times, September 27, 1996. SaraFritz, "Immigration agency disputes claim that about 5,000 naturalized in LAceremonies concealed their records," Los Angeles Times, September 24, 1996.Marshall Wilson, "US Welcomes 11,000 Citizens," San Francisco Chronicle,September 19, 1996. "10,000 new citizens in Texas," Reuters, September 17,1996. Sam Howe Verhovek, "Immigrants' Anxieties Spur a Surge inNaturalizations," New York Times, September 13, 1996. William Branigin, "HouseGOP Accuses Democrats of Minting New Voters," Washington Post, September 11,1996. ____________________________ WelfareChangesImplemented The Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act of1996, scheduled to go into full effect on October 1, 1996, makes most legal andillegal immigrants ineligible for welfare assistance. To obtain maximumfederal payments, states have an incentive to implement the new welfare law asquickly as possible. An estimated one million legal immigrants, including 400,000 in California,are expected to lose about $4 billion per year welfare benefits they are nowreceiving, an average $4,000 each. Under the bill, foreigners are grouped into three major categories for thepurpose of determining their access to welfare assistance: -Legal immigrants who have worked in the US for at least 40 quarters (10years), are veterans or members of the Armed Forces, or have been admitted asrefugees, retain access to welfare as before. - "qualified aliens,"--most legal immigrants--are not eligible for specificmeans-tested federal benefit programs for a five-year period after their entryinto the United States. -"non-qualified aliens" are unauthorized or illegal aliens and somecategories of non-immigrants who have INS permission to remain in the US, suchas aliens with Temporary Protected Status (TPS) or Persons Residing under Colorof Law (PRUCOL). They are not eligible for most federal public benefits, orfor many state and local public benefits. The assistance programs to which legal immigrants continue to gain accessare primarily those that deliver in-kind services, such as soup kitchens, orthose that provide emergency help, such as violence and abuse preventionprograms. Courts may slow the removal of immigrants from welfare programs, sincelawyers are preparing to sue states as they remove immigrants from the welfarerolls. A major argument will be that the new welfare law unconstitutionallydiscriminates against a class of people -- immigrants who have not becomecitizens -- when it cuts off their Supplemental Security Income and food stampbenefits. Under the 14th Amendment to the US constitution, the equalprotection under the law amendment, governments may not discriminate on thebasis of, inter alia, national origin. The new welfare and immigration laws include provisions that ALLOW stateand local government employees to report to INS illegal aliens who seek policeor medical assistance, or education for their children; this provisioninvalidates the ordinances passed by many "sanctuary" cities that prohibittheir employees from reporting suspected illegal aliens to the INS. California Governor Pete Wilson issued instructions to have in the welfarelaw that allows city workers to have state agencies comply with this provisionas soon as possible. New York Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani announced on September 30, 1996 that NewYork City would sue the federal government, arguing that the new welfare lawviolates the due process rights of immigrants, since it requires immigrants topay taxes, but denies them welfare benefits. Welfare benefits have been reduced for all US residents, and cashassistance to eligible poor people is no longer an entitlement: "Effective Oct.1, 1996, no individual or family shall be entitled to any benefits or servicesunder any state plan." However, there is some discretion in how states devisenew ways to help the poor; states are required to file plans with the USSecretary of Health and Human Services that outline how they will help thepoor. New computer systems will have to be developed in order to implement thenew welfare law. For example, the new law limits an individual to a maximumfive years of support, so to prevent persons from obtaining five years ofbenefits in one state, and then moving to another to obtain more benefits,state computer systems will have to be linked to a national system. One provision of the new welfare law requires the federal government to setup a system within 18 months to verify the citizenship status of applicants forassistance. Food Stamps. More immigrants receive assistance under Food Stampsthan any other welfare program, and the ban on immigrants receiving Food Stampsproduced considerable confusion in state governments In most states, immigrants applying for Food Stamps for the first time nearthe end of September 1996 were rejected. In California, new Food Stampapplications from legal immigrants were rejected after September 23, 1996.However, in other states, there was confusion, as intake workers in some statesaccepted applications, and in others did not. There was even more variance in how states treated immigrants whose needfor Food Stamps was being re-certified. President Clinton directed USDA topermit all states to keep immigrants currently on Food Stamp rolls until August22, 1997, one year after the welfare law was signed. However, states may remove legal immigrants from Food Stamp rolls whentheir eligibility is re-verified, and there was uncertainty as to whether towait for the normal eligibility review, which could permit some immigrants toreceive food stamps through September 1997, or to review the legal status ofrecipients sooner. California has 3.2 million Food Stamp recipients, including 436,000 legalimmigrants. They currently receive benefits worth an average of $182 permonth. About 373,000 immigrants will not be eligible for the program once thewelfare law is implemented. California had 2.7 million people receiving AFDC in June 1996, including390,000 or 15 percent non-US citizens. There were also 379,000 non-US citizensreceiving SSI payments, and 258,0000, or two-thirds, are expected to bedeclared ineligible. In the Rio Grande Valley of Texas, an estimated one of every 12 to 15people is a legal immigrant who stands to lose food stamps under the newwelfare law. The unemployment rate in the Rio Grande Valley is typically 15 to20 percent, making it doubtful that those who lose Food Stamps can increasetheir earnings to make up for the lost benefits. The state of Texas estimates that about 187,000 legal immigrants will losefood stamps, 22,000 will lose welfare benefits, and 53,160 will be cut off fromSupplemental Security Income. New Jersey has announced that the 21,000 legal immigrants in the stategetting Food Stamps will continue to receive them for at least sixmonths. Governor Christine Todd Whitman also announced that New Jersey intends toprovide some cash, medical, and disability benefits to legal immigrants withstate funds after immigrants are removed from federal programs, leading some tospeculate that immigrants needing such services will move to states such as NewJersey. About 15,000 legal immigrants receive cash assistance in New Jersey,50,000 receive Medicaid, and 25,000 get SSI payments. Governor Parris N. Glendening said that Maryland will assume the cost ofwelfare benefits for immigrants when they are removed from the federal rolls.Maryland estimates that it will cost the state about $9 million a year tocontinue benefits to 2,155 legal immigrants. The state will not pick up thecost of Food Stamps, estimated at nearly $10 million, but will subsidize foodstamps for 2,217 immigrant children. In 1995, for the first time, the percentage of Hispanics in poverty, 30.3percent, exceeded the share of Blacks in poverty, 29.3 percent. The immigrantwelfare restrictions are expected to increase Hispanic poverty. For moreinformation, see http://www.census.gov/prod/www/titles.html Employer Reactions. A few employers are reportedly worried thatsome of the 2.3 million working Americans who receive Food Stamps might expecthigher wages if they no longer qualify for Food Stamps. US citizens with threedependents can qualify for Food Stamps if they earn less than $17,000 peryear. According to the Restaurant Association of Metropolitan Washington,employers thought more about the additional workers who would be available whenthe new welfare law required people to go to work than about the loss of thesubsidies to employers provided by Food Stamps and other indirect welfareprograms. A "large percentage" of the 5,600 entry-level restaurant workers inthe Washington area, who start at $6.25 per hour, are immigrants. At Marriott, where hourly workers earn an average $7 an hour, or $14,560 ayear, some hotels are helping immigrants to become naturalized citizens byoffering citizenship classes. Other Programs. Lawyers for California Governor Wilson argued thatthe federal judge who prevented the implementation of Prop. 187 in November1995 should now permit California to begin implementing some of theinitiative's provisions because of the new welfare law. There are about six million legal immigrants in California who are not UScitizens. Of these, 1.1 million currently receive benefits under the Medi-Calprogram. (Medi-Cal is funded by the state and federal governments, andprovides health coverage for roughly six million poor Californians, almost 20percent of all residents--those eligible must have family incomes below $23,634for a family of three in 1996. Illegal aliens are not eligible for Medi-Calcoverage). Many of these legal immigrants might become US citizens to retain theireligibility for Medi-Cal. The US Congressional Budget Office assumes thatone-third of California's 1.1 million legal non-citizens on Medi-Cal willbecome citizens in order to remain eligible for benefits. A California Assembly committee in mid-July criticized the INS for"dumping" illegal immigrants in San Diego area hospitals to avoid paying fortheir care. According to critics, Operation Gatekeeper has led to moreinjuries to illegal immigrants, and prompted the INS to take injured aliens toarea hospitals before determining their immigrant status. If an alien is notformally in INS custody, the costs of health care are borne by the localgovernment/hospital, and not by INS. As a result of the new welfare law, 200 severely disabled illegalimmigrants under 24-hour care in California nursing homes--at a daily cost of$73 per day, and an annual cost of $5 to $6 million-- will no longer have theirbills paid, despite an effort by Governor Wilson to persuade the Legislature toextend their care in August. Some in the Legislature refused to approveextended care because they thought such an extension would conflict with Prop.187. Since 1988, severely disabled illegal immigrants and pregnant illegalimmigrant women in California have received state-subsidized care under a billsigned by Republican Governor George Deukmejian. Wilson ordered the prenatalcare for illegal alien women halted as soon as possible. There are also 14,000 to 15,000 legal immigrants now receiving care inCalifornia long-term or nursing facilities. New York City Mayor Rudolph Giuliani on September 11 promised not toimplement the provision of the new welfare law that permits city employees toreport to INS illegal immigrants who seek services like police protection,hospital care and public education. Giuliani is described as a "nationalspokesperson" for immigrants--the Republican mayor of Democratic New York Citywho believes that high levels of immigration are good for New York and the US. Since 1985, New York City has prohibited its 200,000 employees fromreporting any of the 400,000 suspected illegal aliens to the INS. On September 30, 1996, George Soros announced a $50 million gift to thenewly established Emma Lazarus Fund to provide grants to community groups thatcould use it, for example, to pay an immigrant's $95 citizenship applicationfee or to provide the English-language instruction needed fornaturalization. Patrick McDonnell, "Border: Welfare measure may allow public employees toreport suspects to INS," Los Angeles Times, September 30, 1996. Vivian Toy,"Some Immigrants Begin to Lose Food Stamps Under New Law," New York Times,September 25, 1996. Kirstin Downey Grimsley, "New Welfare Law WorriesEmployers in Low-Wage Businesses," Washington Post, September 24, 1996. KenChavez and Brad Hayward, "Mix-up on food stamps," Sacramento Bee, September 20,1996. Louis Freedberg, "Welfare Law's ID Provision Causes Concern," SanFrancisco Chronicle, September 19, 1996. Elizabeth Llorente, "Whitman to KeepWelfare for Legal Aliens," The Record, September 19, 1996. Michael Dresser,"Md. to pay benefits to immigrants," Baltimore Sun, September 17, 1996. DavidFirestone, "NYC Mayor to Sue Over U.S. Welfare Provision on Aliens," New YorkTimes, September 12, 1996. _______________________________ Mexico:Polls, Remittances and Economy Polls. An August 1996 Los Angeles Times poll of 1,500 Mexicans inMexico and 1,572 US adults found that 73 percent of those interviewed in Mexicohad never been to the US. Of the Mexicans who had visited the US, only 34percent had "had a job" in the US. The US poll was conducted by telephone,while the Mexican poll was done in person, and 28 percent of the Mexicaninterviews were conducted in towns with 2,500 or fewer residents. A total of 20 percent of the Mexican respondents said that they would seeka job in the US in the next 12 months; seven percent said it was very likely,and 13 percent responded that it was somewhat likely that they would head forthe US in search of work. Each one percent of those polled represents almost one million Mexicans,suggesting that almost seven million Mexicans would say, if asked, that theyare very likely to seek US jobs in the next 12 months. There were about 4.1million Mexican-born workers in the US labor force of 132 million in November1994. Over half of the Mexicans interviewed in Mexico said they had a familymember living in the US, but only nine percent said that their household getsmoney from relatives in the US. An August 1989 poll of nearly 2,000 Mexicans found that 30 percent had arelative living in the US, and seven percent reported that they received fundsfrom a relative in the US. In 1989, about 22 percent of the respondentsreported that they were very (six percent) or fairly likely (16 percent) tomove to the US within 12 months, which was interpreted to suggest that IRCA wasnot deterring Mexican migrants. Some 95 percent of Mexicans said they were living in an economic crisis,and almost two-thirds of Mexicans said their personal economic situation isworse than it was three years ago. When asked what could reduce illegalimmigration, 84 percent of Mexicans said jobs and economic development inMexico. Americans, by contrast, put the emphasis on enforcement. Slightly moresaid that stricter border control (19 percent) and workplace enforcement (18percent) are needed to reduce illegal immigration than agreed that jobs andeconomic development in Mexico can slow emigration (38 percent). Mexicans tend to view the United States far more favorably than Americansview Mexico, but the percentage of Mexicans who view Americans favorably hasfallen since 1991. According to Jorge G. Castaneda, one reason for the declineis that Mexicans have not found it easier to work legally in the US: "The mainreason most Mexicans supported NAFTA, for example, was they felt it would helpthem work in the United States. And that, of course, hasn't happened." About three-fourths of the Mexicans said that NAFTA has been bad for thempersonally or has had no effect on their economic status. A majority ofAmericans polled believe that NAFTA has resulted in the loss of US jobs. Remittances. Mexicans in the US send home an estimated $4 to $6billion per year, much of it through Denver-based First Data Corp., which ownsWestern Union and Moneygram. First Data is affiliated with Elektra, anelectronics, home appliance and furniture chain that is an agent for WesternUnion in Mexico. Western Union charges $29 to send the average remittance of $300 within 15minutes, and Elektra charges about a 10 percent fee to convert the dollars intopesos--in September 1996, Elektra offered 6.75 pesos per dollar when theexchange rate was 7.5 pesos per dollar. Despite these hefty fees, manyMexicans use wire transfers because of high Mexican bank charges for cashingnon-customers' checks. Banco de Mexico estimates that Mexico received $3.67 billion in remittancesin 1995, slightly below the level of 1994. Electronic transfers and competition may improve the exchange rate obtainedby Mexicans--only 30 to 50 percent of all remittances are transferredelectronically today. The U.S. Postal Service in August 1996 launched a DineroSeguro service that permits up to $3000 from any US Post Office to any of 900branches of Mexico's Bancomer bank--the sender is charged $26 to send$300. Wells Fargo offers a similar system with Banamex. World Center VideoConferences is proposing a service that includes a brief video visit betweenthe money sender and recipients in Mexico. Economy. President Ernesto Zedillo Ponce de Leon delivered hissecond State of the Nation (Informe) speech on September 1, 1996, and pledgedto work for equality before the law: "the law applies to everyone alike." Ina reference to the US, Zedillo said that "the Mexican government will alwaysdemand respect for the rights of our countrymen abroad." Mexico's economy grew 7.2 percent in the second quarter of 1996, versus a10 percent contraction in the same quarter of 1995, and unemployment fell to5.8 percent, versus 7.3 percent in summer 1995. Exports rose 22 percent, asdid the peso. Grupo Modelo, maker of Corona beer, has increased exports to theUS so much that it is planning a $400 million brewery in Zacatecas. Zedillo predicted on September 1 that Mexico's economy would grow by fourpercent in 1997. Mexico's National Statistics Institute (INEGI) reported September 3 thatthe number of maquiladora employees surpassed 750,000 for the first time inJune 1996, up almost 20 percent since June 1995. Maquiladora jobs areconcentrated in five northern Mexican states: Chihuahua, 29 percent ofmaquiladora jobs; Baja California, 21 percent; Tamaulipas, 17 percent; and,Coahuila and Sonora, eight percent each. At the end of September, the Alliance for Economic Recovery (ARE)--keybusiness, labor and agricultural leaders--agreed to a new pacto that called forwage increases of 20 percent. Mexican social security workers won a 25 percentpay increase in September 1996. Non-maquiladoras recently surpassed maquiladoras as the top source ofMexico's manufacturing exports. Many of the manufacturing conglomerates basedin Monterrey saw their exports boosted by the devaluation, since they hadalready reduced employment to cut costs. Alfa, for example, reduced employmentfrom 50,000 in 1982 to 24,000 in 1996, and doubled its exports of steel,chemicals and other products to $1.1 billion in 1995 versus 1994. However, an August 5 Wall Street Journal article praising policymakers fornot backsliding on economic reform--and thus laying the basis for highersavings and more productive investments-- also warned that, "in the next twoyears, at least, the outlook is for high unemployment and stagnantsalaries...and a higher incidence of poverty." President Zedillo said that Mexico must depend on internal savings forinvestment, ensuring that it will be years before wages and incomes recover formost Mexicans. Zedillo said that export-led growth will prompt more local andforeign investment, and that increased investment will eventually increaseconsumption and local demand. A Banamex survey of INEGI of manufacturing labor market data reported that2.9 million paid workers were employed in Mexico's non-maquiladoramanufacturing sector in 1993. According to Banamex, the 1995 economic crisiswas unusual because Mexican companies responded by eliminating jobs, as well asby reducing real wages. On July 26, Mexico announced that it would repay $7 billion of theremaining $10.5 billion that it borrowed from the US in 1995, leaving Mexicowith $3.5 billion in debt from the $12.5 billion borrowed from the US in1995. Over 100,000 Mexicans looking for jobs from the country's interior haveflooded Mexico's northern border region. About 60,000 have found work inTijuana's maquiladora factories. The city's population growth rate is now fivepercent annually, double the rate for the whole country and very difficult onthe city's infrastructure. Luckily, the workers streaming from the south arefinding work, the unemployment rate in Tijuana is two percent. Maquiladoras have added 170,000 jobs since 1995 and the start of the NorthAmerican Free Trade Agreement. Two-thirds of the jobs are filled by Mexicansfrom Chiapas, Oaxaca, Veracruz and other southern states. Forty percent of theworkforce is male and employee turnover continues to be high, eight percent permonth on average. By June 30, 1996, about 78,000 US workers had qualified for a US-governmentprogram to help find new jobs to replace jobs because of NAFTA. Some 8,000 USresidents commute to jobs in Mexican maquiladoras every day. On a scale of 0 to 10, a ranking of 54 countries for how corruption "isaffecting commercial and social life" found that New Zealand and Denmark wereleast corrupt, and Nigeria and Pakistan were most corrupt. Mexico ranked 38 ofthe 54 countries, less corrupt than Brazil and Colombia, but more corrupt thanArgentina (http://www.uni-goettingen.de/~uwvw/icr.htm) In late August, President Zedillo promised National Campesino Confederation(CNC) President Beatriz Paredes Rangel that the government would clear up landtitles for peasants by the end of 1997, under the so-called Program to CertifyCommunal Land Rights (Procede). Agriculture continues to suffer and shrink, with an estimated 500,000 to750,000 subsistence farmers leaving agriculture since 1990. On July 24, 1996,Mexico announced a ten-year 15 billion peso ($2 billion) program to relieveindebted farmers of some of their debt. Farmers monthly payments on debts upto 500,000 pesos ($66,000) will be reduced by about 40 percent. The estimated 20,000 Mixtec migrant farm workers from Oaxaca and Guerreroin Baja California reportedly are paid 35 pesos a day, a little under $5, orabout 60 cents an hour. In July, some of them rioted in San Quintin after theydid not receive their weekly pay. In mid-August, Sanyo announced that it was paying $2 million in ransom tothe kidnappers of one of its San Diego-based executives who was abducted inTijuana. Mexicans Abroad. On July 30, 1996, Mexico's Congress approved apackage of 17 constitutional amendments and implementing laws that aim toreduce electoral fraud and permit Mexicans living abroad to cast absenteeballots in the presidential election in the year 2000. The Mexican Senateapproved the changes by a 124-0 vote on August 2, and they now go to Mexico's31 state legislatures for approval. When 21-- two-thirds of the state legislatures in Mexico-- approve theproposed voting changes, they can go into effect. Mexico's ruling Institutional Revolutionary Party held its 17th conventionin September in Mexico City. Most US newspapers said that it heralded thereturn of the PRI's old guard anti-reformer "dinosaurs" to power within theparty. For example, the 4,400 delegates approved a rule that, in 2000, thePRI's nominee for president must have held elective office and have been aparty member for at least 10 years. If this rule had been in effect, the lastfive PRI candidates and Mexican presidents would have been disqualified. Guerrillas and Drugs. In late August, the Popular RevolutionaryArmy (EPR) launched simultaneous raids in Guerrero, Oaxaca, and Chiapas thatleft 13 dead. As a result, Mexico's army became more involved in internalsecurity in September 1996 than at any time since the 1930s. The EPR is thearmed wing of the Clandestine Worker's Revolutionary Party of the Poor(PROCUP), which announced itself June 28, 1996 in Aguas Blancas at the one-yearcommemorative service for 17 campesinos slain by Guerrero police. Despite the economic crisis, Mexico expanded its troops by 15 percent to180,000, and increased military spending a similar percentage to $2 billion.Many of the soldiers are draftees from poor families, performing one year ofmandatory service. Mexico continues to be criticized in the US for doing to little to preventthe flow of drugs across the southern border. Since November 1993, the US hasshifted its drug interdiction resources from the Mexican border to other areas,and Mexico has assumed the primary responsibility for preventing drugcultivation and smuggling into the US. Mexico has not done the job. In 1995, an estimated 210 tons of cocaineentered the US from Mexico, the most ever, while drug arrests and seizures inMexico declined. A former insider in one Mexican drug cartel testified that the cartel usedINS buses to ship drugs into the US between 1986 and 1990. The drugs wereplaced on buses used to transport illegal immigrants captured in southernTexas to Houston, where they were flown to their homelands. Chris Kraul, "Flood of Workers Flows North to Booming Tijuana," Los AngelesTimes, September 24, 1996. Patrick J. McDonnell, "Border: Influx more thandoubled in late '80s, report says," Los Angeles Times, September 24, 1996.Julia Preston, "Mexico's Army Out of the Barracks," New York Times, September14, 1996. Brendan Case, "Sending Dollars to Mexico Is a Big, LucrativeBusiness," New York Times, September 14, 1996. Mark Fineman, "Mexicans SeeTheir Nation in Moral Decline," Los Angeles Times, September 14, 1996. MarkFineman, "Mexicans' View of U.S. Positive but Skeptical," Los Angeles Times,September 13, 1996. Molly Moore and John Anderson, "Drugs flow as policing isMexicanized," Washington Post, September 8, 1996. "Brutal Rebel Group in MexicoLeaves Trail of Death, Uncertainty," Wall Street Journal, September 3, 1996.Craig Torres and Dianne Solis, "Zedillo urges patience on austerity plan," WallStreet Journal, August 12, 1996. Jonathan Friedland, "Latin America resistsreform backlash," Wall Street Journal, August 5, 1996. Marjorie Miller, " TheTimes Poll--Despite New Laws, U.S. Still a Lure in Mexico," Los Angeles Times,August 21, 1989. ____________________ INSEnforcement The Immigration and Naturalization Service (INS) announced on September 5that a series of worksite enforcement operations at 487 businesses in 13central U.S. states between July 21 and August 30 resulted in the detention of3,679 unauthorized alien workers. The number of aliens apprehended bystate was: Texas (2,097); New Mexico (483); Minnesota (243); Iowa (209);Wisconsin (129); Wyoming (120); Illinois (116); Oklahoma (103); Kansas (76);Indiana (58); Montana (31); Missouri (9); and South Dakota (5). The aliensdetained were from twelve countries including: Mexico (3,590); El Salvador(50); Honduras (21); and Guatemala (8). The cover story of the September 23, 1996 US News & World Report, "TheNew Jungle," focused on the use of illegal immigrant workers in the Storm Lake,Iowa pork processing plant. The story emphasized the role of meat packingcompanies in recruiting immigrant workers, and said that "perhaps no industryis so dependent on this low-wage labor as the nation's meat and poultrycompanies." The INS district director for Iowa and Nebraska estimates that 25 percentof the workers in those plants in the 220 meat packing plants in the two statesare unauthorized aliens. INS inspections of the workers in 15 plants since1992 have led to 1,000 workers. At a July 1996 conference of social scientists on "The Changing Face ofRural America," it was noted that in most Midwestern meat packing plants,Latinos work alongside US-born Blacks and whites. Latinos are less than halfof most plant's work forces, and many of them are US-born citizens. Many Latinos move to the Midwest because, unlike seasonal farm jobs inCalifornia, where workers average 1,000 hours at $5 to $6 per hour, workers inmeat packing plants average 2,000 hours at $6 to $7 per hour, enough to supporta family. The Changing Face report is available athttp://migration.ucdavis.edu/rmn/iow.htm The enforcement operations included an August 25 sweep in Jackson, Wyomingthat resulted in the detention of 150 foreigners, one percent of the county'slabor force. Some employers are calling for an investigation of the INS raids,which they called racially motivated and dehumanizing because all thosedetained were Latino, and some were transported to jail in a horse trailer. The police, who joined with federal INS agents in the raid, defended thesweep as a needed response to complaints of automobile accidents and drugdealing linked to unauthorized workers. Supporters of the aliens counteredthat one of the workers detained reportedly shook President Clinton's hand whenhe vacationed in Jackson. The INS detained 124 of the 1,200 workers at two plants of poultryprocessor Allen Family Foods in Maryland in late August. Eight poultryprocessing firms employ 14,000 workers in the Delmarva area. Most workersbegin at $6 per hour, and rise to a maximum of $7 per hour. Turnover is high;for every 100 jobs, 180 to 200 workers are hired each year. An analysis of INS apprehension data between 1976 and 1995 concluded thateach additional three to four hours of border agent time increased by one thenumber of aliens apprehended along the US-Mexican border. The same studysuggested that each 10 percent decrease in Mexican wages increasedapprehensions by eight percent. The number of apprehensions rose from 1.1 million in FY94 to 1.4 million inFY95, or 27 percent, after the Mexican peso was devalued by over 50 percent.In FY96, there were about 5,100 Border Patrol agents, and the cost of borderenforcement activities was about $600 million. In Texas, INS announced in September the establishment of an InstitutionalHearing Program that stations INS officers at the Huntsville prison, so thatdeportable aliens are removed from the US as soon as they finish theirsentences. About 10 percent of the 128,000 prisoners in Texas were bornoutside the US. The INS will have a budget of $3.1 billion in FY97. Stephen Hedges and Dana Hawkins," The New Jungle," US News & WorldReport, September 23, 1996. http://www.usnews.com/usnews/WASH/IMmHIGH.html JoeMathews and Dail Willis, "Grower likens INS raid to Waco; 2,000-acre nurseryswarmed by agents," Baltimore Sun, September 19, 1996. William Branigin,"Panel Rebukes INS on Miami Probe," Washington Post, September 13, 1996. LouisSahagun, "INS Sweep Puts Wyoming Resort Community on Edge," Los Angeles Times,September 13, 1996. Joseph P. Fried, "Sweatshops Raided in Brooklyn," New YorkTimes, September 4, 1996. _______________________________ CanadianImmigrants Canada is expected to add 220,000 immigrants to its 30 million populationin 1996, a much higher rate of immigration than the US, which is expecting toadd about 800,000 immigrants to its 265 million population. Vancouver, a city of 1.6 million, is Canada's fastest growing city, with40,000 immigrants and Canadians moving to the city each year. The number ofAsians living in Vancouver doubled between 1971 and 1991, and 20,000 Asianimmigrants arrived in 1995. One report says that Taipei's ten richest people have established homes inVancouver, and pumped more than US$653 million into the local economy. Many Asians prefer to migrate to Canada rather than the US, both becausethey feel it is safer, and because Canada permits naturalization after threeyears rather than five. Many of the Asians are wealthy and want the securityof a Canadian passport--one estimate is that 80 percent of the Vancouver homesthat sold for $1 million or more in 1995 were sold to Asian immigrants. Some 2,000 Chilean tourists sought asylum in Canada between March and June1996, a period when Canada removed visa requirements for Chilean tourists.Canada re-imposed visa requirements on Chile in June. Representatives of the Canadian and Manitoba governments visited Scotlandin early July to encourage the immigration of skilled workers to Manitoba.According to a government spokesperson, Manitoba has a shortage of skilledcomputer workers. Scots interested in emigrating to Canada must have one yearof experience in their occupation, a high level of education and fluency inFrench or English. A Canadian immigration lawyer in the New York Times on September 16, 1996decried what he called the push for "designer immigrants" in Canada--the highlyskilled selected on the basis of a point system for their education andskills. Peter Rekai, "Canada's upscale influx," New York Times, September 16, 1996.Pierre Longnus, "Taiwan immigrants to Canada settle in Vancouver," AgenceFrance Presse, August 17, 1996. "Manitoba, Canada Recruiting Skilled ScottishWorkers," Universal News Services, July 5, 1996. _______________________________ EUROPE _______________________________ GermanyBegins to Return Bosnians Ex-Yugoslavia. Germany plans to begin returning 320,000 persons toBosnia-Herzegovina on October 1, 1996, in a process that will continue through1997. The first Bosnians to be returned will be single adults and childlesscouples; those resisting voluntary repatriation face deportation. An estimated60 percent of the Bosnians in Germany are Muslim. Bosnian Muslims who come from areas "cleansed" by Serbs will not bereturned to Serb areas. The interior ministers of the 16 states handle the return of foreigners totheir countries of origin, so that there is likely to be state-to-statevariation in how Bosnians are returned. Baden Wurtemberg plans to send lettersin early October to some Bosnians, telling them to that their "tolerationpermits" to remain in Germany expire on December 15, 1996. Hessen, on theother hand, has said that there will be no repatriations until April 1,1997. Berlin's Interior Minister, for example, said that Bosnians in Berlin mustrealize that "our hospitality is coming to an end and that they must go homevoluntarily." Chancellor Helmut Kohl said that, instead of spending DM15 billion onBosnians in Germany , it makes "more sense to send them home and to spend themoney on reconstruction." Of the 687,000 Bosnians who left the former Yugoslavia, about 320,000 arein Germany, 122,000 are in Sweden, and 80,000 are in Austria. Germany and the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia in September 1996 signed aseparate agreement for the return of another 120,000 Serbian refugees--mostlyethnic Albanians from Kosovo-- currently living in Germany. Most are expectedto return in 1997-98. Asylum. Some 9,548 foreigners applied for asylum in Germany inAugust, 1996, bringing the total for 1996 to 76,000, compared with 80,500 forthe first eight months of 1995. Of the 13,000 cases decided in August, about900, or seven percent of the foreigners who applied, were granted refugeestatus in Germany. A Togo man was removed forcibly by Bavarian police from an Adventist churchin Wunsiedel, Bavaria and flown home, signaling a tough state policy toward"church asylum." The church gave the man sanctuary in March. About 60foreigners whose applications for asylum in Germany have been rejected arebeing sheltered in churches in Bavaria. There were calls for the resignation of the Bavarian interior minister forbreaking a promise not to enter church grounds to expel an asylum-seeker. Germany spent DM5.5 billion on asylum seekers in 1995, about the same as in1994. On September 16, 1996, the trial started for Safwan Eid, a Lebanese asylumseeker charged with burning a Hamburg foreigners' hostel on January 18, 1996.Ten foreigners were killed, and 38 injured. Demonstrators convinced thatneo-Nazis set the fire protested outside the courtroom. The Eid family--parents and three children in Germany, and two grownchildren still in Lebanon-- spent $15,000 to be smuggled to Germany, admittedlyas economic migrants. Their asylum applications were rejected, but they wereallowed to stay in Germany because Lebanon refused to take them back. In September, 1996, 12 neo-Nazi youth were arrested for attackingforeigners' hostels in August in the former east German state of Saxony. Therewere 165 violent attacks on foreigners in Germany in the first six months of1996, down almost 50 percent from the same period in 1995. German Foreign Minister Klaus Kinkel on September 9 assured visitingIsraeli Foreign Minister David Levy that Germany would continue to acceptJewish immigrants from the former Soviet Union. In 1990, Chancellor Kohl madean agreement with German-Jewish leaders to permit immigration to rebuild theaging Jewish community, and 45,000 Jews have so far immigrated under the openimmigration program. According to Der Speigel, some 80,000 visas have been approved for Jewishimmigrants so far, and an estimated hundreds of thousands of Jews in theex-USSR are waiting in line to move to Germany. German Development AidMinister Carl-Dieter Spranger earlier in 1996 said that, since Jewishimmigration is not limited, there is the potential for conflict between Israeland Germany over the Ukraine's 800,000 Jews. Border Controls. Germany has 5,700 agents to guard its easternborders, and another 500 are scheduled to join them in 1997. In 1995, theyapprehended and returned about 30,000 foreigners to Poland and the CzechRepublic. Vietnamese. On September 17, the first chartered flight returned239 Vietnamese to Vietnam, the first returns since Germany and Vietnam signed arepatriation agreement on September 21, 1995 that anticipates the return of40,000 Vietnamese by 2000. About 657 Vietnamese have been returned fromGermany to Hanoi on regularly-scheduled flights. Labor Market. Hans Peter Stihl, a spokesperson for employers, urgedthe German government to make it easier to employ foreign workers fromcountries to which Germany exports its goods. According to Stihl, Germanyshould make it easier for foreign students to enter Germany from developingcountries and to stay in Germany after they have completed theirstudies. During the 1960s and 1970s, unemployment rates in western Europe weretypically half those in the US. In the 1980s, this relationship reversed, andtoday the US unemployment rate is half the German unemployment rate of 10percent. The unemployment rate is 15 percent in the former East Germany, and ninepercent in the former West Germany. A number of employment subsidies,Arbeitsbeschaffungsmassmahmen, are being curtailed to save money--thesesubsidies amounted to DM2.6 billion ($1.7 billion) in the West, and DM7.2billion ($4.7 billion) in the East. The Federal Labor Office, in another study, attacked a favorite unionproposal for job creation--ban overtime. According to the Labor Office, onlyabout 10 percent of the overtime hours would be used to create 85,000additional jobs. Germany is in the lead among European countries in reducing social welfarebenefits. For example, about 92 percent of Germans with monthly incomes ofless than DM580, are enrolled in 850 Krankenkasse (sickness funds). TheKrankenkasse allocate a fixed amount of money to regional associations ofdoctors, which reimburse individual doctor-members according to their work asmeasured in points. A house call, for example, earns a doctor 400 points. Ifall doctors collectively bill more points, the reimbursement per pointdeclines--in one case, from DM40 per 400 points to DM24. Employers and workers in Germany each contribute about 6.5 percent of theirgross earnings for health care, for a total of 13 percent. In France,employees contribute seven percent, and employers 13 percent, for a total 20percent. Herve Asquin, "Germany resolved to send Bosnians Home," Agence FrancePresse, September 30, 1996. "Door's slam," The Economist, September 28, 1996.Alan Cowell, "Germans Plan to Return Refugees to Bosnia," New York Times,September 20, 1996. "Germany sends home first charter-load of Vietnamese,"Agence France Presse, September 18, 1996. Imre Karacs, "Migrant accused ofhostel death fire," The Independent, September 17, 1996. "German official wantseasier foreign worker laws," Reuters, September 11, 1996. "African forciblyremoved from church sanctuary and deported," Agence France Presse, September 5,1996. Cornelia Bolesch, "Germany divides on arson trial," The Guardian,September 4, 1996. _______________________________ UK:Welfare for AsylumSeekers On September 23, the Secretary for States of Social Security, Peter Lilley,told Parliament of new regulations which allow asylum seekers who have beengranted refugee status to make claims for income support, housing and taxbenefits for the period they may have been denied benefits as asylum seekers.The regulations were announced during proceedings on the Asylum and ImmigrationAct of 1996, which went into effect July 24, 1996. In September, 1996, the Joint Council for the Welfare of Immigrants (JCWI)received permission to bring a full High Court case against the decision of theLilley to use emergency legislation to deny welfare benefits to all asylumseekers who applied for asylum inside the UK in 1996. The Asylum and Immigration Act, which bars welfare payments to foreignerswho do not apply for asylum in the UK upon arrival, went into effect in July1996. However, Lilley decided to deny welfare benefits to asylum seekers whofail to apply immediately upon their arrival in the UK in February before theact took effect. Of the 17,375 asylum applications from January through July, 1996, 11,025were made after the foreigner entered the UK, so that he/she was not eligiblefor welfare payments. On June 21, 1996, the JCWI won a Court of Appeal victory, when the courtdeclared unlawful several voluntary organizations who offered shelter and foodto asylum seekers denied welfare payments. After seven Iraqis hijacked a Sudan Airways plane and requested asylum inthe UK, and an Iranian hung onto a hovercraft from France to apply for asylumin the UK, some newspapers complained that the UK was the European country inwhich it was easiest to get asylum. The Iranian was reportedly involved inselling illegal pornographic videos in Tehran, and paid smugglers $3,000 to betaken to Europe. There are 100,000 self-employed Asians in the UK, many working long hoursfor low net wages, and some commentators credit them with helping re-invigoratethe UK economy. At the same time, a study of what Asian immigrant parents wantfor their children shows that most want their children to be professionalsrather than self-employed. Some campaign groups are claiming that Britain has become a "slave haven"for employers who abuse migrant domestic workers. Many cannot leave their jobsdue to government rules which state that migrant workers who enter Britain asdomestic workers are allowed to stay only if they remain with their originalemployer. The Liberal Democrats and Labour parties plan to discuss the issuewhen they meet in early October. The Home Office says it has considered changing the law but believes thatwould make it more difficult to control the 12,000 domestic workers who enterBritain each year. Stowaways on board ship cost the shipping industry at North American postsabout $45,000 per migrant, including fines, guards, hotel or detention centercosts and subsistence expenses. If asylum is claimed and refused, repatriationcosts are paid by the shipping company. The International Maritime Bureauestimates that there were 6,500 reported stowaways worldwide between 1991 and1993. Some shipping companies hire firms to repatriate the stowaways. "Peter Lilley Announces New Rule Bringing in Backdated Payments forRefugees," Universal News Service, September 24, 1996. Arthur Leathley, "Partyto debate claims that Britain is a 'slave haven,'" The Times, September 23,1996. "Immigrant smugglers smashed," Daily Mail, September 20, 1996. NickSavvides, "Turning Back the Human Tide," Lloyds List, September 18, 1996."Britain's Asians," Financial Times, September 10, 1996. Alan Travis, "Lilleyfaces fresh fight over curb on asylum seekers," The Guardian, September 6,1996. Nick Buckley, "The man who hung on to a hovercraft to sneak intoBritain; this is the easiest place to get asylum says Iranian in death-defyingChannel trip," Mail, September 1, 1996. _______________________________ France:AfricanImmigrants On September 12, 1996, hundreds of African and Asian immigrants occupied aParis police office that issues residence permits, demanding residence permitsfor 350 of the immigrants from 21 countries. That same day the Interior ministry announced that 57 Romanians weredeported to Bucharest on a chartered flight, and 14 Tunisians sent home byship. This brings the number of foreigners removed from France to 8,800 so farin 1996, up 24 percent from the level a year earlier. Most of the 130 Africans removed by police from a Paris church on August23, 1996 remain in France--nine were deported by mid-September, while 49 weregiven residency papers. Another 64 have been told that they will be deportedto Mali; eight were flown home. A police union criticized courts for annullingor suspending many of the expulsion orders. Interior Minister Jean-Louis Debre's popularity soared after ordering theraid on the church in August. Some 32 percent of those polled said he shouldplay an important role in politics in the future. In Mali, which is receiving nationals removed from both France and Angola,reaction has been muted. One government leader deplored "the dishearteningspectacle presented by these immigrants who give the impression that returningto Africa is like a return to hell." The Mali government banned a marchplanned for September 4 in the capital to protest the French raid anddeportations. Mali, a country of nine million, ranked 171 out of 174 countries in the UNDevelopment Program's 1996 Human Development Report. The Consultative National Human Rights Commission of the UN asked theFrench government on September 12 to review the implementation of 1993immigration laws to clarify the legal status of foreigners who have a Frenchspouse, the foreign spouses and children of legal foreign residents, foreignparents of French-born children, illegal residents who have a job and haveintegrated into French society, and foreign students. In addition, the Commission asked the French government to considercreating a status similar to German "Duldung" and US Temporary ProtectedStatus--temporary legal residence for non-refugees who cannot be returnedbecause of problems at home. On September 14, Jean-Marie Le Pen led 2,000 people in a march throughMarseilles in remembrance of a teenager allegedly killed by a youth of Araborigin. Marchers carried banners with slogans that included "Protect ourchildren," "Immigration equals insecurity," and "France for the French." Earlier in September Len Pen said that racial inequality was a "fact," andthat some civilizations, including the French, are superior to others. A September 29 profile concluded that Le Pen was succeeding in his bid topersuade French voters to see the National Front as the only alternative to thepolitical establishment. In 1995, the National Front got 15 percent of thevote in the first round of the presidential election, and three National Frontmayors were elected. Current polls show that about the same percentage of French voters wouldvote for the National Front today, but they also suggest that between 30percent and 50 percent of French people say they share some of Le Pen's views.The Front's campaign literature includes the slogan: "Neither left nor right.French." Justice Minister Jacques Toubon announced that a draft bill tightening lawsagainst racism would likely be approved by parliament in October. Under theproposed legislation, even indirect provocations to discrimination, hatred, orviolence would be a crime. A May 1996 profile of immigrants in France by INSEE reported that, in 1990,four million immigrants in France were seven percent of the French population.The 1.7 million immigrants in the French work force were six percent ofFrance's 28 million labor force, but their unemployment rate was twice theFrench rate. Brigitte Bardot, the former actress, threatened to emigrate to Italybecause, she said, of the "invasion" of Islamic immigrants. Anne Swardson, "Anti-Immigrant Party Grows," Washington Post, September 291996. Thierry Cayol, "French far-right stages racially-charged march,"Reuters, September 14, 1996. "Immigrants occupy Paris police office," Reuters,September 12, 1996. Abdoulaye Gandema and Brahima Ouedraogo, "Mali--no placelike away from home," Inter Press Service, September 6, 1996. "African illegalimmigrants call for talks and reject law, "Agence France Presse, September 1,1996. Milton Viorst, "The Muslims of France," Foreign Affairs,September/October, 1996. _______________________________ SwedenTightensAsylum Swedish Citizenship and Asylum Minister Pierre Schori on September 20, 1996proposed legislation that would tighten asylum and refugee regulations. Underthe new regulations, all asylum seekers would have to be photographed andfingerprinted to prevent people from applying twice under differentnames. In addition, only unmarried children under 18, down from 20, could joinparents granted asylum in Sweden. The new regulations eliminate asylum forconscientious objectors, and eliminate asylum for persons who risk persecutionin countries where there is no state authority. Sweden acknowledges the criteria for granting asylum in the GenevaConvention on Refugees, and adds three more grounds for seeking asylum. Swedenwill grant refugees status to those who risk the death penalty or torture,those who flee because of armed conflict or environmental catastrophe, andthose who are persecuted based on gender or homosexuality. Sweden's Parliament will soon vote on the legislation. There were 32,486 immigrants in 1995, including 2,135 foreigners acceptedas refugees. The new legislation is expected to cut the number of refugees inhalf, and allow the government to streamline immigration procedures. Immigration peaked at 78,987 in 1994, when 80 percent of the immigrantscame from non-Nordic countries, including 33,587 Bosnians. About 12 percent of Sweden's 8.8 million residents were born outsideSweden, about the same proportion of foreign-born as in the US. Sweden,traditionally a very open country for those seeking asylum, began to restrictasylum after the dramatic rise in asylum seekers in 1994. In 1995, the numberof immigrants fell to 32,486. Human Rights Watch criticized Sweden on September 24 for its "increasinglyrestrictive asylum policies," after it tightened up rules on asylees. HumanRights Watch claims that many asylum seekers are being denied asylum without afair hearing. Abigail Schmelz, "Sweden accused of treating asylum seekers unfairly,"Reuters, September 25, 1996. "Sweden attacked on rights," Financial Times,September 25, 1996. "Swedish government proposes tightening of asylum, refugeelaws," Agence France Presse, September 20, 1996. Paul de Bendern, "Sweden getstough on immigration," Reuters, August 7, 1996. ________________________ Italy: Amnesty for EnforcementAssistance? Italy is experimenting with amnesty for illegal aliens who help theauthorities locate and prosecute persons who break immigration laws. Under thenew law, Italy "will be allowed to grant a one-year renewable residence permitto non-EU foreigners facing legal action who decide to collaborate withjudicial authorities by denouncing those who exploit them." The aim is to persuade deportable aliens involved with prostitution ordrugs to provide evidence on their bosses. A naturalized Italian citizen who moved to Italy from the DominicanRepublic when her mother married an Italian won the Miss Italy 1996 beautycontest, prompting a number of reflections on racial tolerance in Italy, whatit means to be Italian, and "Italian beauty." Two of the judges were initially suspended for saying, before thecompetition, that a black woman could not represent Italian beauty. Accordingto one judge, "I would happily elect her Miss Universe. But what has she gotto do with Italy? She is not Mediterranean." During the pageant, one-third ofthe one million Italians who called in their vote gave it to Mendez. PrimeMinister Romano Prodi had a commented on the Miss Italy results, "Italy ischanging," he said. "We also have black soccer players, and now this too is asign." The government reports that there are almost one million foreigners livingin Italy, a country with a population of 56 million, not counting naturalizedItalians and "hundreds of thousands" of illegal immigrants. Italian police dismantled a smuggling ring that brought women into Italy onfalse seasonal farm worker contracts. The women received medical certificatesfrom Italian doctors and were then employed in Italian nightclubs. About 1.5 million Italians lived outside Italy in other European nations in1993, including 560,000 in Germany, 380,000 in Switzerland, 250,000 in France,and 240,000 in Belgium. "Italian coast guards capture 60 illegal immigrants," Reuters, September25, 1996. "Residence papers for illegal immigrants who turn informer," AgenceFrance Presse, September 13, 1996. Celestine Bohlen, "An 'Exotic' ItalianBeauty; Miss Italy / Pageant Turns Into 'Psychodrama,' International HeraldTribune, September 11, 1996. Celestine Bohlen, "Italians Contemplate Beauty ina Caribbean Brow," New York Times, September 10, 1996. "Illegal immigrationring of eastern European women dismantled," Agence France Presse, July 5, 1996. _______________________________ IllegalImmigration intoSpain Many Africans attempt to cross the Strait of Gibraltar by boat fromTangier, Morocco to Tarifa, Spain. The going rate is $600 to cross by boat atnight, and Spanish police report that almost half of the 1,000 illegal aliensapprehended near Tarifa were caught in August. There are two Spanish cities on the north coast of Morocco, Ceuta andMelilla, and they attract Black migrants from Mali and other countries whodestroy their documents and request asylum. Under Spanish law, police mustdetermine the identity and country of origin of an alien within 40 days orrelease him from detention. Spain flies those who are being returned to theircountries of origin first from North Africa to Spain, and then to their homecountry, since Morocco refuses to take back persons who crossed into theseSpanish cities from Morocco. A Niger national was killed by security forces on September 23 during ademonstration Bissau, Guinea-Bissau. About 40 Africans, who were expelled fromSpain in July, were demanding the right to return to Spain. The EU recently promised to provide Morocco with $6 billion in aid between1995 and 1999 in exchange for Moroccan help in curbing alien and drugsmugglers. Morocco has stationed 25,000 troops on its coasts. "African immigrant expelled from Spain killed during demonstration," BBC,September 25, 1996. "Spanish police break up two Chinese illegal-migrantoperations," Deutsche Presse-Agentur, September 17, 1996. Marlise Simons,"Tangier a Magnet for Africans Slipping Into Spain," New York Times, August 26,1996. _______________________________ Immigrationin Austrian Elections Election posters throughout Vienna proclaim, "Vienna must not become likeChicago." The election posters are for Freedom Party city council candidateRainer Pawkowicz. Since 1990, the Freedom Party has used Chicago as a code forcrime, which leads to immigrants and cheap foreign labor. Pollsters in Vienna predict that the right wing party could take more than25 percent in the October 13 municipal elections. The Freedom Party's share innational elections have rise from five percent to 22 percent in a decade. Austrian police broke up a smuggling ring believed to have smuggled morethan 5,000 immigrants into Austria during the past four years. The 11smugglers were from Austria, Iran, Syria, Turkey and Iraq and was based in abar in the town of Wels in Upper Austria Province. Immigrants from Hungary and the former Yugoslavia paid about $10,000 eachto be smuggled across the Austrian border. Austria has become a key transitpoint for illegal immigrants since the border controls with Eastern Europe wererelaxed in the region seven years ago. Suzann Campbell, "Chicago a foul word in Vienna election," ChicagoSun-Times, September 24, 1996. "Austrian police smash immigrant smugglingring," Reuters, September 19, 1996. _______________________________ Kurdsand Refugees There are two major factions fighting for independence for the 15 to 20million ethnic Kurds scattered across Turkey, Iran and Iraq. In September1996, the Kurdistan Democratic Party (KDP) invited Saddam Hussein to send inIraqi troops to help the KDP oust its Kurdish rival, the Patriotic Union ofKurdestan (PUK), from several northern Iraq cities that were in the safe zonedeclared off limits to Iraqi troops after the 1991 Gulf War. The fighting produced refugees. The largest contingent, some 40,000 PUKadherents, moved to Iran, which received 1.4 million Kurdish refugees after theGulf War. But this time, Iran was not as hospitable, keeping the Iraqi Kurdsin tent cities rather than permitting them free movement. Iran hosts the largest refugee population in the world, two millionaccording to the Iranian government. In an effort to persuade Afghan refugeesto return, Iran is offering them $25 and 110 pounds of wheat. The US offered to accept as refugees the 250 persons who worked for the USState Department's Office of Foreign Disaster Assistance as drivers, clerks,and translators. With their families, some 2,100 people were flown to Guam toapply for asylum in the US. The European Union is expected to offer asylum to about 6,000 Kurds whoassisted in European peace keeping efforts. About half of the ethnic Kurds live in Turkey--the so-called bridge betweenEast and West, the link between Christendom and Islam. In 1987, Turkey appliedto join the EU, and in 1989, Turkey's application was rebuffed by the Europeanmembers. Most of Turkey's trade is with the EU. Turkey has 60 million people, almost 70 percent live in cities, and 60percent are under 20--a recipe for emigration pressure. The populations ofIstanbul and Ankara have been doubling every 15 years, as rural residents moveto the cities. There are about one million ethnic Turks in southern Bulgaria, and in Mayand June 1989, they began pouring across the border into Turkey after theBulgarian government cracked down on Bulgarian Turks who refused to adoptBulgarian names. "Guam welcomes Kurdish refugees," UPI, September 17, 1996. Daniel Pearl,"Fleeing Kurds don't get red carpet in Iran," Wall Street Journal, September17, 1996. _______________________ IllegalImmigration intoPoland Some 163 illegal immigrants from Sri Lanka, Pakistan, Bangladesh, Liberia,India and Cameroon were detained in September in a village in Warsaw Province,the largest group ever found in one place in Poland. On September 19, 40illegal immigrants from Pakistan were detained in a bus bound forGermany. The Polish Border Police report that, between January and June, 1996, some4,807 foreigners have been detained for illegally entering the country. Manycame from Romania and Armenia, followed by Ukraine, India, and Sri Lanka. "Group of Illegal Iraqi Immigrants Deported from Poland," September 26,1996. "Police detain largest-ever single group of illegal immigrants," PAPNews Agency, September 19, 1996. "Illegal Immigrants from Pakistan detainedin Warsaw," PAP News Wire, September 20, 1996. _______________________________ ASIA _______________________________ InternalMigration and Stability inChina China's population hit 1.2 billion at the end of 1995, so that China had 21percent of the world's 5.8 billion residents. About 45 percent of China'spopulation is under 26. China is one of the world's poorest and fastest growing countries. Itsaverage per capita income is about $500, and its economic growth has been sixto eight percent a year, which means that incomes can more than double within adecade. Growth is not spread evenly across China. The fastest economic and jobgrowth is occurring in the largest cities along the southeastern coast, such asShanghai and Shenzhen. One result is internal migration, and tensions in areasof origin and destination that, some fear, could threaten China'sstability. Internal Migration. Internal migration within China is similar inmany respects to international migration for employment, in the sense that theChinese registration system acts as a barrier to rural-urban movements. Mostrural migrants in Chinese cities are there without government permission,unauthorized workers who fill jobs in construction, services, and manufacturingthat are shunned by local residents. They are liable to detection, fines anddeportation to their rural residences. About 70 percent , or 864 million, of China's residents live in ruralareas, where household incomes average about $225 per year, versus $425 inurban areas. An estimated 150 million rural workers--a third of the rurallabor force of 450 million--is unemployed or underemployed; Chinese data saythere are 130 million "surplus workers" in rural areas. Surplus labor in the countryside, and unfilled jobs in China's cities thatoffer wages that are low by urban standards, but high by rural standards, haveset in motion an internal migration believed to involve at least 50 million,and possibly 70 to 100 million, internal migrants. In 1994, for example, Beijing and Shanghai were believed to have 3.3million migrants each, so that migrants were 25 to 30 percent of those cities'populations. Applying these migrant percentages to China's 350 million urbanresidents yields the estimate of 70 to 100 million migrants. (It should benoted that not all of the migrants in Chinese cities are migrant workers;one-third may be persons away from their registered residences for business,tourism, and education reasons). From 1957 though January 1, 1994, internal migration was restricted by ahousehold registration system (hukou bu) that required residents to beregistered with local authorities. There were two major classifications,agricultural resident (nongye hukou) and urban resident (Chengshi jumin hukou),and only urban residents were entitled to subsidized housing, coupons for foodand jobs. Those registered as agricultural residents remain agricultural residentseven after they move to cities, and are subject to forced return to thecountryside, as occurred after the collapse of the Great Leap Forward in 1960. Chinese policies treated agriculture as a source of low-cost food forindustrial workers. This made the household registration system necessary toprevent rural-urban migration. As grain prices fell and costs rose in the1980s, more and more rural residents migrated illegally to Chinese cities. Much of the Chinese migration is circular, meaning that the migrant retainsa link to his village--Chinese terminology distinguishes between migration(quanyi), an official change of household registration, and floating population(liudong renkou). There are several reasons why many migrant workers in Chinese cities retaina link to the land, including the fear that government policy may change andforce "agricultural" residents back to the countryside. Chinese who live awayfrom the place where they are registered are generally unable to obtainsubsidized housing and food, and can be rounded up and deported to the placewhere they are registered to live. Migration Networks. Young rural men tend to migrate to urban areasto fill construction jobs, while young rural women often find jobs in factoriesin the coastal areas, where they earn $1.25 to $1.75 per day, two to five timeswhat they would earn farming. Most of China's 25 million construction workersare migrants from the countryside. There is currently a struggle between migrants, their employers and localgovernment authorities over how to deal with the rural-urban wage gap thatmotivates migration. In Beijing, for example, employers have to pay theequivalent of $11,600 for urban residence permits for migrant workers from thecountryside but the fine for employing a workers without a permit is only 1,000yuan ($120). Individuals can buy residence permits to live in Beijing at a cost of$5,800. Migrants found working without permits, or arrested for vagrancy, areoften sentenced to produce goods for three to six months in prisonfactories. Most migrants report that they must pay for the permit or sufferharassment. In December 1995, 500 migrant construction workers burned thelocal Communist party headquarters to protest police harassment. Many localauthorities find it easier to get money from migrants than from localemployers. Much of the matching of rural-urban migrants with jobs occurs in or nearChina's railroad stations, where labor brokers surround migrants as they alightfrom trains. They charge workers 100 to 200 yuan ($12 to $24 dollars) to"introduce" migrant job seekers to potential employers. Beijing opened a recruitment center in 1996 for migrant workers in the WestRailway Station, the first step to regularize the flow of an estimated threemillion migrant workers employed by some 2,900 enterprises and privatebusinesses. The West Railway Station, at 580,000 square yards the largestrailway station in Asia, was built with the help of 20,000 migrant workers overthree years. China's state railways have 3.4 million employees. Migrants often escape tight local controls on family planning, promptingthe southeastern province of Fujian in China to pass the country's first lawforcing migrant workers to be sterilized after giving birth to one child ifthey want a job in Fujian. The new law dictates that couples applying for jobs must producesterilization certificates to prove that they will not have another child--thenew rules apply only to migrant men and women. About 80 percent of the birthsin Fujian province in 1995 were to the "daily" commuter population of aboutthree million. Another one million migrants live in Fujian province for onemonth or more. What Next? . By all measures, the number of migrants within Chinais increasing. The Chinese State Planning Commission predicts that only 46percent of the nation's projected work force of 669 million will be farmers inthe year 2000, down from 53 percent in 1995. Other estimates predict moredisplacement from agriculture due to rural population increases andencroachment on farm land by development projects. Chinese analysts are divided on what to do about rural-urban migration. Onthe one side are those who want grant legal status to agricultural personsalready living in urban areas, and permit their families to join them in thecities. Under this proposal, China would abandon the household registrationsystem that limits mobility, and keeps migrants living in fear of deportation. On the other side are those who argue that large numbers of rural migrantscould destabilize Chinese cities and the government, and that the registrationsystem is necessary to prevent a massive "floating population." If the government restricts rural-urban migration too tightly, there couldbe rebellions in poor areas. One Chinese analyst uses his view of the cause ofthe US Civil War--the economic disparity between the North and South--to urgemeasures to reduce Chinese rural poverty. The Chinese government shouldredirect foreign investment away from coastal areas into the interior to reducethe rural poverty that is prompting migration, he concludes. One Chinese city, Zhuhai near Hong Kong, in 1994 erected a nine-foot highfence around itself to deter unauthorized rural-urban migration. Some seefences as a wave of the future. Chinese Abroad. Beginning in the 1950s as "foreign laborcooperation," China has sent workers abroad to complete 1,000 projects in 70countries, most notably the railroad between Tanzania and Zambia. Between 130,000 to 200,000 Chinese work outside the country, mostly inAsia. In 1994, it was estimated that remittances and earnings fromChinese-supplied materials used in foreign projects generated $8 billion forChina in 1994. After economic reforms in 1978, China began to promote the export of laboras a means to earn foreign exchange and to ease domestic unemployment. Threemajor types of government entities--national government corporations, localgovernment companies, and trading companies--and today there are 130,000 to200,000 Chinese workers abroad, mostly in Asia. The Ministry of Foreign Tradeand Economic Cooperation, which reports 200,000 migrant workers outside Chinain 1994, estimated that remittances and earnings from Chinese-suppliedmaterials used in foreign projects generated $8 billion for China in1994. There are also Chinese "worker-trainees" employed temporarily in Japan,ex-USSR, and the US, Chinese farmers in Japan, and 10,000 Chinese workers inSouth Korea. China is asking Japanese and Korean construction firms toconsider using Chinese workers when they win contracts in third countries, suchas the Gulf states. Over half of all Chinese workers abroad come from 10 of China's 30provinces. About 20 percent come from the South China provinces of Guandongand Fujian, two of the fastest growing provinces in China. Chinese officials estimate that, of the 220,000 Chinese students who havegone abroad since 1979, only 75,000 have returned. The Chinese governmentbelieves that part of the blame for this 'brain drain' falls on Western nationssuch as Canada and the United States whose immigration policies give easy entryto the well-educated. Foreigners in China. Eighty foreigners are applying each day forpermits to work in Shanghai. Many of the foreigners are employees ofSino-overseas joint ventures or foreign-owned companies. Nearly 3,000foreigners have been granted work permits since the city began requiring themin May, 1996. An estimated 20,000 foreigners, primarily from Hong Kong, Macaoand Taiwan live in Shanghai. In June 1995, the Chinese government announced that it would reinforce itsborder controls to halt illegal immigration, especially into the southernregions of the country. More than 20,000 foreigners enter China illegallyevery year, mostly from Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia, plus a small number ofillegal immigrants from Africa and Russia. In 1994, police detained 12,000illegal immigrants in the Yunnan province and the autonomous region of Guangxi. "Over 3,000 foreigners get job licenses," Xinhua News Agency, September 26,1996. "China says farmers' majority in work force to end by 2000," AgenceFrance Presse, August 18, 1996. "Fujian to strengthen family planning amongmigrant population, Xinhua News Agency, July 3, 1996. Gary Silverman, "Vitaland vulnerable," Far Eastern Economic Review, May 23, 1996. _______________________________ Singapore: Illegals in Construction Singapore employs about 350,000 foreign workers, and foreign workers are 20percent of the island nation's labor force. Singapore is considered to run one of the tightest guest worker programs inthe world, regulating the ratio of foreign to domestic workers, chargingemployers a monthly tax or levy for each legal foreign worker they hire, andimposing stiff penalties on illegal workers and their employers. However, the Singapore press has been reporting that more and more illegalforeign workers have been found in Singapore. In September, 1996, two Japaneseconstruction firms paid a private company $10,000 to conduct midnight raids insearch of illegal foreign workers. The Singapore Contractors Association has called for an amnesty so thatillegal workers could be registered. A construction industry representativesaid that an amnesty would help determine the number of number of illegalworkers currently on site and then construction companies could pay a levy forillegal workers and they could continue to work on the site. The construction industry also claims that with sub-contractors being heldaccountable for the legality of the workers they hire, they are demanding moremoney from the main contractor in order to hire legal workers. Recent amendments to the Immigration Act and the Employment of ForeignWorkers Act make the main contractors responsible for the legality of allworkers on their sites, even workers who, as in these cases, sneak onto thesite to sleep at night. In order to decrease dependence on foreign workers, the Singaporegovernment launched a "Back to Work" program to attract housewives, olderpersons and displaced workers into the workforce. Jasbir Singh, "Two more construction giants conduct searches on own sites,"Straits Times, September 13, 1996. "Singapore launches 'back to work'program," Xinhua News Agency, September 13, 1996. Tan Hsueh Yun, "Contractors'body wants amnesty so illegal workers can be registered," Straits Times,September 8, 1996. _______________________________ ForeignWorkers in Malaysia A Malaysian cabinet committee on foreign workers will conduct a study offoreign workers following complaints by Bangladeshi workers of harassment inthe southern state of Johore. In one incident, hundreds of Malaysians fromvillages in Johore beat about 70 Bangladeshi workers, seriously injuring seven. Between January and April, 1996, over 10,000 illegal Indonesian workershave been sent home from Malaysia. An additional 11,000 detained and housed inMalaysian detention camps will be deported. Malaysia will not accept newworkers from Indonesia until after December 31. On September 17, the Malaysian government announced two health screeningmeasures to prevent foreign workers from bring infectious disease into thecountry. The Malaysian Cabinet approved a plan to have accredited clinics inthe workers' home countries conduct the medical tests. Also, an agency will beset up in Malaysia to monitor the workers' state of health. The government said that in 1995 about 30 percent of leprosy cases, 11.5percent of tuberculosis cases and 13 percent of malaria cases involved foreignworkers. In an effort to stop "marriages of convenience,", the Malaysian HomeMinistry announced it will revoke the work permit of foreign workers married tolocal women in an effort to gain permanent residence in Malaysia. There are noofficial figures on the number of Malaysian women married to foreign workers. "Committee to meet on conduct of alien workers," New Straits Times,September 26, 1996. Rene Leow, "Move to curb marriages with foreign workers,"New Straits Times, September 26, 1996. "Malaysia to deport foreign workers whomarry locals," Agence France Presse, September 25, 1996. Bob Khan, "Foreignworkers who marry must leave,' UPI, September 25, 1996. "Malaysia mullsreview of foreign worker recruitment policy," Agence France Presse, September22, 1996. Ho Wah Foon, "More thorough health checks for foreign workers inpipeline," Straits Times, September 19, 1996. Kamarul Yunus, "Ministry told tocheck weaknesses in health screening," Business Times, September 18, 1996."Malaysia to monitor foreign workers' health status," Xinhua News Agency,September 18, 1996. "Malaysia tightens health checks for foreign workers,"Agence France Presse, September 17, 1996. _______________________________ TaiwanConsidering Freeze on Foreign Worker Permits Taiwan's Council for Economic Planning and Development on August 15, 1996asked the Council for Labor Affairs to freeze new approvals for foreign workersat the current 280,000, due to the increase in the unemployment rate to 2.6percent, or 241,000 unemployed Taiwanese. There are believed to be 200,000illegal foreign workers in Taiwan. In response, the CLA drafted a set of regulations designed to protect therights and interests of foreign maids already in Taiwan. Under the new rules, foreign maids will be given one day off every week, orovertime pay if they work on their day off. They will also receive a seven-daypaid vacation after one year of employment. The maids can apply for sick leaveof up to 30 days a year. Employers can require helpers to work for a 40-day trial period. If theemployer deems them incompetent, foreigners can be dismissed, and required tobuy their own plane tickets back home. Foreign workers who commit crimes,violate Taiwanese laws, marry in Taiwan or get pregnant, contract contagiousdiseases, or bring families to Taiwan can also be fired. Taiwan has about 30,000 foreign maids, most of whom are from thePhilippines. Taiwan is hoping to improve the marriage prospects for Taiwanese women byreducing the number of foreign brides entering the county. Taiwanese men aresaid to prefer foreign brides because Taiwanese women, who are better educatedand more affluent, expect too much from their husbands. Under the new quotas, only 360 women from Indonesia, 420 from Myanmar, and1,080 from China can enter Taiwan for marriage each year. A quota will soon beimposed on Vietnamese women. There is no quota for Western spouses. "CLA drafts rules to 'Protect' foreign domestic helpers here," ChinaEconomic News Service, August 16, 1996. Annie Huang, "Taiwan Moves to BoostWomen's Marriage Prospects, "Associated Press, August 30, 1996. _______________________________ OTHER _______________________________ SaudiArabia and Kuwait: Reduce Dependence onForeigners? In Saudi Arabia, where six of seven service workers are foreigners, thegovernment has hired foreign firms to teach young Saudis desirable work traitssuch as punctuality, reliability, and courtesy and is trying to persuadeemployers to hire Saudis by prohibiting the admission of foreign secretaries. The government also requires firms to increase the number of Saudis intheir work forces by five percent each year. On the supply side of the labor market, the government is offering nativeyouth up to $190 per week to attend one-year courses designed to turn them intodesirable service workers. The Deputy Labor Minister says that "Every job filled by a foreigner isconsidered a temporary job to be filled by a Saudi whenever it is possible."Many employers reportedly prefer foreigners because they work for $500 permonth, and they can be deported if fired, versus $1,000 per month expected bySaudis. When Iraq invaded Kuwait in August 1990, there were about 650,000 Kuwaiticitizens and 1.4 million foreign workers in Kuwait. The war reduced the numberof foreign workers to about 700,000. After seven-month occupation by Iraq ended, the Kuwaiti government expelled700,000 Palestinian, Jordanian, and Yemeni guest workers in a bid forself-reliance. However, by 1992, newspapers were reporting that foreignersonce again dominated the labor force, this time Egyptians, Iranians andAsians. Today, Kuwait finds itself as reliant on foreign workers as before--six ofseven workers is a foreigners. Egyptians, Pakistanis, Filipinos and othersfill jobs that the Palestinians left behind. Most foreigners are in Kuwaitwithout their families, and many work six days each week. Kuwaitis comprise just 16 percent of the workforce. Each Kuwaiti isguaranteed a job, and 93 percent are government employees. Kuwaiti wages aredouble those paid to foreigners, and many leave their jobs at lunch. As aearly half of the government's expenses go to government salaries compared toone-third to defense. Today, Kuwait's population is two million, 1.3 million of whom arenon-Kuwaitis, according to the most recent government statistics. Of a totallabor force of 1.1 million, only 176,000 are Kuwaiti citizens. Kuwait has a per capita income of $23,000, and an estimated 10 percent ofthe world's oil reserves. There are 720,000 Kuwaiti citizens, but only 107,000 can vote--only men whocan trace their ancestry back at least one generation are allowed to vote. InSeptember, there were demonstrators by Kuwaiti women demanding the right tovote. Kuwait has reduced the number of "bidoon" or stateless residents, from117,000 to 220,000 since the Gulf War. Most are of Iranian or Iraqi origin andsome have lived in Kuwait for generations. The government does not plan togrant them citizenship, and has purged many bidoon from the Kuwaiti military. Kuwait plans to build an electric fence along its 130-mile border withIraq. Douglas Jehl, "For Kuwaitis, Self-Reliance Proves an Elusive Goal," NewYork Times, September 24, 1996. "Manila reports Saudi Arabia continues to beMecca for workers," Deutsche Presse-Agentur, September 21, 1996. Daniel Pearl,"Certain Work Is Foreign to Saudis, But That's Changing," Wall Street Journal,September 12, 1996. Peter Waldman, "Foreigners sweat to build Kuwait, ascitizens flex only financial muscle," Wall Street Journal, May 28, 1992. _______________________________ Immigrationinto Argentina Argentina (36 million population) is a magnet for migrants from Bolivia(seven million), Peru (24 million) and Paraguay (five million). Argentina has an estimated 200,000 illegal immigrants, and the debate overwhat to do about illegal immigrants sounds very familiar to Americans. Thereare those who say that, with a 2,500-mile western border which has 795 crossingpoints, Argentina cannot stop illegal immigrants, and that Argentineans do notwant to do certain types of jobs. The Bermejo River that separates Argentina ($8,200 per capita GNP) andBolivia ($900 per capita GNP) has been likened to the Rio Grande. Bolivianshave long been Argentina's migrant workers, cutting sugar cane and pickingoranges in the northern provinces, and working their way south to vineyards inthe wine country and potato farms near Buenos Aires. More recently, Bolivianshave found jobs picking apples in the flatlands near Patagonia, replacingChileans. Some Argentineans complain of the "Bolivianization" of northernArgentina. The countries of Argentina, Brazil, Uruguay, Paraguay, Chile and soonBolivia are linked in a free-trade area, and there is a long-standing traditionthat allows the free transit over borders of residents living within 30 milesof the border. Some estimates put the number of illegal Bolivians in Argentina at 200,000.Many are in Buenos Aries, where Korean-owned textile factories hire illegalBolivian and Paraguayan workers for as little as $300 a month for a 60-hourweek. Argentina in July had a 17 percent unemployment rate, which has led thegovernment to step up the enforcement of immigration laws. One requirement,that tourists from neighboring countries show they have at least $1,500, hasspawned a new business--the lending of $1,500 by the hour so that Bolivians andPeruvians can enter Argentina. Argentina in 1991 had five percent foreign-born residents, down sharplyfrom 1914, when one-third of Argentina's residents were born abroad--40 percentof the foreign born were from Italy, and 35 percent from Spain. In Peru, unemployment is eight percent, and underemployment is 75 to 90percent. About 20 percent of Peruvians live in "critical poverty." Gabriel Escobar, "Free Trade Leads to Mobile Labor as Bolivians Seek Jobsin Argentina," Washington Post, September 15 1996. Sebastian Rotella,"Argentina's frontier of promise; a country shaped by European settlers seesits future in new immigrants from its impoverished Latin American neighbors,"Los Angeles Times, June 8, 1996. Felix Raucana, "Peru's war on poverty stalls;for the 55 percent facing hard times, the emergency handouts and aid programshave failed," Chicago Tribune, June 7, 1996. _____________________________ 100,000Immigrants to Australia The number of immigrants arriving in Australia rose to 99,139 in the fiscalyear ending June 30, 1996. The three leading countries of origin were NewZealand 12.4 percent, Britain 11.4 percent, and China 11.3 percent. Includedwere 13,800 refugees. The government plans to reduce immigration to 74,000 in 1996-97, in part byintroducing a "cap and queue" system that may require spouses to wait forpermission to immigrate to join their husbands in Australia. Under currentlaw, an unlimited number of spouses can enter Australia. In 1996-97, there areexpected to be about 50,000 requests for family unification visas, although the"quota" is 36,700. In 1995-96, there was a 30 per cent increase in applications for spousevisas from Asian countries, especially from the spouses of the 40,000 Chinesegranted refugee status in Australia after the crackdown in June 1989.Immigrants entering Australia on spouse visas receive a two-year probationaryresidence status. The Australian government plans to propose legislation that would permitthe deportation of immigrants and naturalized Australians who lie about theirqualifications or falsely describe their marital status in their applicationfor permanent residency. Under current law, permanent residents can becomenaturalized Australians after two years. In her maiden speech to Australia's Federal Parliament, an independent MPon September 10, 1996 invoked the name Arthur Calwell, a former Labor Partyleader remembered for his words: "Two Wongs don't make a White," when sheasserted that Asian immigrants "have their own culture and religion, formghettoes and do not assimilate." According to the MP, Australia is danger of being "swamped" by Asians. Sheurged Australia to reinstate the White Australia policy, and end itsmult-cultural policies. A survey of 1,800 Australians found that 63 percent believe immigrationshould be reduced, including 51 percent of foreign-born persons in the country.Others studies suggest that immigrants from some countries were experiencinglong-term unemployment. Australian Minister for Immigration Philip Ruddock said that the MP'scomments "reflect a degree of xenophobia we think is very unhelpful." Some seven to eight percent of Australia's 20 million people are of Asiandescent. Some 28,670 people emigrated from Australia in the fiscal year ending June30, 1996. Researchers interested in immigration and integration in Australia can voteto approve a new group to discuss these issues. If you wish to vote, votinginformation can be obtained at http://www.dataweb.nl/~bekissler/index.html Kevin Clarke, "Australian MP rattles racist skeleton," Business Times,September 26, 1996. Kalinga Seneviratne, "Look to Asia policy takes adifferent turn," Inter Press Service, September 24, 1996. Liam Fitzpatrick,"Immigration laws set to hit spouses," South China Morning Post, September 22,1996. _______________________________ RESOURCES _______________________________ SlateonImmigration The Internet magazineSlate--http://www.slate.com/COC/96-08-19/CoC.asp--hosted a discussion ofimmigration and poverty August 19-23, 1995, in which Mark Krikorian assertedthat US immigration policy is the major factor harming poor Americans that theUS government can control--globalization, technology etc. are more difficultfor governments to control. Several studies suggest that immigration accountsfor 30 to 50 percent of the increase in the wage gap between the richest andpoorest Americans. George Borjas asserted that, between 1970 and 1990, the percentage offoreign-born persons with below-poverty level incomes rose from 14 to 18percent, while the percentage of native-born persons with below-poverty levelincomes remained at 13 percent. According to Borjas, the rise in immigrantpoverty is due to the growing gap between the education levels of immigrantsand natives--in 1970, recent immigrant men had about one-half year of schoolingthan US-born men, but by 1990, the education gap had widened to 1.3years. Borjas argued that the arrival of more unskilled immigrants held down wagesfor unskilled natives, and increased the number of poor persons getting welfarebenefits, especially in-kind benefits such as Food Stamps--in 1990, 21 percentof immigrant households receive some type of public assistance, as compared toonly 14 percent of native households, and only about 10 percent of non-Hispanicwhite native households. Barry Chiswick noted that, by one measure, immigration is only one-third asgreat today as at the turn of the century. Between 1871 to 1920, the annualrate of immigration was about eight per thousand U.S. population, in contrastto a rate of about three per thousand US population in the last 15 years.Without immigration, Chiswick asserts, there would have been more incomeequality, and more rural-urban migration. Peter Skerry agreed that unskilled immigrants depress wages and add to theUS poverty population, but that public desires to reduce immigration are asmuch due to the "unprecedented, demands" of immigrants for bilingual educationor ballots, voting rights electoral districts, or affirmative action benefits.According to Skerry, the major issue is how immigrants are incorporated into USsociety, not their number. Skerry also believes that the US must do far moreto reduce illegal immigration. Sanford Ungar agreed that the US is importing poverty with immigration, buthe argued that immigrants willing to work hard are not a problem because theybegin their American journey poor. Ungar argues that the immigration debate isbeing manipulated by politicians who are blaming immigrants for widespreadeconomic insecurity and uncertainty. Ungar advocates more immigration, raisinglegal immigration and admitting guest workers, and the provision of health andeducation services to them. The panelists also considered the effects of increased imports andincreased immigration, noting that immigration is a long-term increased in thelabor supply. Moderator Herb Stein concluded that all panelists agreed thatthe US was importing poverty via immigration, and that most agreed that moreresources needed to be devoted to reducing illegal immigration. WT02-B15-7IA090-000969-B028-33http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/By-Month/MN-Vol-3-96/MN_Nov_96.html 128.120.36.171 19970122205301 text/html 161898HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 20:53:42 GMTLast-Modified: Tuesday, 05-Nov-96 21:42:53 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 161640 MIGRATION NEWS  MIGRATION NEWS Vol. 3, No. 11 November, 1996 Migration News summarizes the most important immigration and integrationdevelopments of the preceding month. Topics are grouped by region: North America, Europe, Asia andOther. There are two versions of Migration News. The paper edition is about 8,000words in length, and the email version about 15,000. The purpose of Migration News is to provide a monthly summary of recentimmigration developments that can be read in 60 minutes or less. Many issuesalso contain summaries and reviews of recent research publications. Distribution is by email. If you wish to subscribe, send your emailaddress to: Migration News <migrant@primal.ucdavis.edu> Current and back issues may be accessed via Internet on the Migration NewsHome Page--- http://migration.ucdavis.edu There is no charge for an email subscription to Migration News. A paperedition is available by mail for $30 domestic and $50 foreign. Make checkspayable to UC Regents and send to: Philip Martin, Department of AgriculturalEconomics, University of California, Davis, California 95616 USA. Migration News is produced with the support of the University ofCalifornia-Berkeley Center for German and European Studies, the German MarshallFund of the United States, and the Pew Charitable Trusts. Editor: Philip Martin Managing Editor: Cecily Sprouse Department of Agricultural Economics, University of California, Davis Davis CA 95616 Tel (916) 752-1530 Fax: (916) 752-5614 ISSN 1081-9916 _______________________________ NORTHAMERICA _______________________________ NaturalizationControversyContinues As the number of newly-naturalized US citizens surpassed 1.1 million inFY96, Republicans stepped up their attacks on Citizenship USA. Vice PresidentGore launched the INS-administered initiative Citizenship USA in 1995 toeliminate the backlog of 800,000 immigrants who applied for US citizenship andwere waiting to be naturalized. Republicans charged that expedited naturalization was an attempt by theClinton administration to add Democrats to the voter rolls in California andother key states before the November 1996 elections. The INS officer inFresno, for example, asserted in an April 1996 letter that the "INS has beentold to naturalize everyone who filed Form N-400 prior to April 1, 1996, intime for them to register to vote in the November election." A Dole radio ad in California charged that "aliens with criminal records--rapists, murderers, armed felons -- have been granted US citizenship so theycan vote." Republicans uncovered documents that showed that a member of Gore's staffcomplained on March 28, 1996 that INS headquarters was hindering efforts toproduce "a million new voters by election day." One memo discussed ways to"lower the standards for citizenship." The INS eventually granted its districtmanagers in some cities the authority to waive some INS rules and regulationsto speed up naturalizations. Citizenship USA used community-based groups torecruit permanent residents for naturalization. Republicans also charged that the INS permitted foreign criminals to becomeUS citizens. The FBI on October 24, 1996 estimated that 100,000 immigrantswith criminal histories may have become US citizens since August 1995, whenCitizenship USA began, based on the FBI's assumption that eight to 10 percentof the applicants for naturalization have criminal records. In Los Angeles, an INS clerk charged that the INS destroyed more than 4,000fingerprints from aliens seeking naturalization before they were forwarded, asrequired, to the FBI to verify that the aliens did not have criminal records.This prompted California Governor Pete Wilson to release a letter to USAttorney General Janet Reno on October 21, 1996 saying that "The federalgovernment should be deporting such dangerous criminals, not rushing tonaturalize them." The INS countered that the fingerprint cards were destroyed because theywere not complete and that the naturalization applicants were ordered to submitnew ones. The INS said that no more than 1,300 people with criminal historieswere improperly naturalized in 1996. The INS says that it processed 1.3 million applications for US citizenshipin FY96, and rejected about 220,000 applications, a 17 percent rejectionrate. On October 24, 1996, the INS issued regulations that allow the agency,rather than a US court, to revoke the US citizenship of persons found to havebeen improperly naturalized. Senator Alan Simpson (R-WY) focused on "the rights and privileges" ofnaturalization during the immigration subcommittee's last hearing of the yearon October 22, 1996. The hearing ranged over questions such as whether the USshould permit dual citizenship and whether the US has made it too easy tonaturalize. Most industrial democracies are making naturalization easier. In the US,most legal immigrants must be residents for five years before applying,although spouses of US citizens can apply after three years. In New Zealand and Australia, by contrast, legal immigrants can apply fornaturalization after two or three years of residence. In California, immigrants eager to naturalize are often bilked by notarios,non-lawyer paralegals who sometimes operate from fancy leased offices, collectthousands of dollars from immigrants and then disappear. In some cases, the$2,000 to $4,000 lost represents several years of an immigrant'ssavings. William Branigin, "GOP Intensifies Action On Citizenship Inquiry,"Washington Post, October 25, 1996. Julio Laboy, "Immigrants hit by scams oncitizenship," Wall Street Journal, October 10, 1996. Marcus Stern, "WhiteHouse pressured INS to add new citizens," San Diego Union Tribune, October 9,1996. Sara Fritz, "Gore Immigrant Program Role Draws Fire," Los AngelesTimes, October 6, 1996. _______________________________ Immigrationin theElection/a> Presidential Politics. After the second debate between presidentialcandidates Robert Dole and Bill Clinton in San Diego on October 16, 1996, Doletried to win votes in California by accusing the Clinton administration offailing to control illegal immigration. On October 17 in Riverside, Dole complained that Californians must pay for"drug rehab for illegal aliens in prison." According to Dole, "Whenever he[Clinton] has to choose between California taxpayers and the militant groupswho demand public support for illegal aliens, he sides with the militantspecial-interest groups." Dole accused Clinton of weakening the new immigration law by persuadingCongress to accept revisions in last minute negotiations, so that: "If you arein this country illegally, you can stay in public housing, collect welfare, getfree medical care and even invite family members abroad to come and joinyou." On October 15, 1996, California Governor Pete Wilson sponsored an "openletter" in the New York Times that accused President Clinton of "stickingCalifornia taxpayers with $3 billion per year for illegal immigrants." Wilsoncharged that the Clinton administration's last minute changes to the 1996immigration law will allow illegal aliens who unlawfully received US welfarebenefits to nonetheless become naturalized US citizens, to permit illegalaliens in public housing to remain there and to continue to allow wages earnedby unauthorized aliens to be credited to that alien's Social Securityaccount. The flap over an Indonesian couple's $425,000 contribution to theDemocratic National Committee sparked a debate over an anomaly in US law: legalimmigrants living in the United States can contribute to political parties andcandidates, but they may not vote. Clinton and Dole pledged that, if elected,they would make it unlawful for non-US citizens to make politicalcontributions. There is only one Asian-American holding statewide office in California,even though Asian-Americans are 11 percent of California's residents.Asian-Americans outnumber Blacks in Los Angeles County, but there are noAsian-Americans on the 15-member Board of Supervisors, versus three AfricanAmericans and three Latinos. Once Asian Americans register to vote, they vote. In the 1994 election, 76percent of the registered Asian American voters went to the polls, compared to73 percent of whites, 64 percent of Latinos and 63 percent of AfricanAmericans. The Asian population of the US was 1.5 million in 1970 and is expected totop 12 million by the year 2000. Latino Voters. An estimated 6.6 million Hispanics were registeredto vote in the November 1996 elections, up from 4.8 million registered to votein 1992, including two million in California, 1.6 million in Texas, 570,000 inFlorida and 540,000 in New York. About 150,000 Latinos turn 18 every year inthe United States. In California, the two million registered Latinos were 12 percent ofCalifornia's 16 million registered voters. [Latinos are one-fourth ofCalifornia's 32 million residents]. The Tomas Rivera Policy Institute reported on October 22, 1996 the resultsof a public opinion poll that found that 71 percent of the Latinos registeredto vote in California and 85 percent of the Latinos naturalized since 1992,said they planned to vote for Clinton. Several groups charged that many non-citizens have registered to vote inthe 1996 elections. In the 1996 election, one of the groups that backed Prop. 187 plans to handout leaflets to voters approaching the polls that say: "Only citizens can vote!Violators will be prosecuted!" Several Hispanic groups have termed such leafleting "harassment" designedto discourage Latino voters and the US Justice Department promised to respondquickly to complaints of voter harassment. They formed Latino Election Watch'96, which includes toll-free hotlines for complaints and a team of lawyersready to investigate potential violations of the Voting Rights Act. The Democratic party is offering a $25,000 reward to anyone recording videoimages of people near polling places "using intimidating and physical threatsagainst voters." In 1988, uniformed guards were stationed at 20 polling places in Santa Anain Orange County holding signs in English and Spanish that warned thatnoncitizens were barred from voting. The Republicans who arranged for theguards denied any wrongdoing, but settled a lawsuit brought by six Hispaniccitizens for $400,000. On October 21, 1996, two Central Americans employed by a landscapingcompany to work at the vice president's residence were detained by the INS.The INS began proceedings to deport one of the workers. Both workers were able to obtain and present Maryland drivers' licenses totheir employer. The immigration bill originally contained a provision thatwould have required states to check the legal status of applicants for drivers'licenses, but this provision was deleted in last-minutenegotiations. Ken Chavez, "Voter-fraud fliers unfair, Latinos say," SacramentoBee, November 1, 1996. K. Connie Kang, "Asian Americans slow to flex theirpolitical muscle," Los Angeles Times, October 31, 1996. Patrick McDonnell,"New Citizens From Latin America Back Clinton, Poll Finds," Los Angeles Times,October 23, 1996. Mark Z. Barabak, "Dole attacks president on illegalimmigration," San Diego Union Tribune, October 18, 1996. Charles R. Babcockand Ruth Marcus, "Indonesian Gift Points Up What Some Call a Loophole:Political Donations From Noncitizens Questioned," Washington Post, October 161996. _______________________________ Assessing1996 ImmigrationChanges In 1996, three major laws that affect immigrants and immigration wereenacted: The Anti-Terrorism and Effective Death Penalty Act, signed into lawon April 24, 1996; the Personal Responsibility and Work OpportunityReconciliation Act, signed into law on August 22, 1996; and The IllegalImmigration Reform and Immigrant Responsibility Act of 1996, signed onSeptember 30, 1996. The immigration bill will, inter alia, increase the size of the US BorderPatrol to 10,000 agents by 2001. The immigration bill also includes a pilot employee eligibilityverification program that employers in sectors with a history of employingillegal immigrants will be encouraged to enroll in. The "basic pilot program"will be launched in at least five of the seven highest-immigration states.Employer participation is voluntary, but many expect that the INS mayconcentrate its enforcement efforts on non-participating employers. Foreigners who remain in the United States for more than six months in anunlawful status will be barred from entering the US for three years after theirdeparture, and those who stay unlawfully in the US for one year or more will bebarred from returning legally for 10 years. In one of the first moves to implement the new immigration law,Attorney General Janet Reno asked courts to dismiss five class-action lawsuitsfiled on behalf of up to 400,000 illegal immigrants in California andWashington. The suits alleged that the aliens were wrongly disqualified fromthe legalization program that permitted persons in the US illegally sinceJanuary 1, 1982 to apply for permanent resident status in 1987-88. The Justice Department asserted that the lawsuits were filed only to allowwhat it estimated to be 100,000 illegal immigrants to remain in the US. Under the new immigration law, only the US Supreme Court may issue broadinjunctions against INS policies and procedures. Some immigration lawyers, whocall the INS a "rogue agency," do not believe that Congress can depriveforeigners in the US from full access to US courts. Protest and Suits. On October 12, 1996, an estimated 25,000 peopledemonstrated in Washington DC against "anti-immigrant" sentiment. "La Marcha"organizers had predicted that 100,000 of the nation's 26 million Latinos wouldparticipate in what was termed the nation's first "pro-immigrant march." Amarch in 1994 in Los Angeles to oppose Proposition 187 drew 70,000participants. The Million Man March organized by African-Americans in 1995drew an estimated 800,000 people. Speakers at the rally urged support for a seven-point agenda that includedhuman and constitutional rights for all; equal opportunities and affirmativeaction; free public education for all; expansion of health services; citizenpolice review boards; labor law reform and a $7 per hour minimum wage; astreamlined citizenship application program; and an amnesty for immigrants whoillegally entered the United States before 1992. On October 11, 1996, New York City Mayor Giuliani sued the federalgovernment over provisions in the new welfare and immigration laws thatallow--not require-- city employees to report suspected illegal immigrants whoseek city services to the INS. Since 1985, New York City has prohibited itsemployees from reporting suspected illegal aliens to INS. According to themayor's office, there were about 400,000 illegal aliens in New York City in1993, including 85,000 of school age. New York officials claimed that allowing city employees to file reportswith INS would violate the 10th Amendment, which reserves for the states allpowers not expressly granted to the federal government. David Johnston, "Government Quickly Using Power of New Immigration Law,"New York Times, October 22, 1996. George Ramos, "Thousands of Latinos March inWashington," Los Angeles Times, October 13, 1996. Patrick McDonnell, " New LawCould End Immigrants' Amnesty Hopes," Los Angeles Times, October 9,1996. _______________________________ INS:Enforcement and Management Enforcement. On October 10, 1996, the INS announced that OperationGatekeeper would be extended to East San Diego county. Intense Border Patrolagent coverage would thereby be expanded from the 14 westernmost miles ofUS-Mexican border to include the 66 westernmost miles. The number of BorderPatrol agents in the San Diego sector has more than doubled to 2,000 sinceGatekeeper began in October 1994, including 830 agents assigned to the borderfrom Otay Mountain east to Imperial County. In a first-ever case near San Francisco, the INS fined a home owner $450for failing to complete an I-9 employee verification form for a worker he hiredto do heavy yard work. According to the INS, the homeowner drove to a "knownday-labor pickup point" in San Rafael, California, picked up two men and drovethem to his home. INS agents observing the day labor market followed the homeowner up a dirtroad to his property. When the INS agents appeared, one worker fled and theother was apprehended. The home owner argues that he should not be fined for two reasons. First,work had not yet begun, so the workers had not yet been "hired." Second, IRCAexempts US employers from the need to complete I-9 forms for "domesticservice." The INS contends that, in this case, the workers were hired forsomething more akin to construction work--re-establishing a washed-awayhillside--than domestic service. The Immigration and Naturalization Service announced that it would begin toissue Warning Notices to persons who have "minor verification violations" ofemployment laws. Under the new regulations, employers can scan and print outcopies of the Employment Eligibility Verification Form (Form I-9). Since 1989, the INS has issued 16,000 notices of intent to fine USemployers, including 2,200 in California, for hiring illegal aliens, or for notcompleting I-9 forms. When the INS discovers violations of employmenteligibility laws, its agents issue either a Warning Notice, Form I-846, or aNotice of Intent to Fine (NIF), Form I-763. An October 5 analysis in the Sacramento Bee suggests that the INS devotedabout two percent of its $2.6 budget in FY96 to employer sanctions enforcement.The INS typically settles cases against employers for about 40 percent of theamount initially assessed. Between April 1988 and August 1995, for example,the INS proposed $96.3 million in fines on employers, but settled for $38.3million. In a report on fraudulent documents, the Dallas Morning News on October 29,1996 reported that unauthorized aliens soon learn that the coveted green cardis actually pink and that border crossing cards that permit a Mexican nationalto "legally" enter the US can be rented for $50 to $100. In Laredo, Texas, the INS seizes about 300 false documents from the threemillion border crossers each month. Some Border Patrol agents estimate that 70percent to 80 percent of the illegal entrants they apprehend each year arecarrying packets of illegal documents. Aliens caught entering the US with false documents are subject to fines ofup to $2,000 and five years in prison. The INS in New York City indicted on October 8, 1996 three Chinese men,affiliated with the Fuk Ching organization, on alien-smuggling charges afterintercepting a freighter loaded with more than 100 Chinese in near Bermuda-- 83passengers and 26 crew and smugglers. Under the new immigration law, aliensmugglers can be sentenced to up to 10 years in prison for each alien theyattempt to smuggle into the US. Since 1992, more than 40 ships have been detected attempting to smuggleChinese to the United States, including the Golden Venture, which ran agroundoff New York in 1993 with more than 280 Chinese on board. Illegal Chinese immigrants typically pay $30,000 to $40,000 each to besmuggled into the United States. They usually make a down payment in China andthey or their families then pay off the rest once they reach theirdestination. The INS deported a record 67,094 illegal aliens in FY96, including 37,000who had committed crimes in the US. The INS, with 23,000 employees, has becomeone of the largest law enforcement agencies in the US. HIV. Several reports in October attacked the Clinton administrationfor asking INS to consider granting asylum to foreigners with AIDS. Under a1993 law, foreigners infected with communicable diseases, including AIDS, arebarred from entering the United States and are subject to deportation if theyare located inside the US. The Presidential Advisory Council on HIV/AIDS sought to change this policyin 1995, recommending that the INS grant asylum "based on the social groupcategory of HIV-positive individuals." In New York, a foreigner who was HIV-positive was granted asylum in the US,prompting House Speaker Newt Gingrich to complain that "Under the Clintonadministration, you can come to America illegally -- sneak into the country--announce that you are HIV-positive, be declared a political refugee, and beeligible for $120,000 of health benefits." Management. A federal judge in Seattle ruled on October 9, 1996that the INS violated the 5th Amendment's due process clause by failing toproperly inform about 5,000 aliens charged with using false documents to obtainUS jobs or benefits that they have a right to a hearing to try to rebut the INScharges. Any alien who was caught using false documents can reopen his or hercase by "attest[ing] to his or her lack of understanding" of the INS forms,which were published only in English. The judge ruled that aliens who have already been deported, perhaps as manyas 2,500, can return to the US at their own expense to contest theirdeportations. The judge ordered the INS to publicize his decision in CentralAmerica and South America and among the 800 nonprofit immigration assistanceproviders with which the INS has established contact. The 1990 Immigration and Naturalization Act made document fraud a crimepunishable by automatic and permanent deportation. The judge ruled that INSforms that were given to aliens caught with false documents were available onlyin English, and thus did not inform aliens adequately that they were beingpermanently barred from the US. The INS has 60 days to appeal the ruling. On September 12, 1996, the House Judiciary Immigration and Claimssubcommittee berated the INS for attempting to conceal from a Congressionaloversight committee overcrowding at a detention center and understaffing at theMiami airport. The INS officials implicated in the attempt to mislead Congresswere not helpful to the investigation. Some, nonetheless, have been promotedby the INS. An estimated one-fourth of the 720,000 immigrants "admitted" by the INS inFY95 were living illegally in the US and adjusted their status. Some 7.6million foreigners are expected to apply for the 55,000 diversity visasavailable in FY97. David McLemore, "Investigators see fake documents flourish in wake of law,"Dallas Morning News, October 29, 1996. Ruth Larson, "White House waffles onHIV asylum policy," Washington Times, October 22, 1996. Eric Brazil, "Fineover yardwork a test case," San Francisco Examiner, October 12, 1996. HenryWeinstein, "Ruling Could Reopen Many Deportee Cases," Los Angeles Times,October 10, 1996. William Branigin, "2-Year U.S. Probe Leads to Capture ofFreighter Crowded With Aliens," Washington Post, October 9, 1996. MichaelDoyle, "Efforts by INS to levy fines fall short," Sacramento Bee, October 5,1996. _______________________________ WelfareReform'sUneven Impacts Food Stamps. In the omnibus spending bill, approved at the end ofSeptember 1996 along with the new immigration law, the Clinton administrationconvinced Congress to permit legal immigrants currently receiving Food Stampsto continue getting them until April 1, 1997. Food Stamps are entirely paidfor by the federal government; they provide an average $73 per person per monthin coupons that can be used to buy food. About 1.8 million of the 25 million Food Stamp recipients are legalimmigrants. One million are expected to be removed from the program when theireligibility is re-checked. States are expected to re-verify immigrant FoodStamp recipients between April 1, 1997 and August 22, 1997. On October 31, 1996, a state judge issued a preliminary injunctionforbidding California from implementing the part of the new welfare law thatmakes many legal immigrants not eligible for Food Stamps until the stategovernment also develops procedures to notify the public of the changes. About 436,000 legal immigrants receive Food Stamps in California;immigrants are 14 percent of the 3.2 million recipients. Some 373,000 areexpected to be removed from the rolls--legal immigrants can receive Food Stampsonly if they are active U.S. military personnel veterans; refugees who havelived in the US less than five years; or legal immigrants have worked in theUnited States for at least 10 years. In California, counties administer the Food Stamp program. Legal immigrants not currently receiving Food Stamps, and who applied forFood Stamps after August 22, 1996, have had their applications rejected. Suits. On October 15, 1996, a coalition of immigrant rights groupsin California sought an injunction from the federal judge who in 1995 blockedimplementation of Proposition 187. The suit aimed to prevent California fromwithholding prenatal care from illegal immigrant women under the new federalwelfare law. It argued that making illegal alien women ineligible forstate-funded prenatal care would jeopardize their US-born and US-citizenbabies. On November 1, 1996, the federal judge ruled that the new federal welfarelaw DOES permit California to eliminate on December 1, 1996 a $69 millionprogram that provides prenatal care for an estimated 70,000 unauthorizedpregnant women, including 20,000 in Los Angeles. California had been providingprenatal care to unauthorized pregnant women since 1988. The ruling may open the door to barring unauthorized immigrants from otherstate-funded programs. General. President Clinton signed the law creating a new welfaresystem into law on August 22, 1996. States were given from October 1, 1996through July 1, 1997 to prepare plans on the provision of assistance to poorpeople. Each state will receive a federal block grant to provide assistance to poorresidents. Most state plans for caring for poor residents simply state that the statewill devise lawful means of assisting the poor. A few states, includingNebraska and Utah, said they would use state money to provide welfareassistance to legal immigrants who arrived in the US after August 22,1996. Less than 10 percent of adult welfare recipients are now working. Underthe new welfare law, recipients are required to work after two years of federalwelfare benefits. Half of each state's adults on welfare are to be working by2002. The new law sets a five-year lifetime limit on payments to anyfamily. The minimum wage rose to $4.25 hourly on October 1, 1996. About 25 percentof food-service workers are paid the minimum wage. A full-time worker wouldhave to earn $7.80 per hour for 2,000 hours per year to push a family offour above the $15,600 poverty line. Patrick McDonell and Virginia Ellis, "Welfare law will allow Wilson to cutimmigrant aid," Los Angeles Times, November 2, 1996. "Mayor Giuliani Makes CaseFor Immigration in Lawsuit," Reuter, October 12, 1996. Robert Pear, "Legalimmigrants get food-stamp extension," New York Times, October 3, 1996. _______________________________ California:Population, Housing andLabor Population. The US Census Bureau released its projections ofCalifornia's population in October, and projected that the state would have49.3 million residents in 2025. In 2025, California is projected to have 21million Hispanics, 15 million non-Hispanic whites, nine million Asians, andthree million Blacks. California's Latino population is expected to double between 1995 and 2025and account for a third of the total Latino population in the US in 2025.California is projected to add a net 18 million residents between 1995 and2025, including nine million immigrants. The Center for Continuing Study of the California Economy in mid-Octoberreleased a study that projected that California will gain a net 25,000residents from other states in 1996, the first net population growth due tointernal migration since 1991. In August, 1996 California was creating a net 25,000 new jobs eachmonth. Latino Income. Pepperdine University's Institute for Public Policyissued a report in October that argued that, after 20 years in the US, asignificant number of Latinos enter the middle class. According to 1990 Censusdata, there were nearly four times as many US-born Latino households in themiddle class in Southern California as there were in poverty. Middle class wasdefined as a household incomes above $35,000 or owning a home. Latinos in 1990 were about one-third of the population of the five-countySouthern California region--Los Angeles, Orange, Ventura, Riverside and SanBernardino counties--and one-fourth of all residents identified as middleclass. Two-thirds of Latino households in Southern California are headed byimmigrants and two-thirds of the Latino households headed by recent immigrantshad household incomes of less than $35,000. In Los Angeles County, Latinohouseholds make up nearly 47 percent of all poor households. The report paints a picture of hard-working, family-oriented people who aregradually increasing their incomes and purchasing homes, often by pooling theincome of several persons in large households. Housing. Construction normally leads California out of recession,with each 200,000 to 300,000 of added population typically associated with100,000 new home starts. The Wall Street Journal on October 10, 1996 arguedthat immigrants are behind the current mini-housing boom in California. Asiansare particularly apt to press on to home ownership. In 1986, California had over 300,000 new housing starts and the netaddition of over 700,000 people, but in 1991, housing starts fell to less than100,000 and have remained there since. More US-born residents are leaving thanare entering California, giving the state a net loss of population due todomestic migration of over 300,000 per year for the past five years. According to housing experts, there are about three immigrants per housingunit, versus two US-born persons per housing unit. In some areas, such as LosAngeles, immigrants can buy houses vacated by US-born persons leaving the area,but in cities such as Fresno, their arrival leads to new construction. The five most common names of home buyers in the Los Angeles area in 1995were Hispanic; Smith was the eighth most common name. Since 4.5 million legal and illegal immigrants arrived in the past 16years, the California housing industry projects the need for an additional 1.3million housing units. The Hispanic population of California is projected toincrease by 38 percent over the next decade, but the Hispanic populationbetween the ages of 35 and 54, prime home-buying ages, is projected to rise by75 percent. Latinos are optimistic. An August, 1996 Field Poll of 553 Latinos showedthat 50 percent of the Latinos, but only 42 percent of all Californianssurveyed, believe they will be better off a year from now. Some 54 percent ofLatinos in California earn less than $20,000 a year, compared with 30 percentof the entire state's work force. Two-thirds of California's net population growth is due to immigration.There are about 20 million residents of southern California and over one third,or eight million, were born abroad. Indeed, about one third of all theforeign-born persons in the US live in southern California. Welfare. On January 1, 1997, payments to the 2.7 million Californiarecipients of Aid to Families With Dependent Children will be cut by 4.9percent in urban areas and 9.8 percent in 41 rural counties. An urban familyof three will see its monthly check drop about $29, to $565, and rural familiesof three will get $538. California began hearings around the state on implementing the new welfarelaw and, at the first hearing in Fresno on October 24, 1996, local officials inthe "Valley of the poor" complained that legal immigrants removed from welfarerolls would become the responsibility of county governments. However, the state's legislative analyst predicted that, since most of theimmigrants receiving welfare in California have been in the state for at leastfive years, many will apply for US citizenship to keep their benefits. In Fresno county, California, the nation's major agricultural county, legalimmigrants are 14 percent of the population, but constitute one-third of thosereceiving AFDC. Schools. In Fall 1996, there were be a record 52 million childrenenrolled in K-12 schools, topping a 51 million peak during the baby boom in1971. The enrollment surge in the 1990s is due primarily to the baby-boomecho,--the baby boomers of the 1960s having children-- to increased immigrationand higher fertility, especially among Hispanics. A new study found that more than 40 percent of the children enrolled inK-12 education in 1996-97 are Hispanics and their share of public schoolenrollment is expected to top 50 percent by the year 2004. Relatively fewHispanics complete high school in a manner that makes them eligible foradmission to the University of California. For every 100 Latino students in10th grade, only four become eligible for admission into UC, which accepts thetop 12.5 percent of high school graduates, and only one enrolls in UC. California has 1.3 million K-12 children who are not fluent in English, andthe state is grappling with how to reform bilingual education. Bilingualeducation is currently governed by court cases and state regulations writtenafter the last bilingual education law expired in 1987. They require thatbilingual programs must be based on sound educational theory, must be givensufficient resources to allow that theory to make a difference and must produceresults. A September 1996 poll found that 70 percent of Latino parents said teachingchildren to read and write in English should be the schools' toppriority. Labor. In September 1996, the city of Glendale near Los Angelesbegan banning workers seeking day jobs and employers seeking workers frompublic roads. The city is, however, building a structure with restrooms andchairs where day laborers can wait to be hired. Violations of the streethiring law can result in fines of up to $500 or six months in jail. Free classes in English and job-related skills are planned for the men asthey wait for work. Beginning in the mid-1980s, many southern California cities have sponsoredday labor markets to avoid worker loitering near home improvement stores. Thecity of Los Angeles is now operating two sites for day laborers, in NorthHollywood and Harbor City, but does not ban street soliciting for jobs. In1991, Agoura Hills banned street labor markets, its ordinance was upheld andLadera Heights and La Mirada soon followed with similar ordinances. However, these cities have found it difficult to enforce their laws.Studies suggest that only one-fourth to one-third of the day laborers areunauthorized workers. Illegal Immigration. A study released by the Public PolicyInstitute of California concluded that illegal immigration from Mexico toCalifornia reacts to changes in the economies of Mexico and California.Demographer Hans Johnson used a variety of data to estimate the flow of illegalimmigrants to California from Mexico between 1980 and 1993. According to Johnson, illegal immigration accounted for 22 to 31 percent ofthe state's population growth between 1980 and 1993. Johnson found that whenCalifornia's economy boomed in the mid to late 1980s, the state experiencedbrisk job growth and illegal immigration peaked. When California suffered froma severe recession in the early 1990's, illegal immigration fell. In mid-June, state lawyers argued before a federal judge that Californiawas suffering from an "invasion" of illegal immigrants, since the estimated 1.7to 1.8 million illegal residents in California are five percent of the state'spopulation. According to the state's lawyer, an invasion is the "illegal entryof so many persons that it is beyond the capability of the state to handle." An August 1996 survey of 1,100 Riverside county residents found that,although 68 percent thought that illegal immigration was a "big problem," mostthink that the US should continue to permit all persons born in the US to be UScitizens. On October 6, 1996, the Los Angeles Times reported that California, theonly state whose Medicaid program pays for emergency hospitalization in Canadaor Mexico, was being falsely billed for hundreds of thousands of dollars byMexican border city doctors. California in mid-1996 had 163,300 full-time state employees. They were 58percent non-Hispanic white, 17 percent Hispanic, 12 percent African-Americanand six percent Asian. Virginia Ellis, "Welfare Official Warns of Threat From New Law," LosAngeles Times, October 25, 1996. Bernard Wysocki, "Influx of immigrants addsnew vitality to housing market," Wall Street Journal, October 10, 1996. SteveRyfle, "2-Pronged Plan for Street-Side Job Seekers," Los Angeles Times,September 13, 1996. David Lesher and Dan Morain, "Care for Disabled IllegalImmigrants Periled," Los Angeles Times, September 4, 1996. Rochelle Sharpe,"Record school enrollments lie ahead," Wall Street Journal, August 22, 1996. _______________________________ MexicanViews on Immigration On October 22, 1996, Mexican Foreign Relations Secretary Jose Angel Gurriaasserted that "The phenomenon of migration can be beneficial and offers greatpotential advantages to both the migrants' original and new countries, but onlywhen a common vision on this phenomenon is reached." The Sacramento Bee of October 9, 1996 noted that 40 percent of the almost1,000 Mexicans who apply for visas to visit the US every day are turned down.Since July 1996, Mexicans applying for non-immigrant visas to visit the US mustpay $20 each time they apply for a visa. To prevent fraud, the consulate does not tell visa applicants whatmaterials to bring to their interviews and many must apply severaltimes. About a third of the estimated 150,000 foreigners per year who settleillegally after lawful entry are believed to be Mexican. Mexico's population, 94 million in 1995, is rising by two million a yearand is expected to reach 125 million in 2010. The Inter-Secretarial Commissionfor the Creation and Use of Population Identification Numbers recommended inOctober that Mexico adopt a "universal identification system for allcitizens." Kelly Librera, "Committee to explore national ID system formed," The News,October 24 1996. Dorsey Griffith, "No welcome mat at US embassy," SacramentoBee, October 9, 1996. _______________________________ Nonimmigrants/USBusiness/Inequality Labor Certification. US mathematicians holding doctorates,whose unemployment rate jumped to almost 11 percent in 1995, are protesting theprovision of the 1990 IMMACT that increased the number of foreigners allowed toimmigrate to the US to fill vacant US jobs from 54,000 per year to 140,000 peryear. According to the protesting US mathematicians, US employers have takenadvantage of the increased number of immigration visas available. According toone group, 40 percent of the 720 jobs available to PhD mathematicians in 1995went to immigrants. In 1994, some 561 professors and researchers received US immigrant visasbecause they were considered outstanding in their fields, down from 615 in1993. The US mathematicians argue that because of easy immigration, universitiesand other US employers can select from 50 or 100 equally-qualified candidatesfor each opening. There is disagreement over whether intense competition for professor jobsis helpful or harmful. According to economist Jagdish Bhagwati, the fact thatRussian and Chinese immigrants are included in the competition forprofessorships is good, since it raises the standard in mathematics departmentsfrom research universities to community colleges. This process highlights there-distributive aspects of immigration--even if all US residents gain, therecan be significant and concentrated costs. The May 1996 DOL Inspector Generals' report that concluded that many USemployer requests for temporary and permanent foreign workers merely legalizethe status of a foreigner already employed continued to echo in news reports.For example, Philadelphia Inquirer reporters Donald Barlett and James Steele onOctober 20, 1996 detailed the jobs that US employers asked to fill withtemporary and permanent immigrants in 1995--a $5.25 per hour hair stylist inWashington DC, a $15 per hour biologist for the Red Cross and a $53,000 peryear systems analyst at Perot Systems. Other jobs filled by foreigners after DOL certified that US workers werenot available included housecleaners, fast-food restaurant managers andcooks. ImmigrantBusiness/a>es.The number of US businesses reached 17.3 million in 1992, up from 13.7 millionin 1987, and their sales topped $3.3 trillion, up from $2 trillion. Theaverage US firm had sales in 1992 of $193,000. The US Census reported on July 10 that the number of Hispanic businesses inthe US increased from 490,000 in 1987 to 863,000 in 1992, and that theirreceipts jumped from $33 billion to $77 billion. About 47 percent ofHispanic-owned firms, and 45 percent of all US businesses, had annual sales in1992 of less than $10,000, suggesting that most are sideline operations.California has about one-third of US Hispanic-owned businesses--250,000 firms,followed by Texas with 156,000 and Florida with 118,000. The number of US firms owned by people of Asian descent increased rapidlybetween 1987 and 1992, from 386,000 to 603,000. Most of the Asian-owned firmsprovide services in California, New York, and Texas. Almost half of theAsian-owned business are owned by persons who trace their roots to China orKorea (not all Asian-owned businesses are immigrant-owned). Inequality. By all measures, inequality in the US has increasedover the past 20 years. The median income of US families in real dollars fellfrom $29,900 in 1989 to $27,100 in 1993. Thus the median income was 3.25 timesthe poverty level in 1989, but only three times the poverty level in1993. Over the past 20 years, the share of US jobs that paid wages too low tokeep a one-earner family above the poverty line has increased from 24 to 30percent of all US jobs. Four major explanations have been advanced for increased inequality:technological change that raised wages for educated workers and reduced themfor workers without a high school education; the shift to a service economy,where the spread in wages is greater than in manufacturing; increased trade,pitting US manufacturing workers more directly against lower wage workersabroad; and increased immigration, which puts downward pressure on wages at thebottom of the US job ladder. There is widespread disagreement about thepercentage of inequality explained by each of these factors. One recent poll reported that two-thirds of Americans blame trade andimmigration for stagnant wages and rising inequality. According to a study by Occidental College, about 25 percent of theimmigrants who arrived in California's San Fernando Valley in the 1980s hadincomes below the poverty line at the time of the 1990 census. Of theimmigrants who arrived in the 1970s, by contrast, only 12 percent were poor in1990. The study concludes that immigrants are upwardly mobile. A report from the California Public Policy Institute released July 14 foundthat inequality among men is increasing faster in California than among men inthe US as a whole. In 1995, men earning less than $6,000 per year were in thebottom 10 percent of the male earners and men earning $65,000 or more were inthe top 10 percent of earners. Michael Phillips, "Math PhDs add to Anti-Foreigner Wave," WallStreet Journal, September 4, 1996. Michael Selz, "US firms owned byPacific Islanders, Asians are growing at a rapid pace," Wall Street Journal,August 2, 1996. Peter Passell, "Technology's edict: adapt or lose out," NewYork Times, July 25, 1996. _______________________________ CanadianImmigrationFalls Canada anticipated the arrival of 220,000 immigrants and refugees in 1996but, as of October, only about 160,000 had arrived. The platform of Canada's governing Liberal Party calls for the annualaddition via immigration of one percent of the country's population, whichwould mean about 300,000 immigrants per year. However, Canada publishes anexpected level of immigration each year and, for 1997, it expects to admitbetween 195,000 and 220,000. About 113,000 will be economic migrants, personsadmitted under a system that awards points for education and skills, 61,000 arefamily unification immigrants and 26,000 are refugees. In 1971 Canada launched a national policy of multiculturalism. A Ministryof Multiculturalism was established in 1973, and in 1982, the Canadian Charteror constitution was amended to say that it should be interpreted to preserveand enhance "the multicultural heritage of Canadians." The Canadian governmentwas pledged by law in 1988 to preserve and enhance multiculturalism. The Liberal government recently reaffirmed multiculturalism despitewidespread criticism that state-funded multiculturalism is accelerating thebreak-up of Canada. Toronto in 1996 won the United Nations' Best PracticesAward for the integration and celebration of immigrants. A recent poll in the Vancouver Sun found that many immigrants from HongKong believe they are victims of racism. Some analysts say the racism stemsfrom reactions of jealousy from the native community over the wealth of theHong Kong immigrants. Manitoba, which attracted 3,400 immigrants in 1995, won permission inOctober 1996 to relax some of Canada's immigration restrictions to meet theprovince's goal to attract 8,000 immigrants per year. The UNDP ranks Canada first among 174 nations in human development, eventhough Canada was only one of three rich countries--the other two were Finlandand Ireland--considered worse off today than in 1980. Anne Dawson, "Fewer coming to Canada," Toronto Sun, October 29,1996. Peter Rekai, "Canada's upscale influx," New York Times, September 16,1996. Pierre Longnus, "Taiwan immigrants to Canada settle in Vancouver,"Agence France Presse, August 17, 1996. Pierre Longnus, "Chinese immigrantsfeeling racism pressure: poll," Agence France Presse, August 18, 1996."Manitoba, Canada Recruiting Skilled Scottish Workers," Universal NewsServices, July 5, 1996. _______________________________ DominicanRepublicImmigration An estimated 700,000 Dominicans, almost 10 percent of the 7.5 millionpopulation of the Dominican Republic, are believed to have emigrated since1985. About 400,000 were admitted as legal immigrants to the US. Over half ofthese settled in New York City. The Dominican Republic receives an estimated $1 billion in remittances eachyear. More Dominicans receive public assistance than any other non-refugee groupof immigrants. About 28 percent of the Dominican immigrants who arrived since1980 have received public assistance for some period of time. Only Vietnamese,at 38 percent, and persons from the ex-USSR, at 33 percent, have higher ratesof dependence on public assistance. Dominican President Leonel Fernandez Reyna, who took office in August,1996, acknowledged in September 1996 that "many Dominican families residing inthe United States that have benefited from welfare and food stamps will beginto experience difficulties once this law is promulgated." Reyna, who went toelementary and high school in New York City, urged Dominicans in the US tobecome US citizens to retain their benefits; the Dominican Republic made dualcitizenship legal in 1994. In Reyna's words: "If you... feel the need to adopt the nationality of theUnited States in order to confront the vicissitudes of that society stemmingfrom the end of the welfare era, do not feel tormented by this.... Do it with apeaceful conscience, for you will continue being Dominicans, and we willwelcome you as such when you set foot on the soil of our republic." The US Coast Guard reports that growing numbers of poor people from theDominican Republic are hiring smugglers to take them on the 18-hour sea journeyto Puerto Rico. Those who establish themselves in the US commonwealth have afoothold into the US. The Coast Guard has picked up 4,162 Dominicans at sea in1996, about the same as in 1995. The 14-nation Caribbean Community or Caricom wants the US to grant theisland nations a free-trade status equivalent to that enjoyed by Mexico andCanada, but Congress, reportedly responding to US grower concerns of increasedfruit and vegetable imports, did not act in 1996. Angus MacSwan, "Dominican smuggling rings growing problem for US,:Reuters, October 16, 1996. Larry Rohter, "Fewer Immigrant Benefits Do Not FazeDominicans," New York Times October 12, 1996. Ian Fisher, "A Dominican LeaderReceives an Official Embrace," New York Times, October 5, 1996. "DominicanPresident Criticizes US Immigration Law," Reuters, October 3, 1996. _______________________________ EUROPE _______________________________ EU:ajorityVoting on MigrationIssues Third Pillar. The European Union agreed on October 2, 1996 to movefrom unanimity to majority decision-making on immigration, border control,asylum and visa issues, leaving Britain isolated in its refusal to give up itsveto on such issues. EU decisions relating to home and judicial affairs under the third pillarof the Maastricht treaty are currently required to be unanimous. Majority rulewould be coupled with the right of the EU commission to propose legislation andmake immigration decisions subject to scrutiny by the European parliament. In addition, the proposed new structure for dealing with third pillarissues would make the European Court of Justice responsible for settlingdisputes. Britain is opposed to any extension of the court's jurisdiction. IfBritain does not change its position after its expected April, 1997 elections,the other 14 members of the EU will move ahead without Britain. In an October 18 speech, an EU leader called on the European Union to focuson human rights as the key element of a preventive refugee policy. He saidthat the EU provides humanitarian funds to care for refugees, but does not havea plan to stop refugee flows before they begin. Second, he said that the UNHCR should rewrite its refugee convention,adopted 44 years ago, to take into account the social realities of populationdisplacements today, which are often caused by civil discord, rather thanindividual persecution by governments. Third, he called upon the IGC to grant the European Court of Justicesupervisory powers over EU asylum policy in order to guarantee that asylumseekers will not be returned to unsafe territories. Currently the EuropeanCourt of Justice has no jurisdiction over asylum decisions made by individualEU nations. France in October rejected a proposal made by the 39-member Council ofEurope that advocates a smaller role for national parliaments in dealing withimmigration. Britain in October asked the UN to consider recommending that membernations deny asylum to persons "financing, planning and inciting terroristacts." Critics say that, if the British amendments to the 1951 Geneva refugeeconvention were adopted, Nelson Mandela could have been denied asylum in Europeand extradited to South Africa as a terrorist. Denmark, Sweden and Finland became full members of the Schengen pact thatopens internal European borders. Norway and Iceland, both non-EU members, areassociate members, but they pledged to implement some EU legislation, such asEU guidelines on asylum and visa policy. Italy, Austria and Greece hope to become full members of the Schengenagreement in 1997. French officials continue to work on an accord with the Netherlands tocontrol drug sales, so that France would drop its land border controls withBelgium and Luxembourg. French officials continue to accuse the two countriesof being transit areas through which Dutch drugs enter France. Population and Unemployment. The population of the 15-member EU,including resident foreigners, reached 373 million on January 1, 1996. In theEU, fertility was less than 1.9 births per woman ranging from 1.9 in Ireland to1.2 in Italy. There were about four million births and 3.7 million deaths inthe EU in 1995, for a natural increase of 300,000. The total population of the EU rose by 800,000 because a net 500,000immigrants arrived, including 422,000 in Germany and 90,000 in the UK. Irelandand Portugal were net emigration countries. Unemployment in the EU is not likely to fall as EU nations struggle tosatisfy the Maastricht requirements for monetary union. With an unemploymentrate that is twice the US rate, it may be hard for EU nations to developimmigration policies that anticipate the entry of foreigners seeking jobs, eventhough every EU country reports shortages of workers with particularskills. The Irish director of the EURES (European Employment Services) asserted inOctober that there were only two ways to reduce unemployment-- "educate andmigrate." Among EU countries, those with the highest unemployment rates havethe lowest levels of worker skills and therefore the least mobility. In some cases, there is cross-border migration in Europe to take advantageof wage and tax differences between member countries. For example, hundreds ofSwedish nurses reportedly live in Malmo, Sweden and commute daily to jobs inCopenhagen where wages are higher. Sweden is attractive because of lower incometaxes. EU member countries must give nationals of other EU member statesthree-month work and residence permits upon request. But there is no obligationto renew the work and residence permit if the worker does not findemployment. According to the Council of Europe, Luxembourg has the highest percentageof foreigners in its population, 32 percent; followed by Switzerland, 19percent; Germany, nine percent; France, six percent; and the UK, fourpercent. EU labor and social affairs ministers agreed on September 24, 1996 that anEU employer who sends workers to another EU country must abide by the laborlaws of the country to which the workers are sent, including paying minimumwages to EU migrant workers. The new rules are aimed at preventing "socialdumping," or taking advantage of wage differences within the EU by usinglow-wage workers in high-wage countries. The European Court of Justice ruled on October 10, 1996 that spouses ofworkers entitled under German law to child-rearing benefits may receive thosebenefits whether or not they live in Germany. Germany had argued that thebenefit was originally intended for single parent families and not to benefitspouses residing outside of Germany. The court said that if a benefit isgranted without "individual and discretionary assessment of personal needs andif it concerns one of the risks expressly listed in the community regulation,"it is subject to the Community regulations for migrant workers. The UK and Portugal dissented. All EU nations will have three years toimplement the agreement. Janet McEvoy, "Schengen Group Opens Doors to Nordic Neighbors,"Reuters, October 17, 1996. "ELDR President Address on Asylum, Refugee Policy,"Reuter European Community Report, October 18, 1996. Padraig Yeates, "Moreefficient, mobile EU workforce urged," Irish Times, October 11, 1996. "CourtApplies Migrant Worker Rules to Child-raising benefits," Reuter EuropeanCommunity Report, October 10, 1996. Angus MacKinnon, "EU pressure mounts onBritain over immigration veto," Agence France Presse, October 2, 1996."Population: Fewer than four million babies born in EU last year," EuropeanReport, October 2, 1996. _______________________________ GermanyReturns Bosnians Bosnians. Under an August 1996 agreement between the 16 Germanstates and the Interior Ministry in Bonn, a three-phase repatriation programbegan October 1, 1996 for the 320,000 Bosnians refugees in Germany. Criminals,single people and childless couples are to leave Germany by March 1997. Some predict that the expulsion orders will push Bosnians underground inGermany, as many try to stay without legal residence papers. Bavaria, Thuringia, Baden-Wurttemberg and Berlin have announced plans toremove the Bosnians by force if necessary. On October 9, 1996, Bavaria forcibly expelled a 29-year old Bosnian who hadbeen convicted of sexual offenses. He had applied for amnesty in January 1996;the application had been rejected. The Chicago Tribune profiled a Serb-Croat woman in Berlin who was raped andbeaten by Muslims as she tried to escape from Bosnia and who was the first of615 Bosnians in a former East Berlin workers' hostel to receive a notice toleave Germany. The woman does not want to return and reportedly is considering seekingpolitical asylum in the Netherlands. But European Union rules make the firstEU country's decision on an asylum applicant binding on all othermembers. Berlin has nearly 30,000 Bosnian refugees. Berlin's interior minister saidthat Berlin will not send home rape victims and others traumatized by the waruntil after their medical treatment is completed, but that a majority of theBosnian refugees should be returned by the end of 1999. The interior ministerestimates that caring for the Bosnians costs Berlin between $460 million and$525 million a year. On October 10, 1996, Germany and what remains of Yugoslavia signed anagreement to repatriate over the next three years 135,000 persons whoseapplications for asylum in Germany were rejected. Many are ethnic Albaniansfrom Kosovo. The Yugoslav interior minister acknowledged that the return ofthis many people will create difficulties and hoped that the internationalcommunity would help with resettlement costs, since Yugoslavia did not demandfinancial assistance from Germany as a condition for taking back its citizens. German interior minister Kanther said that the treaty, which is effectiveDecember 1, signals Germany's determination not to allow individuals withoutlegitimate claims to political asylum to remain in the country for extendedperiods. The accord provides for the return within three years of all refugeesfrom the former Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) who entered Germany beforethe October 10 signing. Asylum Seekers. The number of foreigners seeking asylum in Germanywas 10,742 in September, 1996, compared with 9,548 in August. Between Januaryand September, some 86,643 people applied for asylum in Germany, a drop of sixpercent from 1995 levels. Of the asylum applications adjudicated, 7.5 percentthe applicants were granted asylum in Germany. After 19 months of refuge in a church in Nuremberg, a Turkish familyvoluntarily returned to Turkey. About 150 foreigners, including 50 in Bavaria,have taken "refuge" in churches. Under "Altfallregelungen"--old cases rules--families in Germany six or moreyears who can support themselves can continue living in Germany. The number of Aussiedler--ethnic Germans moving from the ex-USSR toGermany--fell from 151,000 in the first nine months of 1995 to 129,300 in thefirst nine months of 1996. The German Sports Federation has pledged to reduce the number of requestsit makes to have foreigners naturalized so that they can play on German teams.The current number of 50 per year is to be reduced to five. "Official urges right to stay for former immigrant workers," Agence FrancePresse, November 1, 1996. Ray Moseley, "Savaged Bosnia Refugees Afraid to goHome; Germany Plans to Eject Thousands," Chicago Tribune, October 20, 1996."More Asylum Seekers in Germany," Deutsche Presse-Agentur, October 14, 1996."Germany and Yugoslavia Sign Treaty of Return of Refugees, Bavaria ExpelsBosnian," This Week in Germany, October 11, 1996. Alan Cowell, "Bavaria ExpelsBosnian War Refugees," New York Times, October 10, 1996. _______________________________ France:New Immigration Legislation? The French government in October proposed legislation to crack down onimmigrants employed in the underground economy. If enacted into law, Francewould offer legal residence rights to illegal immigrants who have a Frenchspouse or French children, or have been employed in France for at least 15years, or would face serious danger if sent home. The bill does not offerpermanent residence to illegal immigrant parents of children born inFrance. French leftists and human rights groups criticized the proposed immigrationreforms. One the one hand, the new law would boost state controls on foreignresidents and reduce judicial safeguards that prevent deportation. On the other hand, the legislation would remove provisions from immigrationlaw that have deprived some immigrants of residence rights. These provisionsled to the recent protests by African immigrants who occupied a Paris church. On October 26, between 100 to 150 protesters took over a Paris center forforeigners to demand residence permits and a halt to expulsions. French sociologist Claude-Valentin Marie, in an October 15, 1996 Le Mondearticle, argued that the government's attempt to crack down on illegalimmigration might damage the French economy. The article pointed out thatlegal and illegal immigrant workers serve as shock absorbers during economicrestructuring and argued that reducing the number of flexible immigrant workersmay therefore make restructuring more difficult. The report put the total number of foreign workers dismissed from heavymanufacturing industry jobs between 1973 and 1988 at 500,000. Many laid-offforeign workers entered the underground economy. According to Marie, 90percent of those employed in the underground economy are French citizens orlegal immigrants. The National Front, the political party with the slogan "France forthe French," is only about 15 years old, but it won 15 percent of the vote inthe first round of the 1995 presidential elections, and it frequently wins 30to 35 percent of the vote in local elections. The National Front has attractedsupport among police and transportation workers. On October 16, the National Assembly approved an amendment that would allowthe government to prosecute under anti-racism laws statements that do notsingle out a particular race or religion when making derogatorycomments. On October 20, about 30 Africans evicted from a Paris church two months agobriefly re-occupied the building, protesting tough immigration measures thatare keeping them in a legal limbo. Police ringed the church and by lateafternoon the Africans left. French police arrested 17 people who brought in hundreds of illegalimmigrants from Sri Lanka over the past eight years. The illegal immigrantspaid about $800 to be flown from Sri Lanka to Kiev, and then be driven toFrance through Poland, Germany and Switzerland. They were then housed in Parissuburbs and given forged documents to show in applying for political asylum. Sri Lankans who find themselves stranded in Poland simply apply for asylumthere. In one week in September, about 700 illegal immigrants were caught inPoland, including 168 in two houses in a village near Warsaw. Most applied forasylum in order to prevent their immediate deportation. Poland's Ministry ofInternal Affairs estimates the number of illegal aliens in Poland at 100,000 to200,000. "Police evict immigrants from Paris offices," Reuters, October 29,1996. "Poland: A Gateway to Heaven," Polish News Bulletin, October 17, 1996."France adopts new law to fight racism," Xinhua News Agency, October 16, 1996."Immigrants contribute to modernization of French economy," Xinhua News Agency,October 15, 1996. "Patijn Annoyed with French Misuse of Schengen Accord," ANPEnglish News Bulletin, October 11, 1996. "France smashes network smugglingillegal immigrants," Reuters, October 9, 1996. "France to close loopholes inimmigration law," Reuters, October 8, 1996. _______________________________ Moroccoand Spainto Fight Illegal Immigration Spain and Morocco on October 3, 1996, announced new measures to combatillegal immigration. The two countries will establish joint commissions tostudy the problems of illegal immigration and drug smuggling. Spain has been criticized by other members of the Schengen Group for laxborder controls which allow illegal immigrants and drugs to enter the EU. Illegal immigrants from Morocco cross the 12-mile Strait of Gibraltarbetween the two Africa and Europe. Others try to enter the two Spanishenclaves on Morocco's Mediterranean coast, Ceuta and Melilla, which include anestimated 700 illegal immigrants. Morocco will, on a case-by-case basis, readmit illegal African immigrantswho arrive in Spain directly from Morocco. A Moroccan fisherman taking 26 Moroccans to Spain for 4,000 dirhams ($460)pleaded guilty to causing their deaths in October--the boat sank in the Straitof Gibraltar, and all drowned. The European Court of Justice said that member states must recognize theCooperation Agreement between Morocco and the EU by giving social securitybenefits to Moroccans living in the EU. "Moroccans die in Gibraltar Strait," United Press InternationalOctober 11, 1996. "Spain and Morocco to tackle illegal immigration and drugs,"Deutsche Presse-Agentur, October 3, 1996. "Court says states must giveresident Moroccans benefits," Reuters, October 3, 1996. _______________________________ NetherlandsExpects Increase in Immigration The Dutch Central Bureau of Statistics reported on October 8, 1996 that theimproving economic climate of the Netherlands is expected to increaseimmigration 11 percent in 1996. Immigration fell sharply in 1994 afterstricter rules were introduced. Most immigrants to the Netherlands come from Germany, the United Kingdom,Turkey, Morocco and Surinam. The number of immigrants from Turkey, Morocco andSurinam is expected to rise by 32, 48 and 52 per cent between 1995 and 1996,respectively, while an eight per cent rise in immigrants is expected from theNetherlands Antilles and Aruba. The Netherlands, long known for toleration, is beginning to take steps thatsome see as necessary to integrate foreigners, and others see as racism. Onepolitician proposed that all foreigners from outside the European Union wishingto live permanently in Holland would have to learn Dutch and take "lessons insocial assimilation and career guidance courses." The number of asylum seekers in 1994 reached 52,576, in part because theNetherlands was perceived to be more generous than neighboring countries. Asthe Netherlands cracked down on asylum seekers, many were detained in aconverted army barracks known as Willem II that was opened to asylum seekers inMay 1994. There have been a series of hunger strikes and suicides by asylumseekers protesting what they say is very harsh treatment. In the Netherlands, illegal immigrants are subject to the provisions ofthe Dutch criminal law, and thus, can be ordered to work while detained. Inthe spring of 1996, the Netherlands was holding 700 asylum seekers, mostlyNorth Africans. Morocco asked the Dutch government to legalize the status of the Moroccansliving in the country without proper documentation. Nearly 200,000 Moroccanslive in the Netherlands. Dutch police on October 16 announced the arrest of 30 people who ran aworldwide alien smuggling network. One smuggler made travel arrangements forIraqis and Iranians to fly to the Ukraine or Austria, where they would besupplied with forged documents and an airline ticket to the Netherlands. Othermembers of the smuggling ring would help the illegal immigrants with asylumapplications in the Netherlands. Many of the smuggled immigrants went on toCanada after a short stay in the Netherlands. "Morocco, Netherlands to combat drugs, criminals," Reuters, October 30,1996. "International 'Frontier Running' Network Cracked, 30 Arrested," ANPEnglish News Bulletin, October 17, 1996. "Strong economy could be behind sharprise in 1996 immigration," ANP English News Bulletin, October 8, 1996. GeorgieAnne Geyer, "Dutch move to control immigration," Chicago Tribune, September 13,1996 _______________________________ ASIA _______________________________ Migrationbetween Two Koreas China and South Korea are reportedly building refugee camps to handle whatsome expect to be a hunger-induced mass emigration from North Korea of up tofive million people this winter. South Korea's Ministry of NationalUnification has sought 4.6 billion won ($5.6 million) in the fiscal 1997 budgetto build a refugee camp south of Seoul. In recent years, about 100 North Koreans have moved to South Korea eachyear. It is easier for North Koreans to move to China, because that border isnot heavily mined: 1,000 North Koreans are believed to have moved to Chinasince 1992, blending into ethnic Korean communities in the Chinese borderprovinces of Jilin and Liaoning. But those who are caught meet a harsh fate. Under a 1986 treaty, illegalNorth Koreans apprehended in China are returned to North Korea, where most areexecuted. In some cases, an entire village is punished for the defection ofone villager. Within North Korea, there is reported to be a reverse migrationfrom cities to farms in search of food. Some 400 North Koreans are refusing to return home from logging camps inthe Russian Far East. North Korea has offered resort and beach facilities for the hundreds ofSouth Korean workers expected to enter the country when construction of its newnuclear reactors begins later in 1996. The South Korean Ministry of Labor is currently drafting a new foreignlabor employment act which would extend basic labor rights to foreign workersif their employment was approved by the government. The act would also requireemployers with foreign workers to post a bond with a bank or insurance companythat would be refunded when the foreign worker returns to his/her nativecountry. South Korea is considering hiring foreign workers to construct thecountry's first high-speed train line. An official at the Ministry ofConstruction and Transportation said that foreign workers were needed becauseof high wages and labor shortages. In addition to South Korean workers, 570foreign workers will be employed for three years, beginning in 1997. The government hopes to complete the 250-mile track in time for the 2002World Soccer Cup. Japan and South Korea will share the World Cup soccertournament in 2002, with half of the games to be played in each country. Both countries are already making plans to change their immigration laws tofacilitate the movement of players, trainers and fans between the two countrieswithout unleashing illegal immigration. South Koreans currently need a visa tovisit Japan, while South Korea permits Japanese visitors to enter South Koreafor up to 15 days without a visa. In January 1996, there were 135,686 foreign workers in South Korea,including 51,301 legal workers and 84,385 illegal workers. At the end of May,1996, according to government estimates, the number of illegal foreign workershad risen to 100,000, accounting for 60 percent of the foreign workers in thecountry. The legal foreign workers included 8,539 professional and technologicalpersonnel, and 42,762 industrial technology trainees. Most of the illegalmigrant workers are from China and other Asian countries. Many of the foreignworkers from China are ethnic Koreans. South Korea's labor shortages were most acute in 1991, when almost 10percent of all manufacturing jobs were vacant. In 1992, the governmentreported that 61,126 illegal foreigners were working in South Korea. In 1993, 20,000 foreign trainees were admitted and in February 1996, thetrainee quota was raised to 70,000. Trainees come from 12 Asian countries,including China, the Philippines, Vietnam, Indonesia, Bangladesh, Myanmar(Burma), Sri Lanka, Nepal and Pakistan. South Korea plans a crackdown on illegal foreign workers in November 1996.The crackdown will focus on service industries such as restaurants,entertainment venues and factories. Two similar crackdowns in the past 12months resulted in the deportation of 8,500 illegal foreign workers. There are three types of illegal foreign workers in South Korea. Most areforeigners who enter South Korea on tourist visas and then go to work. Thesecond type enters South Korea on a false passport or is smuggled into thecountry and hopes to stay and work. The third type of illegal foreigner is a trainee who abandons thetraineeship to work illegally. As of January 1996, about 12,000 foreignersleft their traineeships to work illegally. South Korea's economy is expected to grow by 6.5 percent in 1996, down fromnine percent in 1995. South Korean-owned factories outside Korea have a reputation for harshtreatment of local workers. South Korean companies invested $2.75 billionabroad in 1995, but from China to Vietnam to Argentina, local workers complainthat their Korean managers vigorously resist unions, demean workers and expectoverly hard work. They may have local government support in this: InPakistan, a South Korean construction firm sent a letter to police listing thenames of union-sympathizer employees and all were detained. South Koreans own sewing and apparel shops around the world. In Argentina,South Korean-owned textile firms typically hire illegal Bolivian immigrant daylaborers for $3 per day and do not pay social security or other taxes. "Crackdown on illegal foreign workers looming," Agence France Presse,October 28, 1996. "S. Korea's Foreign Labor Relations," Chicago Tribune,October 27, 1996. "South Korea: Foreign Workers to Receive Basic LaborRights," Korea Economic Daily, October 5, 1996. "South Korea to importSoutheast Asian workers for train project," Agence France Presse, September 24,1996. "Korean bosses anger workers overseas," Wall Street Journal, July 23,1996. "Simplified Employment Procedures Foreseen for Foreign Workers," ComlineDaily News, July 11, 1996. "Number of Illegal Workers Rising in South Korea,"Reuter Asia-Pacific Business Report, July 7, 1996. Song Byoung-jun, "LaborShortages & Foreign Workers," Tokyo Financial Wire, March 28, 1996. ShimJae Hoon, "Hunger could trigger an exodus of refugees from North Korea andbring the country to its knees," Far Eastern Economic Review, October 10, 1996. _______________________________ Singapore:Foreign Workers andProductivity In September 1996, Singapore reached its highest-ever level of foreignworker employment, when the 350,000 foreign workers reached 20 percent of thecountry's 1.7 million work force. The government in 1996 launched campaigns against illegal immigration andto promote on the job safety. One result is that many contractors arerequesting one- to two-month extensions on construction projects because theirsub-contractors cannot find enough workers. The number of illegal immigrants apprehended has been rising. An averageof 580 illegal immigrants and overstayers were arrested each month betweenMarch and September, 1996. Heavy fines have not deterred the employment ofillegal workers, including a $1.5 million fine for having 188 illegal foreignworkers at one job site. Singapore's Minister for Home Affairs began a Construction Safety campaignon October 12, 1996 to improve the safety of foreign workers on the job. In1996, there has been an average of one fatal accident a week involving foreignworkers at construction sites and about one murder involving foreign workerseach month. Singapore is attempting to upgrade the skills and productivity of itseconomy. In a Foreign Affairs article in 1994 entitled "The Myth of Asia'sMiracle," economist Paul Krugman argued that countries such as Singapore grewby increasing the amount of capital and labor, not by increasing theproductivity of each worker or unit of capital. Singapore Airlines, with 23,000 employees, is the island-nation's largestemployer. "Projects held up by labor crackdown," UPI, October 30, 1996.Sharon Vasoo, "High price of relying too much on low-cost workers," StraitsTimes, October 12, 1996. "Dependence on foreign workers poses social problemsfor Singapore," Xinhua News Agency, October 11, 1996. _______________________________ Malaysia: Recruitment BanContinues Deputy Prime Minister Anwar Ibrahim announced on October 12 that thegovernment would continue the ban on permits to import unskilled foreignworkers first imposed on July 10, 1996. Malaysia still needs foreign workers,Anwar said, but labor-short companies should recruit illegal immigrants fromdetention centers. According to Anwar, "if they [employers] need foreignworkers they can always go to the camps and hire these [illegal]people." However, of the 37,000 detained illegal workers available to employers inOctober 1996, only 3,000 were hired. Most Malaysian companies say that theillegal aliens in detention centers have too few skills. Employers with illegal foreign workers are supposed to register them withthe Immigration Department by December 31, 1996 and to have a physicalexam. Employers can continue to apply for permission to import skilled foreignworkers, with applications considered on a case-by-case basis. Anwar said there were 750,000 foreign workers with work permits in Malaysiaand one million illegal aliens. The legal foreign workers include 306,000 fromIndonesia and 117,500 Bangladeshis; others are from the Philippines, Thailand,Pakistan, India, Sri Lanka and Burma. According to Anwar, Malaysia will reduce the number of foreign workers toreduce the social problems they cause. There have been several clashes in 1996between Bangladeshis and Malays. Anwar asked Indonesia and Bangladesh tocooperate by preventing the movement of their nationals to Thailand on theirway to Malaysia. The Malaysian Human Resources minister also warned employers that they facesanctions if they lay off Malaysian workers before dismissing foreign workers.The government is investigating two factories in Jahor that laid off 87 Malaysand retained 119 foreign workers. In order to speed up repatriations and encourage the hiring of illegalworkers in detention, Malaysia began requiring employers bringing foreignworkers into the country to pay a fee equivalent to repatriation expenses for25 per cent of the number of workers who arrive, e.g., to admit 100 foreignworkers, the employer must pay for the repatriation of 25. Malaysia is a country of 19 million with a labor force of eight million,including one to two million foreigners. The Malaysian Trades Union Congressestimates three million foreign workers. The economy has been growing at an annual rate of eight to nine percent,the labor force at an annual rate of two to three percent and employment at anannual rate of three to four percent. One result of rapid economic and jobgrowth are labor shortages, estimated to be five to 10 percent of currentemployment in plantation agriculture (250,000 employees) and manufacturing (1.4million employees). Malaysia has had a stop-go policy on foreign worker recruitment. OnOctober 16, 1991, the Malaysian government announced an "amnesty" thatpermitted the employers of illegal alien workers to register them and pay a feeof M$420 in most cases, and some 447,000 illegal aliens--equivalent to sixpercent of Malaysian employment--registered by June 30, 1992. In April 1993, unskilled foreign worker recruitment was suspended but,after employers protested the recruitment freeze was lifted for manufacturersin June 1993. On January 7, 1994, recruitment of unskilled and semi-skilledworkers from outside the country was stopped, but was later permitted on asector-by-sector basis. The New Straits Times reported on October 9, 1996 that two-thirds of1996 Malaysian employer requests for 210,249 foreign workers, including 106,000of 141,300 requests from the manufacturing sector, have been approved. On October 18, 1996, Malaysia announced proposals that would increasepenalties to deter illegal immigrants, including a proposal to cane illegalworkers and their employers if they are caught twice. Under current law, illegal immigrants face RM$1,000 ($400) fines, severalmonths imprisonment and deportation, while Malaysian employers face fines of$800 and imprisonment for several months. The new penalties are expected to beapproved by parliament before the end of 1996. On October 28, Malaysian officials reported that nearly 30,000 Bangladeshiswere massing in southern Thailand in a bid to illegally enter Malaysia. Manywere trying to enter Malaysia through the hills along the border or by sea.The Malaysian government mobilized about 6,000 members from the civiliannational guard to help police the Malaysian-Thai border. Many Indonesians and Bangladeshis are smuggled into Malaysia on fishingboats for fees that average about $1,000. The Malaysian press blames foreign workers for committing adisproportionate number of crimes. However, of the 10,623 serious crimescommitted in Malaysia in 1995, 628 were committed by foreign workers. Of the70,798 minor crimes, 2,197 involved foreigners. The Federation of Malaysian Manufacturers advised its member-employers tobe more diligent when hiring foreign workers. Some Malaysian firms are paidRM1,000 ($400) for each foreign worker they hire from a recruitment agency,which allegedly encourages the hiring of unauthorized foreign workers.According the International Trade and Industry ministry, some company officerswere allegedly receiving under-the-table payments for recruiting foreignworkers from certain agents. The official said that this may explain whycompanies are not hiring detained illegal aliens who have been given workpermits. According to the government, Bangladeshi workers are subject to criticismbecause of their social differences and their tendency to marry local women.The government printed pamphlets "to educate women on the consequences theywill have to face if they still decide to marry foreigners." One Malaysiangovernment minister said that marriages of convenience by Bangladeshi andIndian foreign workers would increase social problems in the Malaysia. Merbok Wanita Chief Rosnah Majid warned that "We [Malaysia] should learnfrom the German experience where foreign workers had caused a lot ofproblems." "30,000 illegal massing at border to enter Malaysia," Straits Times,October 25, 1996. "Retrench foreign workers first, Malaysia warns employers,"Deutsche Presse-Agentur, October 30, 1996. "Malaysia says stop importingforeign workers," Reuters Financial Service, October 12, 1996. Hamisah Hamid,"Be alert when hiring aliens, employers told," Business Times, October 10,1996. "Find long-term measures to overcome labour shortage," New StraitsTimes, October 10, 1996. "JAIP works with Immigration on marriage issue," NewStraits Times, October 9, 1996. Michael Richardson, "Malaysia Readies aCrackdown on Illegal Workers," International Herald Tribune, October 7, 1996. _______________________________ Thailand: From Illegals to GuestWorkers Foreign Workers. According to the Interior Ministry, of the 590,000illegal immigrants in Thailand in mid-1995, about 300,000 came from Burma,100,000 from China, and 10,000 each from Cambodia and Laos. Under new rules, employers are required to legalize their illegal workersby paying a fee and registering them with the Immigration Police. Thelegalized migrants will be granted two work permits and only those employed inagriculture, construction, fishing and water transportation can belegalized. As of October 11, only 27,536 immigrant workers had been registered andpassed medical examinations, less than four per cent of the estimated illegallabor force of 700,000. Most employers complain that the 5,000 baht (US$200)registration fee is to stiff. On November 17, a new general election will be held in Thailand and manywonder it the legalization program will be continued by a new government. When the government legalized the presence of many illegal immigrants inJune 1996, trade unions protested that foreign workers put downward pressure onwages. Bangkok has become the Asian hub for organizing travel for illegal Chineseimmigrants to Europe and the US. Stolen passports, primarily from Korea andJapan, are sent to Bangkok and sold for $2,000 to $3,000 each. Genuinepassports from Bolivia, Honduras, Argentina and Belize can be bought for$12,000 to $32,000. Smugglers can fly a Chinese migrant to the US from Beijing as a bogusmember of a trade delegation for about $18,000. Ships have lost theirpopularity because of the difficulty entering ports without detection. In 1995, investigators found that a subcontractor hired by shoe giantReebok was paying ethnic Karen refugees from Burma working in Thailand lessthan half of the minimum wages paid their Thai counterparts. A professor at Mahidol University in Thailand told a seminar on October 5,1996 that the government should not attempt to lure foreign investors withoffers of cheap labor. He found that in a random survey most foreigners arepaid a quarter of what their Thai counterparts earn for the same jobs. Thissituation, he added, might subject Thailand to trade sanctions by Westerncountries who regard labor exploitation as a violation of human rights. TheThailand Development Research Institute is now completing a study on theadvantages and disadvantages of employing foreign workers. Internal Migration. On October 13, 1996, some Thai workers held amarch to demand that migrant Thai workers be allowed to vote at their workplaces. There are believed to be five million internal migrant workers whoare employed away from the address where they are registered as living andvoting. Since voting in Thailand must be done in person, many will not be ableto vote in the November 17 general election. Unions asked that internal migrants be able to use their employer's addressand vote where they are employed. Thailand raised its daily minimum wage to 157 baht ($6.19) on October 1,1996. Peter Janssen, "Thailand squeezes black market out of immigrantlabour trade," Deutsche Presse-Agentur, October 28, 1996. "Workers AnnounceDemands," Bangkok Post, October 14, 1996. Sirikul Bunnang, "Open Door Policyfor Foreigners a Mistake," Bangkok Post, October 5, 1996. Onnucha Hutasingh,"Thai-Cambodian Relations--Plight of Immigrants in Bangkok not as Good as TheyHope," Bangkok Post, September 8, 1996. Kim Gooi, "Bangkok is Asia's hub forthe illegal travel business," Presse-Agentur, September 23, 1996. Tina Gill,"Foreign Labor Pains Thai Unions," InterPress Service, September 2, 1996. _______________________________ VietnamRestricts Foreigner Workers Vietnam in October 1996 announced new rules for the employment offoreigners. Foreigners working in joint venture and wholly foreign-ownedcompanies will be limited to a stay of three years in the country andforeign-owned companies will be required to train local replacements for theirforeign staff. Most foreigners with business visas will also have to apply for workpermits. Those exempt from the new rules include diplomats, employees ofnon-government organizations, foreign media and executives in companyrepresentative offices. About two million Vietnamese live outside Vietnam, including one million inthe US. Overseas Vietnamese remit an estimated $600 to $700 million annually.Vietnam hopes that its Diaspora will stimulate foreign investment. Some265,000 "Viet kieu" returned for at least brief visits in 1995, but theyregistered only 58 investment projects, worth about $100 million. Many of the 400 US companies operating in Vietnam are pressing Congress togrant a waiver of the Jackson-Vanick Amendment, which withholdsgovernment-guaranteed financing of trade with countries that do not allow freeemigration. "Vietnam curbs foreign workers," Financial Times, October 10, 1996. SethMydans, "Uncertainty Reigns for Returning Vietnamese," New York Times, August3,1996. _______________________________ OTHER _______________________________ UAEExpels Migrants The United Arab Emirates in October continued to expel thousands of illegalmigrants, leading, in at least one case, to labor shortages. Foreigners makeup about 75 percent of the 2.4 million population in the UAE. Illegal foreign workers were ordered to leave the UAE in August and theoriginal September 30, 1996 deadline was extended to October 31, 1996. Most ofthe illegal workers are from India, Bangladesh, the Philippines, Sri Lanka,Pakistan, Afghanistan and Iran. Most arrived legally and then stayed aftertheir visas expired or illegally changed jobs. The UAE reports that as of early October, some 145,000 foreigners fromIndia, the Philippines, Pakistan, Bangladesh, Sri Lanka and Iran had left.Many of the Indians wishing to leave cannot afford the airfare home, so theIndian government is sending boats to bring Indian workers home. The Indianstate of Kerala expects about 30,000 migrants to return from the UAE. Tough new penalties on illegal aliens go into effect on November 1, 1996,including fines of up to 30,000 dirhams ($8,200) and three years in jail. Boatowners bringing illegal aliens into the country face up to 15 years in prisonand fines of between 15,000 dirhams and 100,000 dirhams ($4,100 -$27,000). The Philippine government reports that about 6,000 Filipinos in the UAEplan to leave before the October 31, 1996 deadline. Three out of fourFilipinos working abroad are the sole supporter of their families. The Manilalabor monitor, Migrante, found that within one month of their return, mostforeign workers are broke. Many of the Filipinos who leave the UAE areexpected to seek employment in other countries. King Fahd of Saudi Arabia on October 21 called on Saudi private businessesto employ more Saudi workers. The announcement came three days after the Saudigovernment refused to renew residency permits for foreign workers in 13occupations, including guards, receptionists and administrators. Saudi Arabia in October 1996 barred foreign laborers from driving or owningcars, according to the Filipino Overseas Workers Welfare Administration.Foreigners classified as watchmen and servants are not affected by the ban.There are about 600,000 Filipinos working in Saudi Arabia as domestic helpers,manual laborers and technicians. "Saudi king calls on private sector to hire more Saudi laborers," XinhuaNews Agency, October 22, 1996. "More Saudis to replace foreigners," UPI,October 24, 1996. "Filipino laborers in Saudi Arabia banned from driving,owning cars," Agence France Presse, October 10, 1996. Edgar C. Cadano, "Labournationalization plan needs evaluation, expert tells Gulf firms," Moneyclips,October 7, 1996. "UAE says 144,979 illegal workers have left," Reuters,October 7, 1996. "Asian nations count cost of UAE expulsion of illegalworkers," Agence France Presse, October 6, 1996. _______________________________ ImmigrationinAfrica Throughout Africa in 1996, illegal immigrants were expelled by countrieswho blamed them for everything from spreading AIDS to crime and unemployment.Rising unemployment in immigrant-dependent Middle Eastern countries lead to theexpulsion of tens of thousands of immigrants from Saudi Arabia and migrantworkers in other Middle Eastern countries face increased work permit fees andother measures aimed at reducing immigrant numbers. South Africa, with a per capita income of $3,000--is attracting immigrantsfrom other parts of Africa. The stock of immigrants is estimated at two to fourmillion. The major countries of origin include Mozambique, with a per capitaincome of less than $100, Malawi and Zaire. In October 1996, South Africa announced that it would tighten visa issuanceprocedures after more than 90 000 Zimbabweans violated the terms of theirsix-month visas in 1995-96. Most of the illegal African migrants work in the informal sector of SouthAfrica's economy as street peddlers or day laborers. On July 22, 1996, the South African government announced that foreignerswithout "special skills" would be banned from working in the country. Polls suggest that most South Africans associate illegal immigrants withunemployment, homelessness and crime. However, many of the countries of originsheltered African National Congress members during apartheid and South Africarecently agreed to Mozambique's request that it slow down the deportation ofillegal Mozambicans. South Africa granted a temporary right to stay for nationals of Rwanda,Burundi, Somalia, Angola, Ethiopia and Liberia. This gives nationals of Zaireand Mozambique incentives to claim that they are from one of thesenations. South Africa is considering an amnesty, a guest worker program or anarrangement in which increased aid to neighboring countries is tied tostepped-up enforcement. South Africa still employs about 170,000 foreign miners to work in gold anddiamond mines. In September 1996, wages were raised eight to 13 percent for190,000 miners. There has been a dramatic increase in emigration by South Africans withprofessional or technical skills. There was a first quarter increase of 27percent in 1996 of the total number of emigrants over the same period lastyear. The number of immigrants in the same period decreased by 21 percent.Some observers say that rising crime and fears about education standards arecausing the increased emigration and decreased immigration rates. Zimbabwe will refuse to renew work permits for foreigner professionals tomake room for Zimbabwe professionals returned from SouthAfrica. In CaboraBassa, Songo, in Mozambique's Tete Province, 900 Mozambican workers staged asit in at a dam-power plant to protest the higher wages and benefits paid toPortuguese workers. In August, 1996 Angolan police arrested more than 800 illegal immigrants ina crackdown on illegal immigrants in the province of Luanda. Called OperationCancer III, illegal immigrants from Mali, Lebanon and Senegal have beendeported. The police plan to extend the operation to other provinces in the toarrest illegal immigrants reportedly from Bulgaria, Russia and Portugal. More than 1,000 foreigners were arrested in Luanda Norte province duringthe past six months. Most were Zairians involved in diamond smuggling. Gambia used to be considered the gateway to Europe and the United States.Many African migrants went to Gambia because of the country's open-door policyfor professionals. Relatively high salaries attracted medical doctors, lawyers andaccountants, but most of the Ghanaians, Nigerians, Guineans, Sierra Leoneansand Liberians in Gambia are teachers who planned to use Gambia as a steppingstone to Europe or the US, but were unable to get visas and remained. Many were lured to Gambia by stories of West African professionals,especially teachers, who ended up in Europe, Canada or the US after working fora year or two in Gambia. The rising cost of living in Gambia and stepped upenforcement in Europe, Canada and the US, has encouraged some foreign teachersto return home, or to try their luck in neighboring Senegal. Some try to reachSpain from Senegal via Mauritania and Morocco. Both poverty and wealth have increased in Egypt since 1991 when the countryopened itself to foreign trade and investment. Egypt has 61 million peoplewith an average income of $750 per year; 57 percent of the population livedbelow the poverty line of $226 per person per year in 1990-91. At the other extreme, the richest six million Egyptians had about 28percent of the country's national income. Lansana Fofana, "Gambia-Population: Migrants' Dreams Turn to Dust,"InterPress Service, October 15, 1996. "Calm maybe in Cabora Bassa," IndianOcean Newsletter, October 12, 1996. "Crackdown on illegal immigrants in Angolacontinues," Deutsche Presse-Agentur, August 14, 1996. "S. Africa bans foreignworkers without "special skills." Agence France Presse, July 23, 1996. KenWells, "Waves of immigrants consider South Africa a land of opportunity," WallStreet Journal, April 2, 1996. _______________________________ AustralianRace Debate Heats Up On October 30, Australia's political leaders issued a joint statement inthe Parliament opposing racism. The debate on race in Australia was sparkedby, a September 10, 1996 speech by a newly elected member of Parliament thatcalled for a moratorium on immigration, since Australia was "in danger of beingswamped by Asians." On October 31, Pauline Hanson, a Queensland MP, challenged the governmentby demanding a referendum on immigration and multiculturalism. Hanson issued astatement saying she supported parts of the statement opposing racism, butvowed to continue her anti-Asian immigration and anti-Aboriginal fundingmessage. Recent polls show that as many as two-thirds of Australians back hercall for a halt to immigration. The number of immigrants arriving in Australia rose to 99,139 in the fiscalyear ending June 30, 1996. The three leading countries of origin were NewZealand (12.4 percent), Britain (11.4 percent), and China (11.3 percent).Australia's conservative government announced in July, 1996 that generalimmigration would be reduced to 74,000 in the current fiscal year that endsJune 30, 1997. A Newspoll survey in September 1996 reported that 71 percent of 1,200voters surveyed believed immigration was "a lot" or "a little" too high. Nearly 2,000 Australians marched in Brisbane on November 2 in solidaritywith Asian Australians and to protest the Australian Prime Minister's failureto deal with the race issue. Since September, many Asian tourists, including a group of 160 fromSingapore, have bypassed Australia, hurting the country's billion-dollartourism industry. Nearly two million tourists from Asian countries visitAustralia each year. Some 28,670 people emigrated from Australia in the fiscal year ending June30, 1996. Winston Peters, leader of the populist New Zealand First Party,received 13 percent of the vote in New Zealand's October 12, 1996 election onan anti-foreigner platform. New Zealand adopted a German-style voting systemin 1993 and, for the first time, each voter can vote for a party and also for alocal representative. Anita Jain, "Singaporeans stay away from Australia," UPI, November 1, 1996.Luke Slattery, "Australian premier appeals for calm over racism row," TheScotsman, November 1, 1996. Kiichiro Harano, "Australian legislator's remarksanger Asian media," Daily Yomiuri, November 2, 1996. "Australian race debateMP demands referendum" Agence France Presse, October 31, 1996. S. KareneWitcher, "New Zealand politics turn tumultuous," Wall Street Journal, October9,1996. _______________________________ RESOURCES _______________________________ SlowAdvancement for the Newly-Legalized The Houston Chronicle ran a series, Out of the Shadows, which concludedthat many of the aliens legalized in 1986-87 are falling into America'sdead-end culture of urban poverty. In addition to profiles of unauthorized aliens who received amnesty, theseries includes interviews with Peter Brimelow, who says that "There is noprecedent for a sovereign country undergoing such a rapid and radicaltransformation of its ethnic character [brought about by the 1965 amendments toUS immigration law] in the entire history of the world." Julian Simon, by contrast, asserted that "On average, when an immigrantcomes into the country, natives are made richer." Immigrants pay more in taxesthan they receive in government benefits because they are young and likely towork. George Borjas argued that the costs of today's immigration patternsoutweigh the benefits, and that gap between the level of education and skillsof recent immigrants and natives have been widening. Michael Fix, co-author of Immigration and Immigrants: Setting the RecordStraight, concluded that immigrants generate a net annual surplus for the US of$25 billion to $30 billion per year. Roy Beck, author of The Case Against Immigration, argues that much of theincrease in US wages between 1925 and 1965 was due to tight labor markets,which in turn was due to low levels of immigration. The entire series is available at: http://www.chron.com/amnesty _______________________________ WorkingPapers on Immigration Issues Borjas, George, and Lynnette Hilton. 1996. Immigration and the WelfareState: Immigrant Participation in Means-Tested Entitlement Programs. NBER WP5372. In 1990, about nine percent of US households with foreign-born headsreceived cash assistance such as AFDC, versus seven percent of householdsheaded by US-born persons. However, if in-kind welfare assistance such asMedicaid and Food Stamps are included, then 21 percent of households withforeign-born heads received benefits in 1990, versus 14 percent of householdsheaded by US-born persons. Note that many other analysts of the usage of welfare by immigrants do notconsider the household to be an immigrant household if the head was born inanother country. One estimate is that two-thirds of immigrant-headedhouseholds include a US-born person. Households with foreign-born heads received more assistance--suchhouseholds were nine percent of all US households, but they received 14 percentof the $184 billion spent on federal welfare assistance in 1990. The gapbetween foreign-born and native-born households was greatest for Medicaid--15percent of the immigrant households, and seven percent of native-bornhouseholds, received Medicaid benefits in 1990. Hanson, Gordon and Antonio Spilmbergo. 1996. Illegal Immigration, BorderEnforcement, and Relative Wages. NBER WP 5592. This paper concludes that a 10 percent decrease in Mexican real wages wasassociated with about eight percent more apprehensions in the following monthbetween 1976 and 1995. Adding one more hour of Border Patrol enforcement timewas associated with about 0.3 more apprehensions. Hanson, Gordon. 1996. US-Mexican Integration and Regional Economies:Evidence from Border-City Pairs. NBER WP 5485. This paper investigates the growth of trade and investment in the sixlargest US-Mexican border pairs between 1975 and 1989, and concludes that NAFTAwill expand employment and population on both sides of the border. Krueger, Alan and Jorn-Steffen Pischke. 1996. A Statistical Analysis ofCrime Against Foreigners in Unified Germany. NBER WP 5485. Using data on the number of crimes committed against foreigners fromnewspaper reports, this paper finds that crimes against foreigners are highestin the former East Germany and that the number of foreigners in a county isassociated with more crimes against foreigners only in the East. Borjas, George, Richard Freeman, and Lawrence Katz. 1996. Searching forthe Effects of Immigration on the Labor Market. NBER WP 5454. This paper compares area and factor proportions methods of estimating theeffects of immigrants in local labor markets. In area analyses, the share ofimmigrants in employment, or the change in the share of immigrants, is anindependent variable that is used to try to explain changes in the wages,unemployment etc of native workers. As the labor market expands, the estimatednegative effects of immigrants increase in 1980 and 1990 Census data. In factor-proportions analyses, by contrast, the analyst assumes that e.g.,immigrants are unskilled, and natives are skilled, and then estimates theeffects of more immigrants on skilled workers' labor market outcomes. Theseanalyses suggest that immigration contributed to falling wages for US workerswith less than a high school education in the 1980s. Raphael, Steven and Eugene Smolensky. 1996. Immigration, Foregone HumanCapital, and the Fisc. Berkeley: Graduate School of Public Policy WP 224. If Prop. 187 prohibitions on the estimated 300,000 to 350,000 illegal alienchildren in California public schools were implemented, and if the childrenstayed in California and were not educated, then the illegal children noteducated would earn from $62,000 to $430,000 less in their lifetimes, with thelargest earnings losses for illegal alien children kept out of kindergarten andnot receiving any education. Since more education is associated with higher earnings and more taxes, theanalysis suggests that denying education to persons who remain in Californiaand seek jobs could be counterproductive. Research Perspectives on Migration is a new bi-monthly newsletter producedby the migration programs of the Carnegie Endowment and the Urban Institute.The first issue, September/October 1996, deals with the use of welfare byforeign-born persons in the US and concludes that there is too little consensusin the social science research to serve as a basis for changing the legalimmigration system in a manner that would attempt to reduce the welfare costsof immigrants. For further information, contact David Aronson atdaronson@ceip.org The Carnegie Endowment's International Migration Policy Program issuedseveral brief papers on migration issues in 1996. The first paper, entitledManaging Uncertainty, argues that the immigration problem flows from unwantedimmigration, compassion fatigue, and reactions against global interdependence.The paper concludes that the most important steps needed to deal withimmigration are to have "sound" polices that are reviewed regularly, and toprevent "anti-immigrant demagogues" from shaping public opinion. The "US Refugee Policy" paper reviews resettlement, temporary protection,asylum, and emergency responses to migration crises. The paper cautionsagainst too much reliance on the prevention of refugees, and urges that the UScontinue to offer protection to those facing persecution. The "ConvergingPaths to Restriction" paper reviews how governments in France, Italy, and theUK responded to immigration and asylum issues. For copies of these reports,contact Yasmin Santiago at tel (202) 862-7982 or fax 202-862-3750. WT02-B15-8IA090-000969-B028-68http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/By-Month/MN-Vol-3-96/mn_dec_96.html 128.120.36.171 19970122205328 text/html 181632HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 20:54:15 GMTLast-Modified: Tuesday, 21-Jan-97 21:07:07 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 181374 MIGRATION NEWS  MIGRATION NEWS Vol. 3, No. 12 December, 1996 Migration News summarizes the most important immigration and integrationdevelopments of the preceding month. Topics are grouped by region: North America, Europe, Asia andOther. There are two versions of Migration News. The paper edition is about 8,000words in length, and the email version about 15,000. The purpose of Migration News is to provide a monthly summary of recentimmigration developments that can be read in 60 minutes or less. Many issuesalso contain summaries and reviews of recent research publications. Distribution is by email. If you wish to subscribe, send your emailaddress to: Migration News <migrant@primal.ucdavis.edu> Current and back issues may be accessed via Internet on the Migration NewsHome Page--- http://migration.ucdavis.edu There is no charge for an email subscription to Migration News. A paperedition is available by mail for $30 domestic and $50 foreign. Make checkspayable to UC Regents and send to: Philip Martin, Department of AgriculturalEconomics, University of California, Davis, California 95616 USA. Migration News is produced with the support of the University ofCalifornia-Berkeley Center for German and European Studies, the German MarshallFund of the United States, and the Pew Charitable Trusts. Editor: Philip Martin Managing Editor: Cecily Sprouse Department of Agricultural Economics, University of California, Davis Davis CA 95616 Tel (916) 752-1530 Fax: (916) 752-5614 ISSN 1081-9916 _______________________________ NORTHAMERICA _______________________________ Votingand Naturalization On the basis of exit polls, the New York Times reported that 83 percent ofthose voting in November 1996 were white, 10 percent were African-American,five percent were Hispanic and one percent were Asian. About 6.6 millionHispanics were registered to vote in November 1996, including 2.1 million inCalifornia and 1.6 million in Texas. Exit polls after the November 5, 1996 election found that 71 percent ofHispanic voters supported Clinton, a sharp jump from the Latino vote forClinton in 1992 and a sign, some analysts said, that Latinos were votingagainst Republicans because of their support for anti-immigrationproposals. Republicans are divided over immigration; the party includes bothclose-the-border and open-the-border extremes. The open-border proponents said"I told you so" when many Hispanic and Asian voters said that they voted forClinton because of some Republicans anti-immigrant rhetoric. Hispanics are about 26 percent of the California population and they castabout 1.4 million votes, accounting for 11 to 13 percent of the vote inCalifornia in November 1996, up from 10 percent in 1992, and seven percent in1988. There are now 14 Latino representatives in the 80-seat CaliforniaAssembly. The Democrats, who retook control of the Assembly, elected CruzBustamante of Fresno as their first Latino speaker. Latinos cast 16 percent of the November 1996 vote in Texas and 12 percentin Florida, up from 10 and 11 percent in November 1992. On November 1, 1996, House Republicans asked the US Attorney General toappoint a special prosecutor to investigate the Immigration and NaturalizationService's Citizenship USA program. The program was launched in August 1995 toeliminate the backlog of naturalization applicants. In their letter requesting the special counsel, the five Republicancongressmen said that "The Clinton administration, motivated by the belief thata large number of new citizens ... (would benefit) the Clinton-Gore ticket inthe upcoming elections, put heavy and continuous pressure on the INS tonaturalize as many new citizens as possible." Foreigners wishing to become naturalized US citizens must pay $95 and havelived in the US for at least five years (or three, if they are married to a UScitizen), be of good moral character (no felony convictions), be of sound mindand speak and understand English (unless they are elderly or disabled). A feeof $95 is charged. They must pass a 10- to 12-question test on US history andcivics based on a list of 100 questions and answers provided by the INS, amongthem: "What is the White House?" "Where is the White House located?" and "Nameone right guaranteed by the First Amendment." The INS is revising the test and welcomes suggestions: Citizenship USA, 425I St. NW, Washington, DC 20536. The test is available at:http://www.washingtonpost.com/wpsrv/national/daily/nov/18/citizen.htm Paul Gigot, "Anti-immigrant reckoning comes ahead of schedule," Wall StreetJournal, November 22, 1996. William Booth, "The US Citizenship Test: Learning,And Earning, Their Stripes," Washington Post, November 17 1996. PatrickMcDonnell and George Ramos, "Latinos Make Strong Showing at the Polls," LosAngeles Times, November 8, 1996. Lori Rodriguez, "Latinos Vote in RecordNumbers," Houston Chronicle, November 7, 1996. Eric Brazil, "Immigrant voterpush put to test," San Francisco Examiner, November 5, 1996. Guillermo Garcia,"O.C. group vows to watch for voting by noncitizens," Orange County Register,November 2, 1996. _______________________________ Welfare/ImmigrationReformImplementation About 1.5 million of the nation's four million adult welfare recipients arelikely to lose welfare benefits in the next few years and an additional 800,000will lose their food stamps. Beginning on December 1, 1996, each state willreceive a Temporary Assistance for Needy Families Block Grant--a lump sumamount that will not change for five years. One-third of the aged recipients of Supplemental Security Income are non-UScitizens. Two-thirds of the non-citizen elderly on SSI are in California, NewYork and Florida. The INS is likely to be asked to permit a number of state programs toaccess its data base to determine the legal status of applicants for statebenefits. House Ways and Means Committee Chairman Bill Archer (R-Texas) in Novemberasserted that he would oppose Clinton administration efforts to allow non-UScitizens to continue to obtain welfare benefits. The Ways and MeansCommittee's Green Book says that the US spent $4.5 trillion on "means-testedprograms" between 1968 and 1994. California. California in November made plans to make illegalaliens ineligible for benefits funded by state taxes after December 1, 1996,including prenatal care for pregnant women. Among the programs whose clientsmay be asked about their immigration status are those for early breast-cancerdetection; child-abuse prevention; foster care; abortion and family planningservices; and assistance for the deaf and disabled. California will cut welfare payments for 2.7 million recipients on January1, 1997, by 4.9 percent to $565 for a family of three in urban areas, and by9.8 percent to $538 for a family of three in 41 rural counties. Welfare checkswritten in December 1996 count against the maximum two years and then work, andmaximum five years of lifetime assistance limits. California counties are holding hearings to determine whether to beginrequiring proof of legal US residence before providing services at tax-fundedcounty clinics. If the counties turn away illegal aliens, they will have toget medical services either in hospital emergency rooms or in private "freeclinics." In Sacramento county, for example, an estimated 630 unauthorizedaliens received medical care at county clinics in 1995, at an estimated cost of$300,000. All persons were made eligible for services at county hospitals in1982. Texas. In Texas, leaders of the border county of Zavala believethat the new welfare law will bring hardship. Zavala County has the highestpercentage of Texas residents receiving Aid to Families With DependentChildren, is third in Texas in the proportion of food stamp recipients andfourth in the percentage of Supplemental Security Income beneficiaries. The$281 average weekly wage in the county is half the state average, reflectingthe fact that most residents are seasonal agricultural workers. More than 90percent of the students in the Crystal City school district cannot afford 75cents for lunch. Economists see little hope for job creation in the area. One town residentobserved that even if 10 million jobs were created in the area, 12 millionpeople would move up from central Mexico to take the jobs. Massachusetts. The state estimates that the new welfare law willeliminate AFDC, Food Stamp and disability benefits for 30,000 legal immigrants.The state plans to use some of its $80 million windfall under the new welfarelaw to create state-funded programs that will assist legal immigrants. Poverty. In 1995, some 36 million US residents, 14 percent of thepopulation, lived in households with incomes below poverty level. The povertyline-- calculated as three times what a family needs to spend to eat-- was$15,569 for a family of four and $12,158 for a family of three in 1995. The median household income was $34,076 in 1995, meaning that half of thenation's 100 million households had higher and half had lower incomes. For the first time, the Census Bureau released poverty data on native- andforeign-born residents: 13 percent of the US-born residents were poor,compared with 28 percent of the foreign-born who were not naturalized UScitizens. Native-born households had median incomes of $34,800, whilehouseholds headed by foreign-born persons had median incomes of $28,400. In 1990, 9.1 percent of US households headed by a foreign-born person and7.4 percent of households headed by a person born in the US received cashassistance from a program such as Aid to Families with Dependent Children orSupplemental Security Income. More comprehensive data from the Survey of Income and Program Participationreveals that the immigrant-native welfare gap widens when non-cash benefitssuch as Food Stamps, Medicaid and housing subsidies are included. Medicaidaccounts for about half of the almost $200 billion spent annually on theseprograms. In 1990-91, about 21 percent of the households headed by immigrants,compared to 14 percent of households headed by US-born persons, were receivinga cash or non-cash federal benefit. Almost half of the households headed by persons from the Dominican Republicand Vietnam received a cash or non-cash federal benefit in an average month in1990-91. About one-third or more of the households headed by persons from theex-USSR, Mexico and Central America received benefits. Fewer than 10 percentof the households headed by persons born in Korea received benefits. Dave Lesher, "State Prepares for Dawn of New Welfare System," Los AngelesTimes, November 25, 1996. Diane Jennings, "Bracing for welfare change,poverty-plagued counties on border resigned to cuts," Dallas Morning News,November 12, 1996. Patrick McDonnell, "Wilson Moves to Limit Benefits forIllegal Immigrants," Los Angeles Times, November 5, 1996. ______________________________ MexicanMigrants on the Chicken Trail Missouri. The Los Angeles Times on November 10-12, 1996 ran athree-part report on "the chicken trail," about the recruitment of poultryworkers along the US-Mexican border for employment in the southeast. The stories profiled Hudson Foods, based in Noel, Missouri, (population1,169), which paid a south Texas recruiter, B. Chapman & Co., $175 for eachworker who showed up in Missouri for the $6.70 per hour jobs. The reportertold how workers made their way north on the "chicken trail" to work for Hudsonand live in a converted motel, along with 135 other migrant poultry workers,for $45 per week per person. In 1994, Hudson employed about 1,200 workers to process 1.3 millionchickens each week in Noel. Annual turnover exceeds 100 percent, so thatHudson hires about 50 new workers each month. Hudson employees are representedby a union. About 45 percent of the labor force are Latinos. Hudson paid a$20,625 INS fine in 1992 because many of them were not authorized to work.Hudson offers current employees who bring new workers to the plant a $300bonus. Hudson, the country's seventh largest-poultry producer, with headquartersin Rogers, Arkansas, has 14 facilities in 11 states, more than 10,000 employeesand expects $1.4 billion in sales for 1996. The reporter-worker described the wet, the 47-degree temperature inside theplant, the semi-automated "dis-assembly" line and the lack of training fornewly hired workers. The number of broiler chickens processed in the US eachyear has more than doubled, from three billion per year in the early 1970s toseven billion per year in the mid-1990s. Hudson's human resources director was quoted as saying: "there's a largenumber of jobs that very few citizens in the US want to do, but they're thereand they need to be done...One of the social goods the poultry industryprovides is employing people who would otherwise have a great deal of troublegetting employed." The labor recruiting company travels to industry shows in search ofemployers seeking unskilled labor and then offers to recruit workers for thesescompanies. According to the reporter, the recruiting company checked workers'identification cards and took urine samples on the particular trip reported.The Border Patrol checked the Greyhound passengers identification cards inFalfurrias, about 75 miles north of the Mexican border. In 1994, The motel owner bought the run-down hunting lodge motel for$220,000 and reopened it to house migrant chicken workers. Because poultrywork is considered nonfarm work, it is not subject to special farm workerhousing inspection, only normal local health and safety screening. The motelmanagement takes every new Hudson worker to apply for food stamps at theDivision of Family Services and the number of Latinos receiving food stamps inNoel increased from 35 per month in 1993 to 375 per month in 1996. Hudson is the economic linchpin of Noel, Missouri, but Hudson pays noproperty taxes to the city. The number of Latino students in Noel's elementaryschool rose from 25 to more than 100. Hudson and nearby Simmons Foodscontributed $12,000 to Noel schools in 1996. The final article in the series concluded that, across rural and small townAmerica, jobs that "used to offer working-class security to a local population"are now filled by Latino immigrants. The article concluded that towns withouttraffic lights and ATMs are not well equipped to deal with bilingual education,overcrowded housing, and racial tensions. There are weekly reports of INS raids on food processing facilities or ofunauthorized aliens detected by local police. For example, on November 21,1996, 10 unauthorized workers were apprehended at the Hi-Point Beef Co., ameat processing plant in Bellefontaine, Ohio. Some 40 unauthorized aliens were apprehended in late October in IdahoFalls, Idaho, the tenth INS raid in the area in 1996, prompting criticism thatthe INS detained and removed the parents of children in school from the USbefore they had time to tell their children. Most of the inspections were ofpotato processing and similar facilities. Tobacco. The Virginia Agricultural Growers Association imported2,603 Mexican workers to harvest tobacco under the H-2A program. The H-2Aprogram requires that US employers offer to US workers, and pay to foreignworkers, an Adverse Effect Wage Rate of $5.80 per hour in 1996 in Virginia.The H-2A program also requires US farm employers to provide free housing toworkers and to pay the workers' round trip transportation. Farmers have toguarantee workers employment for at least 75 percent of a 44-hour work week, or33 hours. H-2A tobacco workers in Virginia earn about $3,000 a summer, and$5,500 if they stay for six months. H-2A tobacco workers are recruited in Mexico by Del-Al Associates of SanAntonio, Texas. The Mexicans obtain visas to enter the US at the Americanconsulate in Monterrey. Mexican H-2A tobacco workers pay $30 to the localrecruiter who found them, and $125 to Del-Al Associates, which includes $44for the US visa and an $81 recruitment fee. There is reportedly a blacklistthat can get Mexican workers excluded from participation in the H-2A program. Mexican workers are also recruited under the nonfarm H-2B program to workin the Virginia and North Carolina crab meat industry. In 1996, eight Virginiacrabmeat processors hired 143 Mexicans under the H-2B program and 27 NorthCarolina seafood houses got Department of Labor approval to hire 1,685 H-2BMexican workers. Most of the seafood processors said that, when their local Black womenemployees retired, they could not "compete against the welfare programs of theUnited States government" for local workers. Unlike farm workers hired under the H-2A program, H-2B workers do notreceive written contracts that guarantee them a certain amount of work at agovernment set wage. Most H-2B crab workers are paid piece rate wages of $1.35to $1.89 per pound and most workers can extract 18 to 40 pounds of crabmeat perday, for daily earnings of $25 to $67. Seafood processors sell crab meat for$6 to $13 per pound. All workers must earn at least the federal minimum wage, $4.75 per hour,which generally means that workers must clean at least 750 crabs over eighthours to obtain 25 pounds of crab meat. Workers are entitled to 1.5 timestheir base wages for hours in excess of 40 weekly, a requirement that employersoften violate. Most seafood processors provide housing for workers, at a cost of $15 to$25 per week for beds in mobile homes or converted motels, The workers payabout $100 for bus tickets from Mexico to Virginia or North Carolina. Foreign workers are reportedly seeking jobs in construction, on tobaccofarms and in meat and poultry plants in Kentucky. In October, 1996, the INSwon its first conviction of an employer in Kentucky, the Valley Fresh chicken-processing plant in Glasgow, for knowingly hiring illegal alien workers. Wageswere $5 hourly. In September, 1996, Kentucky police stopped a rented truck taking 31illegal aliens to North Carolina, but the short-staffed INS told the police tolet the truck continue its journey. Pamela Stallsmith, "Golden leaf brings man to Southside," Richmond TimesDispatch, November 10, 1996. Jesse Katz, "The Chicken Trail: New MigrantTrails Take Latinos to Remote Towns," Los Angeles Times, November 10-12, 1996.Lane DeGregory, "Crab industry saviors come from unlikely place-Mexico,"Virginian-Pilot, November 10, 1996. _______________________________ LegalImmigrationChanges?/a> Legal immigration is expected to return as a major issue in the 105thCongress, which begins its work in January 1997. Current law anticipates theadmission of 675,000 immigrants each year within numerically limitedcategories. Although about 900,000 legal immigrants in all categories wereadmitted in FY96, plus an additional 100,000 asylum seekers and parolees. Anestimated 200,000 US citizens and immigrants emigrate every year. The extremes in the new Congress are marked by proponents of the statusquo, and those who advocate a moratorium that would halt all legal immigrationexcept for the immediate families of US citizens. The bipartisan US Commission on Immigration Reform, established by the 1990Immigration Act, will issue its final recommendations in September 1997. TheCIR in June 1995 recommended that the basic legal immigration system remain inplace, but that the entry of nuclear families be speeded up by awarding theimmigration slots now available to the adult brothers and sisters of UScitizens to immediate relatives. The CIR also recommended that the number of slots for immigrants requestedby US employers be reduced and that US employers demonstrate that they lookedfor US workers by paying a fee into a fund that would be used to trainAmericans who could eventually fill the jobs now done by foreigners. The President endorsed the CIR's recommendation for a lowering of theoverall number of legal immigrants allowed to enter the country annually, butnegated that endorsement in March 1996, when his administration backed effortsto separate legal and illegal immigration proposals in Congress. The death ofthe Chairman of the Commission, former Rep. Barbara Jordan (D-Texas), inJanuary 1996, is widely seen as a factor in the Clinton administration's changeof heart. The three major doors through which legal immigrants enter the USare: Family Unification. Congressional critics of the current law assertthat chain migration rather than US needs is increasing the number ofimmigrants admitted to the US for family reasons. The US admits without limitspouses and minor children of US citizens, so that the current naturalizationwave is expected to increase immediate family immigration. After immediate families of US citizens, the US has four family immigrationpreferences: the parents of US citizens, the immediate families of USimmigrants and the adult brothers and sisters of US citizens. There are lengthy backlogs in these categories. The CIR recommended atrade off, more slots to speed up the unification of immediate families oflegal immigrants and the elimination of slots for brothers and sisters. In an effort to head off a debate over reducing legal immigration, EmpowerAmerica in November 1996 released, "In Defense of a Nation: The MilitaryContributions of Immigrants," a report that argues that immigration increasesnational security by adding to the US population, by adding scientists whodevelop military technology and through individual acts of heroism by newcomersin the armed forces. The report was released at a press conference attended bya Mexican immigrant who won a silver star fighting in Vietnam. Employment. The major bill in the House in 1996 would have reducedthe number of immigrants admitted annually for economic/employment reasons from140,000 annually to 135,000(including dependents), while the Senate bill wouldhave reduced the number to 90,000. Both bills would have reformed the H-1Bprogram, which admits a maximum 65,000 professional temporary foreign workerseach year, each for up to six years. Business groups, especially high-tech companies such as Microsoft, opposedany changes to the economic/employment-based immigration system. Refugees. The US adopted the UN definition of a refugee in 1980: arefugee is a person outside her country of citizenship with a well-founded fearof persecution because of race, religion, nationality, membership in aparticular social group, or political opinion. The 1980 act anticipated thenormal arrival of 50,000 refugees each year and pledged the federal governmentto reimburse states for the welfare and other costs associated with resettlingrefugees. Non-Immigrants. Some 22 million foreigners enter the US every year,most for short-term tourist or business visits. However, about 650,000 areadmitted each year for US jobs or to study in the US. Many of thesenon-immigrants are authorized to remain in the US for three to 10 years andmany find ways to become permanent residents. Population Impacts. About one-third of US population growth is dueto immigration and, if the US-born and US-citizen children of recent immigrantsare included, immigration accounts for more than half of US population growth,according to the Census Bureau. Immigration is increasing the size of the current and future population.In 1989, the Census Bureau projected that the US population, 265 million in1996, would level off at 300 million in 2050. The most recent projectionssuggest that the US population will be 400 million in 2050. About 93 percentof the population growth in the year 2050 will result from immigration that hasoccurred since 1991. In 1994, there were more Hispanic than Black babies born in the US--17percent of the 3.9 million babies born were Hispanic, compared to 16 percentBlack, five percent Asian and 62 percent non-Hispanic white. Hispanics areexpected to surpass Blacks as the largest US minority population in2005. William Branigin, "Immigration Issues Await New Congress," Washington Post,November 18, 1996. Anna Borgman, "The Noncitizen-Soldier: Mexican-Born Heroof Vietnam Becomes a Symbol in Fight for Immigrants' Rights," Washington Post,November 8, 1996. Frank Trejo, Alfredo Corchado, "Immigration debate rageson," Dallas Morning News, November 6, 1996. Deborah Billings, "Return ofimmigration debate likely," Daily Labor Report, November 4, 1996. _______________________________ INSEnforcement The INS announced that it removed from the US 67,100 illegal aliens inFY96, and 160,000 over the past three years. About 55 percent of the aliensremoved committed crimes in the US and many are removed as they leave USprisons. About 75 percent of those removed in FY96 were Mexicans. In FY96, the INS conducted 4,900 worksite operations that resulted in theremoval of 14,000 unauthorized workers. In a first-ever agreement, the INS inOctober 1996 announced that it would notify the Virginia Department of SocialServices when it removed unauthorized workers from jobs in that state. On November 13, 1996, the US Supreme Court ruled that the INS couldconsider the fraud an alien committed in entering the country when decidingwhether the person should be deported. The ruling overturned the opinion of anappeals court that said that, because the INS generally disregards fraudulentacts committed by people trying to gain entry, INS must exclude fromconsideration any fraudulent acts connected to how one ultimately got into theUnited States. The case involved a couple from China who moved to Taiwan, and divorcedthere. The wife, using fraudulent documents, then assumed the identity of a UScitizen. The couple remarried in Taiwan under false names and the man used hiswife's apparent US citizenship to immigrate. The wife, meanwhile, divorced herhusband under her true name to obtain a US immigration visa through US residentrelatives. In late November, the INS issued an arrest warrant for Governor Wilson'sex-maid; the maid's questionable legal status was detected in 1995, duringWilson's brief campaign for the Republican nomination for President. The INSsuspects that the maid may have fraudulently married a US citizen to become alegal immigrant. On the US-Mexican border, environmental and public officials expressed moreconcern about unauthorized migrants threatening fragile plants in the OtayMountains in eastern San Diego county. There have been more than 322 fires sofar in 1996 in the Otay Mountains. The rugged terrain means that mostly youngmen attempt the trip. INS Commissioner Doris Meissner, in an October 27, 1996 interview with theNew York Times magazine, said that Congress was right in maintaining thedistinction between legal and illegal immigration in 1996 legislation.However, she faulted Congress with not doing enough to help the INS enforceemployer sanctions. Meissner noted that denying welfare benefits to legal immigrantsrepresented a major change in the US social contract and disputed the notionthat illegal alien women are increasing numbers are motivated enter the US togive birth to US citizen babies. She noted that US citizen children cannotsponsor their parents for immigration until they are 21. Carey Goldberg, "Scenic Mountains Scarred by Illegal Border Crossings," NewYork Times, November 17, 1996. Joan Biskupic, "Court Strengthens INS AuthorityAgainst Fraud," Washington Post, November 14, 1996. _______________________________ MexicoandGuatemala Gaps between the rich and poor in Mexico and between the industrialnorthern and indigenous southern parts of the country, are widening. Therehave been many skirmishes in Mexico's so-called misery belt--Chiapas, Oaxacaand Guerrero. One-fourth of the population is illiterate, compared with sixpercent along the northern border. On November 9, 1996 police shot and killed three protesting Mexicanpeasants in Chiapas. The peasants were demanding a doubling in the base pricefor corn, from the government-guaranteed price of about $160 per ton to $315 aton. One recent study 55 percent of all Mexicans are poor and working class, 35percent are middle class, and 10 percent are upper class. Only one-third ofthe poor and working class have jobs that bring in regular wages and salaries.Mexico's informal or non-tax paying sector represents about 39 percent of thecountry's gross domestic product (GDP). Two-thirds of the 14 million people that Mexico classifies as "living inextreme poverty" are in rural areas. Mexican President Zedillo on November 8,1996 said that the average adult Mexican has seven years of education, up fromone year of schooling in 1950. Many US investors are reportedly postponing plans to invest in Mexicobecause of concerns about kidnappings and the persistence of bureaucraticproblems. Zedillo announced the government's 1997 budget on November 7, 1996. Itprojects a 1997 GDP of about $360 billion, four percent growth and 15 percentinflation. The peso/dollar exchange rate is expected to fall from the current7.7 pesos to $1 to about 8.5 to $1. Exports of about $100 billion are expectedto approach 25 percent of GDP. Mexico's economy grew by 7.4 percent in the third quarter of 1996, up from7.2 percent in the second quarter. The US has been importing about $6 billionworth of goods from Mexico each month in 1996 and exporting goods worth $4.5billion, producing a $1.5 billion monthly US trade deficit with Mexico. Mexico and other Latin American countries continue to try to increase theirsavings from the current 20 percent of GDP to the 30 percent more common inEast Asia. In October 1996, unemployment fell to 5.2 percent in 41 cities, the lowestlevel since January 1995. Unemployment peaked at 7.6 percent in August 1995.Mexico considers persons 12 and older who actively sought a job in the twomonths before the survey to be in the labor force. In voting in November, opposition parties won enough mayorships to control10 of the 12 largest Mexican cities. In response, the PRI-dominated 500-memberChamber of Deputies backtracked on election reforms that were meant to open upthe political process. Over the protest of opposition parties, the Chamberapproved plans to spend $250 million in government funds in the July 6, 1997congressional races, about half of which will go to PRI candidates. PRI has governed Mexico for 67 years -- the longest uninterrupted reign ofany governing party in the world. Some experts wonder what the impact will be when Mexicans living in the UShave their first opportunity to vote in Mexico's next election. If, asexpected, the PAN manages to edge the PRI in Mexico, a poor showing amongMexican voters living in the United States would critically diminish the PAN'sshare of the total presidential tally. In the close election everyone isexpecting, a large unfavorable vote from the US could reinstall the PRI through2006. The estimated four to five million Mexican voters living in the US are ahuge unknown in the election and each party has a different approach toreaching these voters. The PRI was responsible for giving Mexicans living inthe US the right to vote, hoping to win their support. The PAN has no strategyfor the voters north of the border. The PRD has extensive networks of votersthrough the US and pushed for emigrant voting rights. Mexico plans to "register" Guatemalan refugees in Campeche, Quitana Roo andChiapas in December 1996, so that a "legalization process for certain migrants"can be carried out. In Guatemala, it was announced that a 36-year civil war would end with apeace treaty to be signed in Guatemala City on December 29, 1996. DuringCentral America's last and longest civil war, some 100,000 people died, and anestimated 40,000 disappeared. A Bank of Boston survey released in November found that 57 percent of USresidents do not want NAFTA to be extended to other Latin American countries,in part because 51 percent believe that free trade agreements cost the USjobs. During his first term, President Clinton did not visit Latin America exceptfor a quick trip to Haiti to visit American troops. Many Latin Americandiplomats say the US largely ignores Latin America and has no clear policytoward the region, except for trying to suppress narcotics. The Clintonadministration says it does plan a presidential visit to Latin America nextyear, although no firm date has been set. Other Latin American specialists take a more favorable point of view,pointing out that the Clinton administration acted decisively in response tothe Mexican peso crisis of 1994. The multibillion-dollar bailout was alandmark in US-Latin American relations. Trade is expected to be the top issue in US-Latin American relations duringClinton's second term. A Free Trade Area of the Americans, agreed to at the1994 Miami summit, should be established by 20005. Sebastian Rotella, "Foreign Policy: Clinton's Latin Lesson," Los AngelesTimes, November 22, 1996. John Ward Anderson, " Mexican Party Backs Down OnReforms," Washington Post November 16 1996. "President says illiteracy ratedown," The News, November 9, 1996. Mexico. Financial Times Survey, October28, 1996. David R. Ayon, "Could votes of US expatriates topple Mexico's PRI in2000?" Houston Chronicle, November 3, 1996. _______________________________ ReligionandImmigration Largely because of changes in immigration laws in 1965, the United States"is now the most religiously diverse country on earth," according to an articlein the September-October, 1996 issue of Harvard magazine. According to Professor Martin Marty of the University of Chicago, areligion has "six marks"--a system centered on a matter of deep meaning,socialization (believers tend to form communities), show a preference forsymbolic language over everyday speech, use ceremonies (especially at birth,marriage and death), take a metaphysical view of life (there is more to theworld than what one sees) and require behavioral adjustments (attending SundaySchool or shunning pork). Some social scientists consider that religious institutions to be of themost important sources of social capital in the US--institutions that cancreate the social networks and norms that enable people to work together forcommon goals. Churches, in this view, teach people basic political skills--how to give a speech, organize a meeting, raise money and provide pools offriends and neighbors who can be recruited for civic activities. Protestants. Many traditional Protestant denominations arewelcoming immigrants and hope to thereby bolster declining membership. It has not always been easy to integrate immigrants. The First UnitedMethodist Church in Queens, New York was troubled in 1995 by divisions betweenFilipino immigrants and African Americans. The pastor of the church tried tobring in new lay ministers, but was removed by the Bishop, prompting some ofthe immigrant members to picket the Bishop's office. In Queens, churches thatrely on immigrants who joined long ago are dying--one has 30 elderlyPolish-American members, another only five German-American members. The United Methodist Church has lost about two million members nationwidein 10 years. Membership is growing in communities with Korean, Caribbean,African and Asian immigrants. Most Americans attend neighborhood churches and their attendance patternsreflect housing patterns. Martin Luther King in the 1960s asserted that 11 amon Sunday morning was the most segregated hour of the week, asAfrican-Americans and whites went to separate churches. There are very fewracially-integrated churches in the US. Catholics. The Pope's October 1995 visit to New York highlightedthe ethnic diversity of Catholic parishes brought about by continuingimmigration. Churches built by German or Irish or Italian immigrants decadesago now celebrate Mass in Spanish or Polish. Mass is celebrated in New Yorkarea churches in 38 languages. Before his 1995 visit, the Pope released a statement asking establishedresidents to try to understand the circumstances of illegal immigrants. "Theillegal immigrant," the Pope said, "comes before us like that stranger whomJesus asks to be recognized." The Pope called for international cooperation tofoster political stability and accelerate economic development so that peopleare not forced to migrate. In an address to the United Nations in 1995 the Pope deplored the "fear ofdifference" that he said can lead to violations of human rights. Catholic leaders make a point of saying that no passport or papers arerequired to enter their churches, thus reproving those with less welcomingattitudes to immigrants. Los Angeles Archbishop Roger Mahoney decried Prop.187 in California in Fall 1994 as a "social sin," and pastoral letters in NewYork and elsewhere remind listeners that Catholic teaching instructs thatimmigrants should be treated with hospitality. A nationwide September 1995 poll conducted in English and Spanish foundthat about the same percentage of Catholics as respondents in general--28percent--want immigration levels reduced. There are an estimated 22 million Hispanic Catholics in the United States,about a third of the country's 66 million Catholics. About a fourth of theHispanic Catholics were born outside the US. California's Catholic priests are becoming more outspoken on issues such asaffirmative action and prenatal care for undocumented immigrants, a majorchange from their previous behind-the-scenes lobbying efforts. A group ofclerics representing the state's 12 dioceses met with elected officials inSacramento in March, 1996. According to a spokesperson, the group's advocacy is a mandate from thestate's 5.6 million Hispanic Catholics whom they represent, and also reflectsthe church's traditional concern for the poor, elderly and children. The groupbecame more outspoken after a November 1995 pastoral statement from the USCatholic Conference of Bishops that urged Catholics to become more activepolitically as a community conscience. Islam. There are six to eight million Muslims in the US, includingtwo million Black Muslims. The number of Muslims in the US is increasingrapidly through immigration and conversions. Islam, now with one billionadherents, is the world's fastest-growing religion. Of the more than 1,200 mosques in the US, nearly 80 percent have been builtwithin the past 12 years. The first theological school in the US to trainIslamic imams opened in Virginia in 1996. In the past two years, six mosqueshave been damaged or destroyed by arson. Experts say that Islam, with its clearly defined behavioral norms, isparticularly appealing to American blacks living in neighborhoods wherecommunity and family life have been strained by poverty, crime and despair.Islam also provides an alternative for some blacks who associate Christianitywith slavery and racism. For some, Islam is a bridge to their African roots--as many as 20 percent of the slaves transported to America may have beenMuslims. At a private Islamic school in Silver Spring, Maryland, girls who wear thehijab, or traditional Muslim head scarf, do not have to worry about teasing bytheir classmates. Islamic schools in the Washington, DC area are popular; mosthave long waiting lists. The American Muslim Council estimates that there are200,000 Muslims in the Washington DC area and 1,500 pupils in Islamic schools.Many Muslim parents who cannot get their children into Islamic school opt tohomeschool. Some Muslims, both immigrant and American-born, are organizing to increasetheir political clout. Most are liberal on minority rights and immigration,but conservative in such matters as opposing sex and violence in movies andtelevision. In California, home to the largest Muslim community in the US,most Muslims supported Republican Pete Wilson in the governor's race, but mostopposed Prop. 187. Gustav Niebuhr, " America's Religious Quilt Has Become a Patchwork," NewYork Times, November 23, 1996. Diego Ribadeniera, "Islam's rising lure,"Boston Globe, October 20, 1996. Tara Mack, "Lessons in their own faith,"Washington Post, October 15, 1996. Peter Steinfels, "Active Churches andSynagogues Let People Work for Social, Political Goals," New York Times, May 4,1996. Norimitsu Onishi, "Strangers in the Next Pew," New York Times, April 14,1996. Elizabeth Spaid, "Churches still struggling to cross racial divide,"Christian Science Monitor, April 10, 1996. Robert Marquand and Lamis Andoni,"Muslims Learn to Pull Political Ropes in US," and "Separating the Fact fromthe Fiction in Islamic Extremism," Christian Science Monitor, February 5, 1996.Gustav Niebuhr, "With every wave of newcomers, a church more diverse," New YorkTimes, October 3, 1995. __________________________ ImmigrantIntegration A survey found that 52 percent of graduating US high school students thinkthe US has too many immigrants. More than half believe that immigration andaffirmative action will make it harder for them to get into the bestuniversities and to find good jobs. The Wall Street Journal on November 13, 1996 reported that more employeeswho are bilingual are demanding and getting additional wages. The prevailingstated policy of US employers has been to set wages by the job, not accordingto the qualifications of the person filling the job, so most US employers havenot paid premium wages for workers with bilingual skills. Management jobs, onthe other hand, often offer wage premiums for bilingual skills. Bilingual skills used on the job have brought wage premiums of five to 10percent to US Customs inspectors and MCI operators. In some cases, wagepremiums for bilingual employees have led to grievances from non-bilingualemployees. In New York City, a new magazine, City Family, is aimed at low- andmiddle-income immigrants trying to make a better life for themselves. About210,000 copies are sold each month, half in Spanish as the La Familia de laCiudad. The magazine, aimed at women, is written at a fifth-grade level. Themagazine is distributed free in places where immigrants congregate as well asby subscription. Affirmative Action. California voters, 54 to 46 percent, approvedProposition 209 in November 1996, an initiative that eliminates quotas andpreferences in state and local government university admissions, contractingand hiring. Proposition 209 amends the California Constitution to read, "Thestate shall not discriminate against, or grant preferential treatment to, anyindividual or group on the basis of race, sex, color, ethnicity or nationalorigin in the operation of public employment, public education or publiccontracting." Governor Wilson immediately issued an executive order directing stateagencies to identify programs that grant or encourage preferences based on raceor sex. Men voted two to one for Prop. 209, as did 60 percent of white women.About one-third of Black and Hispanic voters supported Prop. 209. Hmong. There are about 60,000 Hmong refugees from Southeast Asia inCalifornia's San Joaquin Valley cities of Fresno, Merced and Tulare. About 70percent are on public assistance, the highest rate of any immigrant group. TheHmong are considered to be most disadvantaged refugee group ever to come toAmerica. Many are not literate and most live in ethnic enclaves. Some oftheir customs clash with the mores of established residents, including havinggirls marry at 13 and many women having nine or 10 children. Hmong community leaders say that in 1996 about 6,000 Hmong have left theSan Joaquin Valley for Minnesota, Wisconsin, Oregon and elsewhere. Theyattribute the departures to the prospect of losing welfare benefits and tobetter job prospects elsewhere. Many have moved to St. Paul, Minnesota, whichhas 32,000 Hmong residents. In the 1960s, the Hmong were recruited by the CIA to fight the Viet Congand suffered the highest casualty rates of any group of combatants in theVietnam War. To many of the 125,000 Hmong who made their way to the US,welfare benefits are no more than a proper reward for having fought in anAmerican cause. Peter Fritsch, "Bilingual employees are seeking more pay, and many now getit," Wall Street Journal, November 13, 1996. Mark Arax, "Hmong Seek Better Lifein Exodus From State," Los Angeles Times, November 10, 1996. Robert Pear, " InCalifornia, Foes of Affirmative Action See a New Day," New York Times, November7, 1996. _______________________________ EUROPE _______________________________ EUImmigration The EU's on-going inter-governmental conference (IGC) is set to approvemajority voting for employment promotion and environmental protection.However, Irish negotiators preparing for the Dublin summit said that there were"major inhibitions" on questions of citizenship and nationality becoming an EUresponsibility. The European Commissioner responsible for issues related to immigration andjudicial affairs, Anita Gradin, visited Morocco's northern provinces inNovember to discuss drug trafficking and illegal immigration in Europe. The EU provided about $116 billion in regional aid in 1996. Much of theaid goes to the "poor four" EU members--Ireland, Portugal Spain, and Greece.In a review of disparities within the EU, it was noted that Ireland's percapita GDP is now 90 percent of the EU average, while Greece's is still only 64percent of the average. Hamburg is the richest city in the EU--its per capitaGDP is 189 percent of average, followed by Brussels at 183 percent. The Cecchini report in 1988 projected that the "single market" would add4.5 percent to the GDP of the 12-nation EU, adding 1.8 million jobs. OnOctober 30, 1996, the EU released a report on the first four years of thesingle market and it estimated that the GDP of the now 15-nation EU was 1.1 to1.5 percent higher than it would have been without the removal of marketbarriers and that a net 300,000 to 900,000 new jobs were created. Studies done in preparation for monetary union emphasize that unemploymentrates might rise because, under current integration steps, differences inregional unemployment rates have not diminished. The EU Court of Justice on November 12, 1996 ruled that the UK--the maximum48 hour work week. The UK argued that it had negotiated an exemption from the"social chapter" of the 1991 Maastricht agreement. Quentin Peel, "Spring fears British block in the IGC," Financial TimesNovember 8, 1996. _______________________________ Germany:Bosnia, Asylum andVietnamese The German Bundestag in November approved changes to immigration laws thatpermit the expulsion of foreigners convicted of "severe" disruption of thepeace at an unauthorized protest rally. The law was a response to Kurdishprotests in Spring 1996 against the Turkish government. Germany continues to debate eased naturalization procedures. Persons whohave a right (Anspruch) to German nationality do not have to take a languagetest, while those who are permitted (Ermessen) to apply for naturalization mustsatisfy residence, language and other requirements. Most of the proposals would ease the requirements for theErmessenseinbuergerung, such as reducing the residence requirement for personsborn in Germany, or giving persons born in Germany the right to become Germannationals at age 16 or 18. Bosnians/Serbs. Germany and Bosnia-Herzegovina in November signed afinal agreement to return home the 320,000 Bosnians in Germany. Until June1997, only single people and couples without children will return. German courts in August ruled that Bosnians "tolerated" in Germany do nothave the right to apply for asylum in Germany because the Bosnian governmentcan protect them within the borders of Bosnia. Germany and Yugoslavia signed an agreement October 10, 1996 to begin return135,000 mostly Kosovo-Albanians on December 1, 1996. The return of the personsto Serbia is expected to take three years. Asylum. On November 5, 1996, a minister charged with providing"church asylum" to a Roma gypsy between 1994 and 1996 went on trial, the firsttime a person involved in church asylum was put on trial in Germany. The number of asylum seekers in October was 11, 677. In the first seven months of 1996, 489 rejected asylum seekers appealed tothe German Constitutional Court and eight were found to have beenunconstitutionally rejected. Aussiedler. Germany accepts up to 220,000 ethnic Germans per yearfrom the ex-USSR. The SPD has been urging the coalition government to makethis annual quota flexible, reducing the number admitted when Germanunemployment and funds to provide integration assistance decline. The Germangovernment reduced integration assistance for Aussiedler, but kept the quota at220,000 per year. Germany requires ethnic Germans to complete their applications and todemonstrate some knowledge of German, before they leave Kazackstan and Russiafor Germany. Some 3.5 million Aussiedler migrated to Germany since 1950, including 1.3million from the ex-USSR, 420,000 from Romania, and 104,000 from theex-Czechoslovakia. The peak year of Aussiedler migration was 1990, when397,999 persons arrived. Vietnamese. On November 1, Cornelia Schmalz-Jacobsen, the Germangovernment official with responsibility for foreigners, called for a permanentright of abode for Vietnamese workers in the former East Germany. Followingreunification, East Germany's foreign worker population dropped from 90,000Angolans, Cubans, Hungarians, Mozambicans and Vietnamese to 15,000, including13,000 Vietnamese. Most of the former East German guest workers received anAufenthaltsbefugnis in 1993-94, a residence permit that can be renewed everytwo years if the foreigner can prove that he has appropriate housing and noreceipt of welfare or record of crime. After four renewals or eight years oflawful residence, the Vietnamese are eligible for an Aufenthaltserlaubnis, amore secure residence permit. Under current law, residence before 1993-94 does not count for theVietnamese seeking to qualify for an Aufenthaltserlaubnis. One proposal is tocount half of the years before 1993 toward the eight-year requirement and topermit those convicted of minor crimes to obtain residence permits. The number of xenophobic violent crimes against foreigners living inGermany fell from 382 in the first eight months of 1995 to 200 in the sameperiod in 1996. Illegal Immigration. At the end of August, 1996, the GermanBorder Patrol announced that it had apprehended 29,604 illegal aliensattempting to enter Germany over its eastern borders in 1995, down about fivepercent from 1995. Those apprehended represented an estimated 80 percent ofillegal entrants. An additional 125,742 foreigners were turned back at the border and 36,455were flown out of Germany by the German Border Patrol. Labor Market. Unemployment in October rose to over four million or10.6 percent of the labor force. About three million foreigners were employed in Germany in April 1995.About 37 percent were employed in manufacturing, 22 percent in services such ashotels and restaurants, 15 percent in other services, 11 percent inconstruction and eight percent were self employed. Schwarzarbeit--unauthorized foreigners and Germans working for unreportedwages--cost Germany an estimated DM100 million or $65 million per year in lostincome and payroll taxes. There are an estimated 500,000 "illegal jobs" inGermany. German employers and construction unions in November 1996 agreed on aminimum wage for all construction workers for the period January-August, 1997.All workers on construction sites must be paid at least DM17 ($11.33) per hourin the former west Germany and DM15.64 ($10.43) per hour in the east, whichwould then become the minimum wage for foreign workers. An estimated 200,000 foreign workers and 350,000 German workers areemployed at German building sites. In 1995, a total DM117 billion ($76 billion) was spent on unemploymentinsurance, early retirement benefits and other programs for the jobless inGermany. An average 3.6 million people were unemployed in 1995, about 10percent of the labor force. A report by the Council of Economic Advisors found that growth in eastGermany will be only 2.25 percent in 1997, which means that for the first timesince German reunification in 1990, the growth rate in the east will be slowerthan in western Germany. Construction has been the catalyst for east Germangrowth. Productivity in east Germany remains 50 percent below that in thewest, but wages in the east are about 70 percent of western levels. The German union confederation, the DGB, in November 1996 changed themanifesto adopted in 1958 to accept more labor market flexibility. The changewas pushed by IG Metall, the world's largest industrial union, with about threemillion members, or one-third of DGB members. Human rights. On November 8, a UN human rights committee criticizedthe treatment of foreigners and minorities by German police and expressedconcern about continuing xenophobia and anti-Semitism in Germany. The UNcommittee recommended the establishment of independent bodies throughoutGermany to investigate complaints of ill treatment by the police. Turks. Turkish President Suleyman Demirel visited Germany onNovember 6 for talks with German officials regarding Turkey's bid for EUmembership, human rights and the security of Turks living in Germany. Demirelsaid that Turkish EU membership is only a question of time. German ForeignMinister Klaus Kinkel responded that Turkey belongs to Europe and serves as abridge between Europe, Islam and Central Asia, but added that Turkey mustimprove its human rights record. Michael Anders, "Mirage of east German economic boom melts away," AgenceFrance Presse, November 15, 1996. "The once and future capital," The Economist,November 9, 1996. "Growing together," The Economist, November 9, 1996."Germany seeks to ban low-wage EU construction workers," DeutschePresse-Agentur, October 8, 1996. _______________________________ FranceAmends 1993 ImmigrationLaw The French cabinet on November 6, 1996 approved a bill that would remove"anomalies" created by 1993 immigration laws, largely by increasing the powerof police to deal with illegal immigrants and make it easier for foreignerswith a French spouse or French children to obtain residence permits. The bill would permit aliens who did not leave France as instructed to bejailed for up to three months and permit police to conduct identity checks inworkplaces to crack down on illegal labor. France's Human Rights Commission asked the French government on November 15to review the entire 1993 immigration law because it violates human dignitywithout resolving the problems of illegal immigration and labor. Thecommission said that the bill to remove the anomalies would clear up the statusof a number of immigrants but may threaten individual freedom and create aspecial criminal law for foreigners which the commission believes would breachthe principle of equal justice. In Dreux, a city of 36,000 45 miles west of Paris whose population is 20percent immigrant, a mayoral contest highlighted the tensions between theFrench and North African immigrants. The National Front candidate said thatillegal immigrant children should not be permitted in French schools. The National Front candidate, who promised to double the city's policeforce to 40, won 36 percent of the vote in the first round. The National FrontCandidate lost in the run-off election on November 24 despite a visit to thetown by National Frond leader Jean-Marie Le Pen. The incumbent may won 60.4percent while the National Front candidate trailed with 36.4 percent. NationalFront mayors were elected in Toulon, Orange and Marignane. After the election, fighting between the conservative and National Frontsupporters was reported. No one was seriously injured. Many of the North Africans live in high rises on the outskirts of the citywhere unemployment and reliance on welfare are high. The Economist in its November 16 issue summarized the French integrationmodel as one which expects newcomers to "speak French, eat French food, wearFrench clothes, observe French customs." In 1994, Jean-Claude Barreau, the adviser on immigration to the Frenchminister of the interior, was quoted as saying that "when somebody emigrates,he changes not only his country, but also his history. Foreigners arriving [tosettle] in France must understand that from henceforth their ancestors are theGauls and that they have a new homeland . . . But Muslim extremists have begunarriving in France as colonizers, with gods and weapons in their baggage . . .Today, there is a real Islamic threat in France which is part of a greatworldwide wave of Muslim fundamentalism." France has four to five million Muslim residents. About half are Frenchcitizens, born in France or acquiring French nationality (by marriage ornaturalization) since their arrival. About six percent of the Muslims adhere tothe strict tenets of their faith and 10-15 percent worship regularly at amosque or prayer center, about the same percent of French Catholics who goregularly to mass. A 1996 poll found that two-thirds of the French think that France has "toomany Arabs" and "too many Muslims.". High school students in the French Guiana capital Cayenne in South Americarioted in November; the French attributed the riots to illegal immigration,which helped to increase the population to 140,000 from 80,000 over the past 13years. The unemployment rate is 25 percent. "Far-Right National Front Loses Local Vote," Chicago Tribune, November 25,1996. Craig Whitney, "Anti-Immigrant Testiness at Issue in Mayoral Race," NewYork Times, November 18, 1996. Irwin Arieff, "French far-right takes lead inkey city poll," Reuters Financial Service, November 17, 1996. "The Muslims inFrance. Rejecting their ancestors the Gauls," The Economist, November 16, 1996."French government urged to review immigration laws," Reuters, November 15,1996. "France to hold Guiana talks after student riots," Reuters, November12, 1996. Alexander Miles, "France accuses rioters of destabilizing Fr.Guiana," Reuters, November 13, 1996. "France to plug tough immigration lawloopholes," Reuters, November 6, 1996. _______________________________ Immigrantsin Eastern Europe Poland and Russia in November signed an agreement that permits visa-freetravel between the two countries. Russia also agreed to accept from Polandillegal immigrants from third countries who passed through Russia intoPoland. Poland has set up detention centers for foreigners awaiting deportation.The immigrants can be held a maximum of 90 days and then they will be released.On November 15, the detention center in Ostrowic Swietokrzyski could not take44 illegal immigrants because it were full. In 1996 there were an estimated 190,000 foreigners living in the CzechRepublic with long-term or permanent residence permits. The 70,000 foreignersliving legally in Prague are 10 percent of city's residents and there may beanother 60,000 illegal immigrants in the city. By 2020, about 20 percent of the Czech population will be over 65 comparedwith 13 percent in 1995. This may prompt immigration to fill laborshortages. "Illegal Immigrants Detained," Polish News Bulletin, November 18, 1996.Anthony Barker, "Ending visas with Russia won't boost crime," Reuters, November15, 1996. "Czech Population Aging, New Immigrants Will be Required--Study,"CTK National News Wire, October 21, 1996. "Prostitutes 'are migrant workers,'"The Independent, October 5, 1996. _______________________________ MigrantSmuggling An International Organization for Migration heard a plea to treatprostitutes as migrant workers because they are forced by their economicsituation to cross borders to work as prostitutes. Hungarian police estimatethat one-third of the prostitutes working in clubs, massage parlors and othervenues in Budapest are foreigners, primarily from countries east ofHungary. The City Council of Verona, Italy is attempting to halt a rise inprostitution primarily by foreign women from Africa, Romania and Albania. Thecouncil suggested confining prostitution to a designated area of the city and areopening of brothels--much to the outrage of the Catholic Church. The women are recruited with promises of high wage jobs but, after theirarrival, the smugglers destroy their documents and force them intoprostitution. Italy's largest association of prostitutes charges that, sincethe Italian authorities cannot control the influx of illegal immigrants, theytarget the most visible immigrants--prostitutes. By the end of October, 1996, 12 persons were arrested in Belgium under a1995 law that prohibits "trade in human beings." Over the past four years, aBelgian-based smuggling ring recruited an estimated 4,000 Filipinos bypromising them high wage jobs in Europe. They then sent most of the Filipinosto Italy as manual workers, maids or prostitutes. The Filipinos paid up to $8,000 each to the smugglers. The Belgian law allows anyone who forces an immigrant to work againsthis/her will to be charged with illegally trafficking in human labor. Withoutthe new rule, any abused immigrant trying to get police protection would havebeen immediately deported as an illegal alien before being able to testify at atrial. "Detectives crack scam wedding ring," Sunday Mirror, November 10, 1996.Raf Casert, "Filipinos smuggled as slave laborers," Associated Press, November7, 1996. Marlise Simons, "Belgium Holds Suspects in Immigrant Smuggling," NewYork Times, November 6, 1996. Jessica Taylor, "Shamed by the ladies ofVerona," Sunday Telegraph, November 10, 1996. "Prostitutes are migrantworkers," The Independent, October 5, 1996. _______________________________ RussiansSeek Asylum in Norway The Norwegian Foreign Ministry has refused to give the Russian Embassyinformation about eight Russian citizens seeking political asylum in Norway.The Russians traveled to Norway by bus via a border post near Kirkenes in theArctic north and requested asylum in Tromso, 400 kilometers from theborder. The Russians are being held at a refugee center in Trondheim. According to a 1971 Norwegian-Russian agreement, each country is to informthe other about all cases involving the detention of citizens of the other.The Norwegians say they are not detaining the Russians and so this case is notcovered by the agreement. According to the Norwegian press, 28 Russian citizens have asked forpolitical asylum in Norway since the beginning of the year. The Russian Ministry of Labor and Social Development reported that thenumber of immigrants to Russia from the former the USSR republics is dropped byhalf in 1996. Each year nearly 100,000 Russians emigrate, primarily forGermany, Israel, the United States and Greece. Lilya Kuznetsova, "Immigration to Russia from CIS going down," TASS,November 15, 1996. "Russia denied information on political asylum," TASS,November 15, 1996. Igor Pshenichnikov, "Eight Russians Seek Asylum in Norway,"TASS, November 13, 1996. _______________________________ AustriaTightens/a>Border Controls On November 13, the Austrian government announced that it would imposestricter controls on its border with former Communist countries, including theCzech Republic. The extra border guards, supplemented by the Austrian Army,will be concentrated on the Hungarian border, where most of the illegal bordercrossings are made. The beefed up patrols are an effort by the Austrian government tocomply with the Schengen agreement. Bavaria's interior minister warned thatthe passport controls on the Austria-Bavaria border will not be eliminateduntil there is proof that Austria can secure its eastern borders. Joerg Haider's Freedom Party won 28 percent of the vote in elections for EUParliament representatives on October 13, 1996, making it the strongestanti-immigrant or far-right party in Europe. During a Freedom Party conference on November 10, Haider said that likeFrance and the US, Austria must consider housing, jobs and integration in itspolicy towards foreigners. "Austria to impose stricter controls on Czech-Austrian Border," CTKNational News Wire, November 13, 1996. Susan Ladika, " Austria backed farright in protest vote, not neo-Nazi shift," Washington Times, November 10,1996. Janet McBride, "Austria's Haider says has government in sights,"Reuters, November 10, 1996. _______________________________ Ireland'sImmigrants Ireland, a country of 3.6 million with a per capita GNP of $13,500 in 1994,has heretofore been a country of emigration rather than a destination forimmigrants. Today Ireland has about 40,000 legal alien residents, including 2,000asylum seekers who are awaiting decisions on whether they will be allowed toremain in Ireland. Most of the legal aliens have annually renewablevisas. Legal aliens who have been married to an Irish citizen for three years areautomatically entitled to Irish citizenship. Those not married to an Irishcitizen can apply to the Minister for Justice for Irish citizenship after fiveyears' legal residence in Ireland, although the Justice ministry does not haveto give any reason for refusing citizenship. During the first nine months of 1996, 713 foreigners applied for asylum inIreland, versus 424 in 1995, 355 in 1994, 91 in 1993 and 39 in 1992. Thelargest group of asylum seekers are Romanians, followed by persons from Somaliaand Algeria. In 1995, 14 foreigners were granted refugee status and eight weregiven "humanitarian leave to remain" in Ireland. At present, the authoritative statement of Ireland's refugee policy is a1985 letter from the Irish Department of Justice to the United Nations HighCommission for Refugees (UNHCR) outlining its commitment to the 1951 GenevaConvention. The practice has been to interview applicants for asylum and thento await comments from the London office of UNHCR and the Irish Department ofForeign Affairs. Only after their advice was received was a final decisionreached, often after two to three years. According to Irish authorities, these delays and some passengers onAeroflot planes seeking asylum during stopovers at Shannon Airport, contributedto the 1,000 percent increase in the number of asylum seekers in the past threeyears. In 1996, Ireland approved a new Refugee Act that will go into effect in1997. It has an expansive definition of refugee, adding to the GenevaConvention the possibility of receiving refugee status because of persecutiondue to gender, sexual orientation or trade union membership. In addition, theIrish Refugee Act defines "family" broadly for the purpose of regulating familyreunion for refugees. Asylum seekers in Ireland are prohibited from working, but are eligible forpublic assistance. If an asylum seeker becomes the parent of an Irish bornchild or marries an Irish citizen, she or he gains the right of residency andtherefore the right to work. Ireland in October 1996 deported to Algeria an Algerian man who wasreturning to Ireland from a visit to France and did not have a re-entry visa.The Algerian man had entered Ireland as a student in 1991, married an Irishcitizen in 1993 and remained in the country. His brother, who owns arestaurant in Dublin, obtained a court order to delay the man's deportation,but he was sent to Algiers despite the court order. Irish immigration laws, like US law, do not require the government to giveany reason for refusing to issue a visa. There is no right to appeal thedecision of an immigration officer. "Bid to have immigration staff jailed for contempt," Irish Times, November1, 1996. Yvonne Healy, "Out of the frying pan into the fire," Irish Times,October 22, 1996. _______________________________ Sweden'sRefugee Law The Swedish Ministry of Foreign Affairs released in October 1996 a summaryof a Proposed Parliamentary Bill on Migration Policy. If enacted, the billwould reduce the number of asylum-seekers through more stringent eligibilityrules for family reunification and transfer responsibility for alien affairsfrom the police to the Swedish Immigration Board. Two reasons cited by the Swedish government for the change in refugeepolicy are the fiscal crisis in Sweden and the influx of persons from theformer Yugoslavia. Sweden has provided shelter for 122,000 Bosnians, more thanany other nation, on a per capita basis. The Swedish government WILL continue to grant refugee status to personsfleeing areas in which the state fails to provide protection againstpersecution by other agents. In the past, Sweden has denied asylum to refugees suffering persecution bynon-governmental authorities, such as Peruvians targeted by the Shining Path orAlgerians persecuted by the insurgent Armed Islamic Group. Denying protectionto such persons has been criticized by the Human Rights Watch. "Swedish Migration Policy in a Global Perspective," Summary of GovernmentBill 1996/97:25, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, October, 1996. ELDR PresidentAddress on Asylum Refugee Policy," Reuter European Community Report, October18, 1996. _______________________________ ASIA _______________________________ JapanCopes with Illegal Foreigners On November 18, the Japanese government said it will grant Japanesecitizenship to a child born out of wedlock to a Filipina woman and a Japaneseman. In a settlement worked out at the Hiroshima District Court, thegovernment said it would give Japanese nationality to the child and cancel thedeportation order for the child and the mother. The government's decision followed a Justice Ministry announcement in July1996 that divorced, separated, widowed or otherwise single foreigners--eventhose illegally in Japan-- who are bringing up children with at least oneJapanese parent would be granted legal residency. If a child is born to aforeign women out of wedlock, the Japanese father must acknowledge the babybefore birth for the mother and child to remain in Japan. According to Japanese press reports, many municipalities have begun totreat foreigners like ordinary residents; many no longer worry whether aforeigner has overstayed his or her visa. Local authorities are supposed toreport visa violations to the Immigration Bureau, but many do not. Shinjuku Ward in Tokyo gives illegal foreign residents access to publichospitals and schools. Other local governments provide Japanese languagetraining, job placement assistance and classes on Japanese culture to foreignresidents. Under current laws, local governments can hire foreign residents only ifthey possess special skills, and if their job does not involve the "use ofpublic power." Local authorities would like to have more freedom to hireforeign residents, especially for 3-D jobs--dirty, dangerous, anddifficult--and to help to provide government services to the growing foreigncommunities. The governors and mayors of several cities that have large (and growing)foreign populations, including the Tokyo, Osaka and Kyoto governments, wouldlike to give foreign residents the right to vote in local elections. The Fukuoka District Court sentenced 18 Chinese to one year in prison,suspended for three to four years, for illegally entering Japan from a Chinesefishing boat on August 22, 1996. The Japanese birth rate hit an all-time low in 1995, down to 1.4 births perwoman. If this low birth rate continues, Japan's population is projected tofall from 125 million in 1996 to 55 million in the year 2100. Some Japanese worry that a declining population could lead to costlyeconomic adjustments or a loss of world power and prestige. Some localgovernments offer financial rewards to mothers with four or more children and afew are helping to arrange for the immigration of Filipino wives. "Filipina/Japanese child to get Japanese nationality," Japan EconomicNewswire, November 18, 1996. "18 Chinese sentenced for illegal immigration,"Mainichi Daily News, November 15, 1996. "Letting Local Government Push ItsLimits--Rights of Foreign Residents," Japan Economic Institute of AmericaReport, November 15, 1996. _______________________________ China-HongKongBorder In mid-November, some 2,000 police and border troops in China's Guangdongprovince launched their second drill to prevent a sudden storming of the borderby Chinese citizens when the British colony reverts to Beijing's control inJuly 1997. Chinese authorities say they constantly battle rumors in Guangdong provinceabout a July 1997 amnesty for illegal immigrants in Hong Kong. Guangdongauthorities have informed the Hong Kong police that criminal gangs on bothsides of the border tempt mainlanders with rumors of an amnesty to encouragethem to use their services to sneak into Hong Kong. Newspaper reports in 1996 have said many mainland Chinese think that afterJuly 1997, they will be able to enter Hong Kong at will. However, China plansto keep Hong Kong as a distinct entity and to restrict immigrationtightly. Hong Kong's governor has been trying to get pledges from the European Unionnations that they will allow Hong Kong passport holders visa-free entry afterJuly 1, 1997. The Benelux nations, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Sweden and theUnited Kingdom currently allow visa-free access for holders of British nationaloverseas passports and Hong Kong Governor Patten would like these countries toextend this right to the future holders of Special Administrative Regionpassports, which Britain has agreed to do. China is expected to issue SAR passports to just under half of Hong Kong's6.2 million residents. Many EU nations are resisting visa-free entry for SAR passport holders forfear that they would be opening themselves to Chinese immigrants. British citizens going to Hong Kong for employment, residency or educationwill need to apply for a six-month visas before the July 1, 1997 transfer ofHong Kong sovereignty to China. The new visa will permit entry, but not workor study. This change will bring the immigration status of British citizensinto line with that of other foreign nationals in Hong Kong. Previously,Britons were allowed a 12-month unconditional stay in Hong Kong that permittedwork, study or vacation. Hong Kong's immigration chief since May 1989, Laurence Leung, resignedsuddenly in July 1996 and there are rumors that he told Beijing which Hong Kongresidents had accepted the 50,000 British passports offered to restoreconfidence after the Tiananmen Square Massacre. Other reports say that Leungwas involved in the unauthorized provision of so-called "one-way permits" tomainland Chinese moving to Hong Kong. Leung's wife, Kitty, and two daughtersemigrated to Canada in 1989. There were reports in the press that Hong Kong's Secretary for Industryadmitted that political pressure compelled the government to adopt a laborimportation policy under which the quota of 5,000 imported workers waseliminated. Since 1985, China's economy has grown by an average of 10.3 percent eachyear. An American entrepreneur has an unusual scheme to attract Chineseinvestment in Fujian-- any Chinese mainlander who invests in and works for theFujian-based joint venture company can immigrate to the US. Investors in thecompany, which makes video cassette storage boxes, will receive stock in thefirm and a transfer to the US after they work for the company in Fujian for oneyear. As US employees, they will receive health insurance, 24 paid holidays ayear and education and legal assistance. After 15 months in the US, thecompany will sponsor their applications for green cards. Magdalen Chow, "Pay fraud denied by agent," South China Morning Post,November 22, 1996. "Britons to lose HK privileges," Financial Times, November19, 1996. Stephen Vines, "Britons find HK job market is drying up," TheIndependent," November 19, 1996. "Britons set to lose visa-free entry to HongKong," Reuters, November 18, 1996. Dusty Clayton, "US venture promises a joband new life," South China Morning Post, November 14, 1996. Yojana Sharma,"Border Security Braces for Mainlaind Stampede," Inter Press Service, November13, 1996. "Chinese troops drill to block 1997 border stampede," Reuters,November 13, 1996. Glenn Scholoss, John Flint and David Wallen, "Queenconcerned for minorities," South China Morning Post, November 11, 1996."France mute on HK visa rights: Patten," Agence France Presse, November 11,1996. "Chinese troops drill to block 1997 border stampede," Reuters WorldService, November 13, 1996. Linda Choy, "Political heat 'forced dip in labourquota,' South China Morning Post, November 5, 1996. _______________________________ APECMeets in Manila The 18-nation Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation forum (APEC) met in Manilaon November 20-25, 1996 to discuss ways to achieve free trade between thedeveloped economy members by 2010 and for all APEC nations by 2020. Two APECmembers, China and Taiwan, are not members of the World TradeOrganization. APEC members also endorsed free trade in computers and informationtechnology by 2000. APEC includes Australia, Brunei, Canada, Chile, China,Hong Kong, Indonesia, Japan, South Korea, Malaysia, Mexico, New Zealand, PapuaNew Guinea, the Philippines, Singapore, Taiwan, Thailand and the UnitedStates. The Philippines is booming; its 70 million people have a GDP of almost $80billion. Economic growth will exceed seven percent in 1996 and per capitaincome has risen to more than $1,000 per person per year. However, the boom ismostly an urban phenomena; inequality between rural and urban areas hasincreased and two-thirds of Filipinos live in rural areas. Philippine President Fidel Ramos announced that the economic boom hasresulted in "fewer people going abroad now...And we have people coming back."However, Ramos reiterated his call for a global conference on migration anddevelopment. Keith B. Richburg, "Philippine Economy Reviving," Washington Post, November22 1996. _______________________________ ForeignWorkers inSingapore There are now 350,000 foreign workers employed in Singapore, nearly 12percent of the population. Most of the foreign workers in Singapore are fromMalaysia, Thailand, the Philippines, Bangladesh, Sri Lanka and India. Some believe that Singapore's reliance on foreign workers is hurtingproductivity and slowing growth, especially in construction. Constructionproductivity has been falling for the last four years, a period that coincidedwith the import of more foreign construction workers. Cheap labor does not necessarily mean low costs. According to a 1989Construction Industry Development Board comparison study: in Dallas, Texas,materials cost 80 per cent more and wages are six times higher than inSingapore, but unit construction costs are only two to 15 per centhigher. The Singapore government will increase the maximum stay of skilled foreignworkers from eight to ten years to minimize employers' training costs. Aboutseven percent of the foreign construction workers are skilled. Constructionemployers must pay a S$440 per month levy to the government companies for eachforeign worker they employ. Malaysian workers can continue to renew their work permits every two years. Some contractors worry that once workers are trained they will continue tojob-hop or move to countries with higher pay such as Taiwan. A Singapore court has ruled that building contractors who hire foreignworkers must check their documents instead of relying upon sub-contractors toinspect workers' documents. The ruling was made in September in the case of acontractor who was sentenced to 16 months jail for employing and harboring twoillegal workers. Employers of foreign maids in Singapore were warned by the government onNovember 21, that they faced fines if they deploy their workers to otherduties. The Ministry of Labor reported that it found 59 cases in 1996 ofemployers who had their domestics work for relatives or friends, often asnon-domestic workers in retail, food shops or factories. Singapore's work permits are valid only for the trade, occupation andemployer specified on the card. Employers violating the law could face a fineof up $3,500 US and/or a jail term of up to one year. "Singapore employers of foreign maids get a warning," Agence France Presse,November 21, 1996. Tan Ooi Boon, "Contractors must check foreign workers'papers," Straits Times, November 9, 1996. Audrey Tan, "Maximum job period forforeign workers extended," Business Times, November 6, 1996. Yeow Pei Lin,"Skilled workers can be kept for 10 years now," Straits Times (Singapore),November 6, 1996. "Singapore minister warns of dangerous dependence on foreignlabor," Agence France Presse, November 4, 1996./a> _______________________________ SouthKorea Contendswith ForeignWorkers The South Korean government plans to import 1,500 skilled foreign workersfrom Thailand, Indonesia and the Philippines in 1997 for the construction ofInchon International Airport in northern South Korea. This will be the firsttime that skilled foreign workers have been admitted to South Korea by either aprivate or public agency. South Korea plans to bring in 3,000 more skilled foreign laborers in 1998and about 2,000 in 1999 to work on the airport. South Korean businesses are struggling to find workers for the 3-D (dirty,difficult and dangerous) jobs. Up to 50 percent of an employer's workers canbe industrial trainees. However, many of the trainees escape from theiremployers because they can earn more than trainee wages as illegalworkers. There are an estimated 170,000 foreign workers in Korea, including 70,000to 110,000 illegal foreign laborers. Korea plans a third crackdown on illegal foreign workers, after twoprevious crackdowns resulted in the removal of 8,500 illegal aliens over thepast 12 months. The crackdown will focus on restaurants and places ofentertainment, not factories, reflecting, an official said, recognition oflabor shortages in manufacturing. The national fishing cooperative says there are 53,000 coastal fishing jobsand only 42,000 Korean fisherman. The Korea Federation of Textile Industriescannot fill nearly 15 percent of its jobs, up from 12 percent in 1995. About20 percent of heavy manufacturing jobs are vacant at small- and medium-sizebusinesses. Some sectors, such as plastics and electrical machinery, are short30 percent of their desired work force. Foreign workers in South Korea complain that the biggest problems for themare poor living and working conditions, substandard wages and employer abuse.Koreans managers are notorious for mistreating workers, both at home and inKorean-owned factories abroad. In August, 1996, a Korean manager of a Korean-owned shoe factory inVietnam's Ho Chi Minh City received a suspended prison sentence for lining upand beating employees with an unfinished shoe. Corporal punishment wasaccepted in Korean work places until the 1970s. The Korean government has announced plans to improve local trainingprograms for foreigners, cracking down on immigrants who commit crimes andestablishing a new system to track and supervise foreigners throughout theirstay in Korea. South Korea promised to change its labor laws when it joined the OECD in1996 and became a full member of the ILO in 1991. A 1963 law limits each workplace to one union, one union per industry and one national unionconfederation, the Korean Trade Unions (FKTU), thereby making the activities ofthe rival Korean Congress of Trade Unions unlawful. A 1980 law bars non-employee organizers from assisting a plant union and athird law prevents teachers and civil servants from joining unions. Hundredsof union activists are in jail for violating these laws. Korean employers complain that rigid labor laws limit their flexibility.Workers can be dismissed only "for cause" and discharged workers are entitledto 30 days severance pay per year of service. South Korea is a country of 44 million, with a per capita GDP of about$11,000 in 1996. Seoul, which is only 30 miles from North Korea, is home toone-fourth of all South Koreans. Pauline Jelinek, "Influx of foreign labor leads to harsh lessons for SouthKorean Bosses," Los Angeles Times, November 10, 1996. "South Korea to importskilled foreign workers," Xinhua News Agency, November 5, 1996. "Crackdown onillegal foreign workers looming," Agence France Presse, October 28, 1996. _______________________________ TaiwanStruggles to Control ForeignWorkers The Council of Labor Affairs on November 14, 1996 announced that it wasreducing the maximum percentage of foreign workers in a company or factory from32 to 35 percent to 30 percent. There were about 239,000 foreign workers inTaiwan in August 1996--most from Thailand, the Philippines, Malaysia andIndonesia --and 300,000 unemployed Taiwanese. According to the Taiwan Labor Front, there may be a total of 450,000foreign workers in Taiwan, including illegal workers. Taiwan first admitted foreign workers in 1991 for 3-D jobs--dirty,dangerous, and difficult--but expanded permission to employ foreign workers in73 industrial and business categories, as well as six major manufacturingprojects on a case-by-case basis. The Department of Health reported on November 15, 1996 that 24,966 foreignworkers, 10 percent of those who legally entered Taiwan, had abandoned theirjobs. About 15,200 have been caught, which leaves almost 10,000 who have fledtheir jobs Sofia Wu, "Nearly 25,000 legal foreign workers have fled their jobs inTaiwan," Central News Agency, November 15, 1996. "Taiwan to further reducenumber of foreign workers," Agence France Presse, November 14, 1996. _______________________________ OTHER _______________________________ ChildLabor andSlavery On November 11, 1996, the International Labor Organization released areport, "Child Labor: Targeting the Intolerable," that estimated that 250million children ages five to 14 work in developing countries, double previousestimates. About 130 million of these children work part time and 120 millionwork full time. About 60 percent of the child laborers are in Asia. In 1995, an estimated 42 percent of the children in Kenya worked full orpart time; followed by Bangladesh, 30 percent; Haiti, 25 percent; Turkey, 24percent; and Pakistan, 17 percent. The ILO report urged stepped up enforcement and stiffer penalties for threetypes of child labor: child prostitution, slavery and the use of children inhazardous manufacturing On November 1, 1996, Bangladesh agreed to stop using children under 14 inits 2,000-firm garment industry. The firms exported $2.5 billion worth ofclothing in 1995-96, 60 percent to the US. Under the agreement, the 10,500girls now employed in the garment industry will be sent to school and eachchild will receive a stipend of 300 take (US$8) per month. Businesses caughtusing child labor could lose their export licenses. Children under 15 are employed in an estimated 300 types of jobs inBangladesh. The UN on August 10 released a report on slavery throughout the world. Thereport found that more than 55 million Indian children are held in servitudedespite a 20-year old ban on slave labor. In Pakistan, the UN found nearly 800 cases of employers convicted forexploiting child labor. The Kamiya system in Nepal keeps entire families inslavery through buying and selling workers. The UN investigators also foundthat Burmese local authorities are using more and more forced labor in ruralareas, infrastructure projects and oil and gas prospecting. Most offenses involving foreign workers found employers confiscating anemployee's passport, so that abused immigrants usually did not have residenceor work permits and were dependent upon the employer. The ILO has proposed a convention to protect foreign seafarers. The ILOrecommends a minimum monthly wage for seafarers of $435 per month for a 72-hourwork week beginning in January 1998. Kasra Naji, "Bangladesh bans child labor in garment industry," FinancialTimes, November 2, 1996. "UN condemns modern slavery," Agence France Presse,August 13, 1996. _______________________________ PopulationGrowth,Urbanization/a>andTourism The world's population, expected to top 5.8 billion in December 1996, isgrowing at about 79 million per year (216,000 per day), reflecting 133 millionbirths per year (364,000 per day) and 53 million deaths per year (145,000 perday). The world's population is projected to reach 6.2 billion in the year2000 and seven billion in 2010. In November, the UN announced that the world's population growth hadunexpectedly slowed to 1.48 percent per year, down from an expected 1.57percent per year. Fertility worldwide is now about three children per woman.If these trends continue, the world's population might be 9.4 rather than 10billion in 2050. By 2025, some five billion people, two-thirds of the world's expectedpopulation of eight billion to nine billion, are expected to be living incities. Many fast-growing cities are in developing countries and areincreasingly populated by young, unemployed men, creating a climate for risingcrime, political violence and the spread of diseases. The New York metropolitan area was the world's largest city in 1950 andthird-largest in 1995. According to UN projections, New York City will drop to11th place by 2015, behind Tokyo; Bombay, 27 million; Lagos, 24 million;Shanghai, 24 million; Jakarta, 21 million; Sao Paulo and Karachi. Beijing,Dhaka, and Mexico City will have 19 million residents each. At a UN meeting in November, both Thailand and Zambia said that illegalimmigration was a major threat to their countries. The World Tourism Organization reported that France attracted 61 millionforeign visitors, almost 10 percent of the world's total of 567 million,followed by Spain and the US, with 45 million each. The top 10countries--including Italy, China, UK, Hungary, Mexico, Poland, andAustria--attracted 54 percent of all foreign tourists. According to the World Travel and Tourism Council, worldwide spending ontravel and tourism is projected to be $3.6 trillion in 1996, up from $3.1trillion in 1992 and $1.9 trillion in 1987. Travel and tourism employed anestimated 255 million workers in 1995, up from 130 million workers worldwide in1992 and 100 million in 1987. Barbara Crossette, "U.N. Survey Shows Population Growth Slowing," New YorkTimes, November 17, 1996. Kaplan, Robert D. 1996. The Ends of the Earth.New York: Random House. _______________________________ India/Bangladesh Bangladesh formally asked Taiwan if it would receive Bangladeshi workers,but Taiwan responded on October 11, 1996 that it does not plan to importBangladeshis now or in the future. About two million Bangladeshis work abroad, including nearly 40 percent inSaudi Arabia. They remitted $1.2 billion in 1995, accounting for 41 percent ofBangladeshi's foreign exchange. Bangladesh began to export workers in1987. An estimated 25,000 Bangladeshis were returned home from the United ArabEmirates in September, 1996 and another 8,000 were expected return after theUAE's extended amnesty for illegal migrant workers expired on October 31, 1996.Another 100,000 may be expelled from Malaysia. The Bangladeshi government has offered to export workers to Malaysia, SouthKorea, Mauritius, Brunei, Taiwan, Singapore, Japan and South Africa. TheBangladeshi work force is estimated at 25 million. Bangladeshis also migrate north to Assam, India. One of the largest daylabor markets is the Indian state of Assam, in Gauhati's Laktakia quarter,where hundreds of Bangadeshis congregate at rail and bus stations for jobs.According to local officials, the Bangladeshis go to work on farms or inconstruction, build a shelter for themselves and then send for theirfamilies. If a Bangladeshi worker can get the Indian employer to provide him with awork permit, he can use the permit to get a ration card, which signifies thatthe bearer is an Indian. In 1993, the Indian Election Commission struck threemillion names of alleged Bangladeshis from the voting rolls in Assam becausethey got ration cards in this manner, but a court overturned the action. About 35 percent of Assam's residents are believed to be foreigners. Mostof the "native Assamese" immigrated from Burma in the 1300s and were laterHinduized by immigrant Brahmans from Bihar and Orissa. The indigenousinhabitants of the Brahmaputra Valley are the Bodo tribes, who are opposed toboth the Bengali immigrants and the Assamese. It is not clear what the Indian government intends to do about illegalBangladeshis. In 1985, the Assam Accord pledged to remove all Bangladeshis whohad immigrated illegally after 1971. On January 28, 1983, not far fromGauhati, thousands of "illegal Bangladeshis" were killed. Plans for a 600-mile border fence have not yet been implemented. Theborder police estimate that about one thousand Bangladeshis cross the borderinto India each day. A new book by Ashok Swain, The Environmental Trap: The Ganges RiverDiversion, Bangladeshi Migration and Conflicts in India (1996), argues thatIndian water and environmental policies may be a factor that encouragesBangladeshi migration to Assam. Since 1975, India has diverted water from theRiver Ganges at the Farakka Barrage before the water reached the south-westernpart of Bangladesh, encouraging some people there to migrate because they didnot have enough water to irrigate their crops. There are some 15 million ethnic Indians scattered around the world, morethan a million in each of Burma, South Africa and the US and 700,000 inCanada. Government officials from the state of Kerala, in southern India, reportthat the clampdown on foreign workers in the United Arab Emirates, will hitthem hard. Nearly half of the 50,000 to 60,000 Indians in the UAE areMalayalees, native from Kerala, and 90 percent are unskilled or semi-skilledworkers. In the run-up to Indian elections, sketches of life in rural Indiaemphasized that moneylenders and local power brokers still maintain an irongrip on the countryside, where most Indians live. "Many illegal residents defied UAE amnesty," Reuters, November 6, 1996."Taiwan does not plan to import Bangladeshi workers," Deutsche Presse-Agentur,October 11, 1996. Shakeel Anwar, "Bangladesh looking for new overseas jobmarkets," Reuters, October 9, 1996. Hari Kartha, "UAE Labour Clampdown to HitSouth India Worst," Reuter Asia-Pacific Business Report," September 21, 1996.Nadim Kawah, "UAE sees sharp drop in foreigners as more Asians leave,"September 20, 1996. Caroline Drees, "Foreign workers in UAE flock out ahead ofnew law," Reuters, September 19, 1996. "Bangladeshi Illegals Seek a New Lifein India," Swiss Review of World Affairs, August 2, 1996. "Nepal, Bhutan failto resolve differences on refugees," Japan Economic Newswire, April 5, 1996.Rahul Jacob, "Passage from India: 15 million expatriates have made their markaround the globe," Time, March 25, 1996. Swain, Ashok. 1996. TheEnvironmental Trap: The Ganges River Diversion, Bangladeshi Migration andConflicts in India. Uppsala: Sweden. Department of Peace and ConflictStudies Report 41. Fax 4618-69-5102 or ashok.swain@pcr.uu.se _______________________________ ForeignWorkers in the Middle East About 40 percent of the population of the six Gulf nations are foreignersand their per capita incomes, including foreign residents, have fallen sharply.In Saudi Arabia, for example, per capita income has fallen from $19,000 in 1980to about $7,000 in 1995, below the World Bank's line for rich countries($7620). Jordan. The Jordanian government is considering deporting 300,000guest workers to reduce unemployment. Unemployment estimates range from 15percent to 25 percent of the 900,000 work force. There are currently about400,000 foreign workers in Jordan, three-fourths of whom are Egyptians. Under one proposal, medicine, engineering and administrative andsecretarial positions would be closed to foreigners. Analysts say that most competition for employment between foreign workersand Jordanians is in low-paying jobs. A proposed minimum wage for Jordanianworkers might, analysts say, make employers favor foreign workers forlow-paying jobs. UAE. Water and power demand in the United Arab Emirates fell 10 to15 percent since nearly 200,000 illegal foreign workers left the country,according to government sources. Water and electricity are heavily subsidizedin the UAE, which has 2.4 million residents. About two-thirds of thepopulation, and 90 percent of the work force, are foreigners. Estimates of the number of illegal immigrants leaving the UAE range from167,000 to 200,000. Reports from the UAE say that taxis are difficult to findand hiring a maid is almost impossible. Work at several construction sites hasstopped. Most of the workers who left were construction workers and serviceworkers in restaurants, shops and some factories. One bank official predicted that there may be a slight decline in realgrowth through the rest of the year because of the departure of the foreignworkers. One effect of the exodus has been to have illegal part-time workerstake on full-time jobs. Employers must pay taxes on full-time employees andprovide housing. Saudi Arabia. Saudi Arabia continues its effort to intervene inboth the demand and supply side of the labor market, denying employerspermission to import e.g. secretaries, and offering young Saudis courses in howto be better workers. There are about three million Saudi workers and fivemillion foreign workers in the country. The Saudi 1995-2000 plan calls for the creation of 650,000 jobs for Saudis,with 300,000 created by having Saudis replacing foreigners. Saudi Arabia's per capita income fell from about $18,000 per year in theearly 1980s to $6,000 in 1995. Kuwait. The 1.2 million foreign workers and their families inKuwait are about 63 percent Kuwait's 1.9 million residents. Since 1991, 440foreigners were found to be HIV positive and immediately deported. Israel. Israel in November set up a camp near Tel Aviv to hold someof the 200,000 illegal aliens in the country that it apprehends. The camp, aformer prison annex, can accommodate 90 immigrants. Israel plans to deport2,000 illegal immigrants each month, up from 1996 level of 150 permonth. Most of the foreign workers are from Romania, Thailand, the Philippines andAfrican countries. Many overstay their visas rather than return to a life ofpoverty in their native lands. At one Tel Aviv school, half the pupils arechildren of foreign workers illegally living in the country. The 250,000 foreign workers in Israel enter into some 3,000 fictitiousmarriages each year, the Interior Ministry estimates. Israeli women typicallyreceive NIS 2000 to marry a foreigner. Israel will ask Thailand for 4,000 additional workers to pick fruit forexport to Japan. In Palestine, the labor force is about 433,000 with unemployment estimatedto be over 50 percent. About 18,000 Palestinians work in Israel, down from116,000 in 1992. Douglas Jehl, "A Tutorial for Young Saudis On Ways to Toil for Money," NewYork Times, November 21, 1996. "Israel is preparing to deport 2,000 illegalaliens monthly," Associated Press, November 7, 1996. "UAE Utility DemandSlides as Illegal Workers Leave," Reuters, November 3, 1996. Patrick Rahir,"Emirates could pay high price for exodus of foreign workers," Agence FrancePresse, November 2, 1996. "Israel to open detention camp for illegalimmigrants," Agence France Presse, November 6, 1996. "Israel wants more foreignworkers," UPI, October 4, 1996. "Jordan to deport foreign laborers," XinhuaNews Agency, October 14, 1996. "Jordan: Unemployment moves," Middle EastEconomic Digest October 7, 1996. _______________________________ RESOURCES _______________________________ TheAtlantic: Can the US afford immigration? The November 1996 Atlantic includes two immigration articles. HistorianDavid M. Kennedy asks "Can We Still Afford to Be a Nation of Immigrants?" andeconomist George Borjas discusses "The New Economics of Immigration." Kennedy begins by noting that two extremes have framed US views ofimmigrants. On the one hand, immigrants have been often praised for being thebest of their societies, the risk-takers attracted to the US by opportunity andfreedom. The other extreme, common at the beginning of the 20th century, isthat immigrants are inferior to US-born residents--supply-push factors such asoverpopulation and joblessness push them toward the US. Both views seeimmigrants as individuals choosing where to live. Two supply-push factors in Europe, says Kennedy, were responsible for massUS immigration in the 19th century--population growth--Europe's populationdoubled from 200 million to 400 million in the 1800s, even after 70 millionpeople emigrated--and the agricultural and industrial revolutions thatdisplaced rural and urban peoples. Kennedy then turns to three factors that he thinks helped to integrateimmigrants in the US; their relatively low numbers, rapid economic growth, andthe varied composition and broad dispersal of the immigrants throughout the US.The 15 percent foreign-born persons enumerated in the 1910 Census were lessthan the 18 percent foreign-born in Australia, or the 20 percent foreign-bornin Canada, or the even higher percentage of foreign born in Argentina at theturn of the century. According to Kennedy, the diversity of immigrants meantthat no group could forever maintain its cultural identity and none could gainpolitical power over more than a city. Kennedy argues that the same two supply-push factors--population growth andeconomic change--are pushing migrants from Mexico and other countries to the USat the end of the 20th century. Kennedy asserts that the US can absorb thenumber of immigrants arriving. However, Kennedy says that unskilled immigrantsdo not have the same economic payoff for US natives that they did a centuryago. Kennedy then turns to Mexico, the source of about one-fourth of USimmigrants over the past 15 years. He notes that the Hispanicization of theAmerican Southwest is sometimes called the Reconquista and goes on to speculatethat the prospect of continuing migration from a neighboring country isunprecedented and that it is far from clear whether geographic proximity willserve to speed integration or isolation. George Borjas says that immigration policies can be compared by how theyresolve two fundamental questions: how many immigrants the country should admitand what kinds of people they should be. According to Borjas, there is now aconsensus that: 1. The relative education or skills of successive immigrant waves havedeclined over much of the postwar period, i.e., the gap between the averageyears of schooling of native-born adults and recent immigrants has widened fromabout 0.4 years to 1.3 years. 2. Many recent immigrants will never earn as much as similar US-bornresidents and, as they crowd into the low wage labor market, immigration mayaccount for as much as one-third of the drop in the wages of unskilled USworkers. The net economic benefits to the US from immigration are about $7billion per year, according to Borjas, about what the US spends on the InteriorDepartment, or $30 per person per year. 3. Households headed by recent immigrants are more likely to receive sometype of welfare assistance than households headed by US-born persons.Unskilled immigrants are likely to have children who also have below averagelevels of schooling. Borjas goes on to divide the world's people into three groups--natives,immigrants and the persons left behind, and asks how immigration affects thesize of the economy after immigrants enter and the distribution of income.Immigration slows wage increases, but increase the size of the economy; a 10percent increase in the labor force is associated with a three percent drop inwages. Borjas agrees with Briggs and many other economists that the number ofimmigrants admitted annually should be linked to conditions in the USeconomy. Furthermore, Borjas suggests several immigration policy goals and ways toachieve them. If the goal of immigration policy is to increase the per capitaincome of the native population, then immigration policy should encourage theentry of skilled workers. Both articles are available athttp://www.theatlantic.com/atlantic/election/connection/immigrat/immigrat.htm Maolain, Ciaran. 1996. European Directory of Migrant and Ethnic MinorityOrganizations. Utrecht: ERCOMER. ercomer@fsw.ruu.nl orhttp://www.ruu.nl/recomer/ This directory includes a listing of over 9,000 community organizations,support organizations, anti-racism groups, private and government agencies andresearch centers arranged by country. Geyer, Georgie Ann. 1996. Americans No More: The Death ofCitizenship. Boston. Atlantic Monthly Press This book argues that Americans are gradually losing their sense ofcitizenship. According to Geyer, it is too easy for foreigners to becomenaturalized US citizens. Klusmeyer, Douglas B. 1996. Between Consent and Descent: Conceptions ofDemocratic Citizenship. Washington. Carnegie Endowment for InternationalPeace. Contact yasmin@ceip.org. This monograph traces citizenship from ancient Greece and Rome, through theRenaissance and the Enlightenment and the American and FrenchRevolutions. National Research Council. 1996. Statistics on U.S. Immigration: AnAssessment of Data Needs for Future Research. Committee on National Statisticsand Committee on Population. Available from National Academy Press, 2101Constitution Ave. N.W., Box 285, Washington, DC 20418. This report calls for the inclusion of questions on nativity and parentalnativity in the Census, and that more socio-economic data be added to thePublic Use Microdata Sample (PUMS) files so that researchers can more easilystudy immigrant integration. WT02-B15-9IA090-000969-B028-96http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/hspn-census/cityhsp1.htm 128.120.36.171 19970122205350 text/html 29332HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 20:54:46 GMTLast-Modified: Tuesday, 21-Jan-97 21:07:07 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 29075 California cities sorted by percentage Hispanic: 1990 California 23,667,902 4,544,331 19% 29,760,021 7,687,938 26% City Total Population 1980 Hispanic: Total 1980 1980 % Hispanic Total Population 1990 Hispanic: Total 1990 1990 % Hispanic Parlier city 2902 2641 91% 7938 7707 97% Huron city 2768 2528 91% 4766 4597 96% Calexico city 14412 13566 94% 18633 17806 96% Coachella city 9129 8148 89% 16896 16107 95% Mendota city 5038 4266 85% 6821 6405 94% Maywood city 21810 17546 80% 27850 25931 93% Huntington Park city 46223 37328 81% 56065 51496 92% Commerce city 10509 8937 85% 12135 11006 91% Soledad city 5928 4906 83% 7146 6394 89% Cudahy city 17984 12508 70% 22817 20288 89% Bell Gardens city 34117 21932 64% 42355 37075 88% Bell city 25450 16028 63% 34365 29583 86% Orange Cove city 4026 2905 72% 5604 4820 86% Irwindale city 1030 897 87% 1050 899 86% South El Monte city 16623 12927 78% 20850 17633 85% Pico Rivera city 53459 40705 76% 59177 49237 83% South Gate city 66784 38969 58% 86284 71727 83% Guadalupe city 3629 2711 75% 5479 4546 83% McFarland city 5151 3904 76% 7005 5809 83% San Fernando city 17731 12219 69% 22580 18683 83% Gonzales city 2891 1968 68% 4660 3828 82% Firebaugh city 3740 2607 70% 4429 3573 81% Vernon city 90 41 46% 152 119 78% Greenfield city 4181 2781 67% 7464 5763 77% San Joaquin city 1930 1161 60% 2311 1743 75% Arvin city 6863 3973 58% 9286 6960 75% La Puente city 30882 19291 62% 36955 27663 75% Woodlake city 4343 2811 65% 5678 4238 75% Calipatria city 2636 1762 67% 2690 1995 74% Livingston city 5326 3253 61% 7317 5354 73% Sanger city 12542 8251 66% 16839 12269 73% El Monte city 79494 48782 61% 106209 76991 72% Westmorland city 1590 1051 66% 1380 997 72% Baldwin Park city 50554 29363 58% 69330 49051 71% Lynwood city 48548 20990 43% 61945 43565 70% Brawley city 14946 8688 58% 18923 13076 69% Indio city 21611 12152 56% 36793 25068 68% Montebello city 52929 31387 59% 59564 40263 68% Santa Fe Springs city 14520 8745 60% 15520 10456 67% King City city 5495 2673 49% 7634 5091 67% Hawaiian Gardens city 10548 5516 52% 13639 9078 67% El Centro city 23996 11983 50% 31384 20482 65% Santa Ana city 203713 90646 44% 293742 191383 65% Lindsay city 6924 3228 47% 8338 5410 65% Wasco city 9613 4619 48% 12412 7858 63% Holtville city 4399 2092 48% 4820 3011 62% Delano city 16491 9464 57% 22762 14214 62% Selma city 10942 5413 49% 14757 9043 61% Watsonville city 23543 11509 49% 31099 18927 61% Paramount city 36407 16808 46% 47669 28998 61% Dinuba city 9907 4818 49% 12743 7693 60% Fillmore city 9602 4602 48% 11992 7111 59% Santa Paula city 20552 10376 50% 25062 14753 59% Fowler city 2496 1206 48% 3208 1874 58% Farmersville city 5544 2310 42% 6235 3636 58% Reedley city 11071 4988 45% 15791 9196 58% Hollister city 11488 6305 55% 19212 10786 56% Oxnard city 108195 48034 44% 142216 77320 54% Madera city 21732 9033 42% 29281 15759 54% Avenal city 4137 1863 45% 9770 5224 53% Azusa city 29380 12437 42% 41333 22092 53% Imperial city 3451 1229 36% 4113 2176 53% Kerman city 4002 1494 37% 5448 2871 53% Corcoran city 6454 3334 52% 13364 6919 52% Pomona city 92742 28287 31% 131723 67533 51% Salinas city 80479 30655 38% 108777 55084 51% Industry city 664 220 33% 631 319 51% Colton city 21310 11925 56% 40213 20000 50% Shafter city 7010 2298 33% 8409 4179 50% Rosemead city 42604 24453 57% 51638 25641 50% National City city 48772 18708 38% 54249 26914 50% Patterson city 3908 2051 52% 8626 4156 48% Norwalk city 85286 34231 40% 94279 45118 48% Gilroy city 21641 9760 45% 31487 14885 47% Blythe city 6805 2711 40% 8428 3909 46% Santa Maria city 39685 13281 33% 61284 28014 46% San Juan Bautista city 1276 587 46% 1570 714 45% Compton city 81286 17137 21% 90454 39510 44% Newman city 2785 855 31% 4151 1784 43% Riverbank city 5695 2010 35% 8547 3619 42% Williams city 1655 312 19% 2297 970 42% Ontario city 88820 24072 27% 133179 55542 42% Dos Palos city 3123 779 25% 4196 1706 41% Winters city 2652 976 37% 4639 1868 40% Avalon city 2022 484 24% 2918 1170 40% Artesia city 14301 4961 35% 15464 6194 40% Los Angeles city 2966850 816076 28% 3485398 1391411 40% Whittier city 69717 16279 23% 77671 30278 39% Inglewood city 94245 18060 19% 109602 42249 39% Montclair city 22628 4541 20% 28434 10849 38% Lathrop city 3717 1176 32% 6841 2568 38% Chula Vista city 83927 19624 23% 135163 50376 37% Cathedral City city 4130 1116 27% 30085 11197 37% Live Oak city 3103 807 26% 4320 1606 37% Carpinteria city 10835 3330 31% 13747 5026 37% East Palo Alto city 18191 2568 14% 23451 8527 36% San Gabriel city 30072 11477 38% 37120 13471 36%WT02-B15-10IA090-000969-B028-119http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/hspn-census/cityhsp2.htm 128.120.36.171 19970122205417 text/html 29160HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 20:55:11 GMTLast-Modified: Tuesday, 21-Jan-97 21:07:07 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 28903 Cities 101-200 Chino city 40165 10733 27% 59682 21588 36% Fontana city 37111 6905 19% 87535 31597 36% Alhambra city 64615 24287 38% 82106 29626 36% Los Banos city 10341 2560 25% 14519 5218 36% Perris city 6827 2008 29% 21460 7704 36% Hughson city 2943 792 27% 3259 1161 36% Porterville city 19707 4865 25% 29563 10299 35% Duarte city 16766 5039 30% 20688 7160 35% West Covina city 80291 16854 21% 96086 33253 35% San Bernardino city 117490 29858 25% 164164 56755 35% Lawndale city 23460 6664 28% 27331 9359 34% Colma town 395 99 25% 1103 375 34% La Habra city 45232 10052 22% 51266 17395 34% Tulare city 22526 6290 28% 33249 11250 34% San Jacinto city 7098 2110 30% 16210 5455 34% Stanton city 23723 4857 20% 30491 10209 33% Downey city 82602 13910 17% 91444 29569 32% Colusa city 4075 798 20% 4934 1580 32% Brentwood city 4434 1753 40% 7563 2405 32% Coalinga city 6593 1073 16% 8212 2593 32% Rialto city 37474 7056 19% 72388 22787 31% Santa Barbara city 74414 16500 22% 85571 26920 31% Anaheim city 219311 37676 17% 266406 83755 31% Kingsburg city 5115 1219 24% 7205 2265 31% Monterey Park city 54338 21079 39% 60738 19031 31% Barstow city 17690 5278 30% 21472 6726 31% Hawthorne city 56447 11636 21% 71349 22219 31% Sand City city 182 30 16% 192 59 31% Corona city 37791 10416 28% 76095 23101 30% Fresno city 218202 51489 24% 354202 105787 30% Merced city 36499 10291 28% 56216 16786 30% Port Hueneme city 17803 4035 23% 20319 6063 30% Hanford city 20958 5046 24% 30897 9131 30% Tulelake city 783 131 17% 1010 294 29% Monrovia city 30531 5595 18% 35761 10177 28% Dixon city 7541 2001 27% 10401 2958 28% Imperial Beach city 22689 4831 21% 26512 7502 28% Carson city 81221 18926 23% 83995 23413 28% San Marcos city 17479 2233 13% 38974 10702 27% Pasadena city 118550 21772 18% 131591 35912 27% South San Francisco city 49393 10953 22% 54312 14731 27% Lompoc city 26267 4796 18% 37649 10100 27% San Pablo city 19750 3356 17% 25158 6737 27% San Jose city 629442 140529 22% 782248 208388 27% Gridley city 3982 683 17% 4631 1219 26% La Quinta city 3328 516 16% 11215 2944 26% Woodland city 30235 6850 23% 39802 10413 26% Exeter city 5606 914 16% 7276 1893 26% Lake Elsinore city 5982 1074 18% 18285 4757 26% Riverside city 170876 27604 16% 226505 58826 26% La Mirada city 40986 7714 19% 40452 10459 26% Covina city 33751 4285 13% 43207 11042 26% Visalia city 49729 9538 19% 75636 19005 25% Union City city 39406 11008 28% 53762 13484 25% Stockton city 149779 33050 22% 210943 52653 25% Lincoln city 4132 1208 29% 7248 1796 25% Vista city 35834 6163 17% 71872 17804 25% Placentia city 35041 7121 20% 41259 10174 25% Galt city 5514 1091 20% 8889 2187 25% Calistoga city 3879 698 18% 4468 1098 25% Buena Park city 64165 11386 18% 68784 16879 25% West Sacramento city 10875 1261 12% 28898 7060 24% Tracy city 18428 4889 27% 33558 8145 24% Waterford city 2683 311 12% 4771 1152 24% Redwood City city 54951 8617 16% 66072 15935 24% Beaumont city 6818 1344 20% 9685 2323 24% Hayward city 94167 19029 20% 111498 26671 24% Bellflower city 53441 7934 15% 61815 14776 24% Pittsburg city 33034 6204 19% 47564 11288 24% Long Beach city 361334 50700 14% 429433 101419 24% Point Arena city 425 17 4% 407 96 24% Walnut city 12478 2562 21% 29105 6836 23% Garden Grove city 123307 16589 13% 143050 33579 23% Morgan Hill city 17060 4112 24% 23928 5594 23% Escondido city 64355 9378 15% 108635 25380 23% Banning city 14020 2562 18% 20570 4776 23% Gardena city 45165 7736 17% 49847 11506 23% Victorville city 14220 2282 16% 40674 9353 23% Newark city 32126 6619 21% 37861 8672 23% Moreno Valley city 1175 196 17% 118779 27165 23% Orange city 91788 11372 12% 110658 25278 23% Highland city 10908 1401 13% 34439 7839 23% Ceres city 13281 1768 13% 26314 5960 23% Burbank city 84625 13761 16% 93643 21172 23% Oceanside city 76698 14118 18% 128398 28982 23% Daly City city 78519 15134 19% 92311 20634 22% Half Moon Bay city 7282 775 11% 8886 1978 22% Ione city 2207 231 10% 6516 1445 22% Moorpark city 4030 2152 53% 25494 5613 22% Palmdale city 12277 1147 9% 68842 15154 22% San Juan Capistrano city 18959 2049 11% 26183 5703 22% Signal Hill city 5734 693 12% 8371 1822 22% Isleton city 914 197 22% 833 181 22% Healdsburg city 7217 1034 14% 9469 2026 21% Fullerton city 102034 13801 14% 114144 24304 21% Orland city 4031 351 9% 5052 1073 21% Lemoore city 8832 1281 15% 13622 2886 21% Tehachapi city 4126 806 20% 5791 1226 21% Turlock city 26287 3726 14% 42198 8849 21% Glendale city 139060 24685 18% 180038 37731 21%WT02-B15-11IA090-000969-B028-138http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/hspn-census/cityhsp3.htm 128.120.36.171 19970122205431 text/html 29189HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 20:55:24 GMTLast-Modified: Tuesday, 21-Jan-97 21:07:07 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 28932 Cities 201-300 Tustin city 32317 2826 9% 50689 10508 21% St. Helena city 4898 793 16% 4990 1034 21% San Diego city 875538 130613 15% 1110549 229519 21% Bakersfield city 105611 15886 15% 174820 35854 21% Desert Hot Springs city 5941 514 9% 11668 2378 20% Costa Mesa city 82562 8475 10% 96357 19319 20% Rancho Cucamonga city 55250 9019 16% 101409 20298 20% Lemon Grove city 20780 2909 14% 23984 4764 20% Gustine city 3142 313 10% 3931 779 20% Culver City city 38139 6428 17% 38793 7667 20% Grover City city 8827 1454 16% 11656 2280 20% Norco city 21126 2593 12% 23302 4556 20% Lomita city 18807 2877 15% 19382 3756 19% Westminster city 71133 8542 12% 78118 14896 19% Hesperia city 13540 1011 7% 50418 9573 19% Redlands city 43619 7373 17% 60394 11450 19% Temple City city 28972 3740 13% 31100 5862 19% Palm Springs city 32271 2894 9% 40181 7504 19% San Bruno city 35417 5096 14% 38961 7252 19% Milpitas city 37820 6541 17% 50686 9434 19% South Lake Tahoe city 20681 1508 7% 21586 4003 19% Atwater city 17530 2179 12% 22282 4124 19% La Verne city 23508 3702 16% 30897 5675 18% Grand Terrace city 8498 1053 12% 10946 1991 18% El Paso de Robles (Paso Robles 9163 1063 12% 18583 3367 18% Yuba City city 18736 1773 9% 27437 4905 18% Manteca city 24925 3369 14% 40773 7241 18% San Buenaventura (Ventura) cit 74393 8970 12% 92575 16251 18% Upland city 47647 5741 12% 63374 11115 18% Seaside city 36567 3646 10% 38901 6787 17% San Dimas city 24014 3128 13% 32397 5612 17% Adelanto city 2164 195 9% 8517 1475 17% Needles city 4120 742 18% 5191 887 17% Oakdale city 8474 1097 13% 11961 2038 17% Diamond Bar city 28045 3937 14% 53672 9136 17% Lodi city 35221 3525 10% 51874 8766 17% Modesto city 106602 11180 10% 164730 26920 16% Clovis city 33021 4334 13% 50323 8206 16% Sacramento city 275741 39161 14% 369365 60007 16% Suisun City city 11087 1255 11% 22686 3645 16% Cloverdale city 3989 262 7% 4924 791 16% Mountain View city 58655 6713 11% 67460 10821 16% Solvang city 3091 166 5% 4741 757 16% Vacaville city 43367 5182 12% 71479 11366 16% Escalon city 3127 318 10% 4437 697 16% Antioch city 42683 5958 14% 62195 9719 16% San Mateo city 77561 7160 9% 85486 13235 15% Brea city 27913 3234 12% 32873 5078 15% Biggs city 1413 121 9% 1581 244 15% Bonadelle Ranchos-Madera Ranch 3272 344 11% 5705 870 15% Encinitas city 10796 1340 12% 55386 8446 15% Napa city 50879 4165 8% 61842 9425 15% Santa Clara city 87746 12865 15% 93613 14260 15% Lancaster city 48027 3435 7% 97291 14816 15% San Leandro city 63952 8323 13% 68223 10363 15% Glendora city 38654 3479 9% 47828 7250 15% Corning city 4745 308 6% 5870 882 15% Hemet city 22454 1624 7% 36094 5383 15% Solana Beach city 13047 1545 12% 12962 1907 15% Lakewood city 74654 8630 12% 73557 10763 15% Temecula city 1783 245 14% 27099 3939 15% Richmond city 74676 7713 10% 87425 12690 15% Mammoth Lakes town 3929 174 4% 4785 692 14% San Rafael city 44700 2135 5% 48404 6951 14% Bradbury city 846 69 8% 829 118 14% Chowchilla city 5122 254 5% 5930 840 14% Brisbane city 2969 364 12% 2952 415 14% Santa Monica city 88314 11485 13% 86905 12210 14% El Cajon city 73892 5862 8% 88693 12387 14% San Francisco city 678974 83373 12% 723959 100717 14% Oakland city 339337 32492 10% 372242 51711 14% Dana Point city 10602 979 9% 31896 4425 14% Carlsbad city 35490 4790 13% 63126 8700 14% Palm Desert city 11801 1094 9% 23252 3196 14% Fort Bragg city 5019 320 6% 6078 833 14% Loma Linda city 10694 937 9% 17400 2365 14% Santa Cruz city 41483 3623 9% 49040 6662 14% Pacifica city 36866 4825 13% 37670 5099 14% Ripon city 3509 224 6% 7455 1009 14% Cypress city 40391 4417 11% 42655 5765 14% South Pasadena city 22681 2330 10% 23936 3213 13% Fremont city 131945 18423 14% 173339 23091 13% Fairfield city 58099 5746 10% 77211 10208 13% Sunnyvale city 106618 12288 12% 117229 15444 13% Wheatland city 1474 178 12% 1631 211 13% San Clemente city 27325 2296 8% 41100 5285 13% Simi Valley city 77500 7219 9% 100217 12707 13% Apple Valley town 14305 802 6% 46079 5813 13% Cerritos city 53020 7532 14% 53240 6666 13% Willits city 4008 254 6% 5027 629 13% Los Alamitos city 11529 1398 12% 11676 1460 13% Ojai city 6816 546 8% 7613 928 12% La Palma city 15399 1822 12% 15392 1872 12% Camarillo city 37797 3803 10% 52303 6326 12% Ukiah city 12035 635 5% 14599 1709 12% Redondo Beach city 57102 6542 11% 60167 6917 11% Concord city 103255 7438 7% 111348 12765 11% Bishop city 3333 221 7% 3475 395 11% Huntington Beach city 170505 13427 8% 181519 20397 11% Fetters Hot Springs-Agua Calie 1675 100 6% 2024 226 11%WT02-B15-12IA090-000969-B028-156http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/hspn-census/cityhsp4.htm 128.120.36.171 19970122205454 text/html 29155HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 20:55:49 GMTLast-Modified: Tuesday, 21-Jan-97 21:07:07 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 28898 Cities 301-400 Fetters Hot Springs-Agua Calie 1675 100 6% 2024 226 11% Millbrae city 20058 1691 8% 20412 2279 11% Yucaipa city 23345 1323 6% 32824 3609 11% Marysville city 9898 875 9% 12324 1347 11% La Habra Heights city 4786 253 5% 6226 678 11% Folsom city 11003 652 6% 29802 3245 11% Willows city 4777 254 5% 5988 647 11% Roseville city 24347 3009 12% 44685 4825 11% Vallejo city 80303 6823 8% 109199 11777 11% Santee city 47080 3448 7% 52902 5685 11% Marina city 20647 2038 10% 26436 2837 11% Arcadia city 45994 3164 7% 48290 5146 11% Campbell city 27067 2255 8% 36048 3839 11% Maricopa city 946 70 7% 1193 125 10% Dublin city 13496 1174 9% 23229 2429 10% Hercules city 5963 642 11% 16829 1758 10% Weed city 2879 328 11% 3062 318 10% Dorris city 836 50 6% 892 92 10% Twentynine Palms city 7465 651 9% 11821 1219 10% California City city 2743 193 7% 5955 611 10% Claremont city 30950 2281 7% 32503 3334 10% Burlingame city 26173 1622 6% 26801 2731 10% Torrance city 129881 10839 8% 133107 13398 10% Yountville town 2893 208 7% 3259 326 10% Dunsmuir city 2253 187 8% 2129 212 10% Emeryville city 3714 357 10% 5740 567 10% Livermore city 48349 3843 8% 56741 5587 10% Pinole city 14253 1109 8% 17460 1715 10% La Mesa city 50308 3177 6% 52931 5176 10% Sierra Madre city 10837 746 7% 10762 1050 10% Menlo Park city 26369 1529 6% 28040 2710 10% Thousand Oaks city 77072 4469 6% 104352 10019 10% Santa Rosa city 83320 4697 6% 113313 10727 9% Portola city 1885 131 7% 2193 207 9% Yorba Linda city 28254 2319 8% 52422 4948 9% San Luis Obispo city 34252 2233 7% 41958 3951 9% Petaluma city 33834 2012 6% 43184 3985 9% Amador City city 136 3 2% 196 18 9% Alameda city 63852 5342 8% 76459 6950 9% El Segundo city 13752 1082 8% 15223 1382 9% Arroyo Grande city 11290 842 7% 14378 1298 9% Red Bluff city 9490 537 6% 12363 1106 9% Rohnert Park city 22965 1601 7% 36326 3247 9% West Hollywood city 35703 2006 6% 36118 3153 9% Chico city 26603 1476 6% 40079 3484 9% Cotati city 3475 220 6% 5714 487 9% Atascadero city 16232 1030 6% 23138 1972 9% Sonora city 3247 181 6% 4153 352 8% Martinez city 22582 1734 8% 31808 2676 8% Berkeley city 103328 5219 5% 102724 8589 8% Capitola city 9095 581 6% 10171 848 8% Coronado city 16859 782 5% 26540 2191 8% Fountain Valley city 55080 3738 7% 53691 4357 8% Albany city 15130 1320 9% 16327 1324 8% Sebastopol city 5595 298 5% 7004 560 8% Rio Vista city 3142 112 4% 3316 264 8% Loyalton city 1030 127 12% 931 74 8% Ridgecrest city 15929 741 5% 27725 2198 8% Monterey city 27558 1663 6% 31954 2495 8% Laguna Niguel city 12237 511 4% 44400 3451 8% Mission Viejo city 50666 2839 6% 72820 5615 8% Morro Bay city 9064 432 5% 9664 744 8% Crescent City city 3075 151 5% 4380 334 8% Susanville city 6520 446 7% 7279 547 8% Rio Dell city 2687 191 7% 3012 225 7% Davis city 36640 2051 6% 46209 3425 7% Benicia city 15376 998 6% 24437 1808 7% Hidden Hills city 1760 84 5% 1729 127 7% Taft city 5316 270 5% 5902 433 7% Belmont city 24505 1532 6% 24127 1755 7% Novato city 43916 2045 5% 47585 3460 7% Loomis town 1284 81 6% 5705 414 7% Rocklin city 7344 496 7% 19033 1333 7% Lakeport city 3675 149 4% 4390 306 7% Hermosa Beach city 18070 1122 6% 18219 1267 7% Poway city 32263 1686 5% 43516 3023 7% Rancho Mirage city 6281 288 5% 9778 674 7% Laguna Beach city 17901 768 4% 23170 1590 7% Pleasanton city 35160 2233 6% 50553 3383 7% Pleasant Hill city 25124 1400 6% 31585 2099 7% El Cerrito city 22731 1056 5% 22869 1518 7% Alturas city 3025 124 4% 3231 212 7% Placerville city 6739 259 4% 8355 548 7% Del Rey Oaks city 1557 87 6% 1661 108 7% San Carlos city 24710 1367 6% 26167 1691 6% Pismo Beach city 5364 317 6% 7669 495 6% Fort Jones city 544 15 3% 639 40 6% Irvine city 62134 3752 6% 110330 6902 6% Colfax city 981 79 8% 1306 81 6% Pacific Grove city 15755 875 6% 16117 967 6% San Ramon city 22356 1190 5% 35303 2064 6% Foster City city 23287 1472 6% 28176 1627 6% Clearlake city 4983 179 4% 11804 672 6% Oroville city 8683 343 4% 11960 679 6% Angels city 2302 96 4% 2409 135 6% Beverly Hills city 32367 1356 4% 31971 1725 5% Rancho Palos Verdes city 36577 1085 3% 41659 2215 5% Clayton city 4325 205 5% 7317 388 5% Villa Park city 7137 269 4% 6299 331 5% Fortuna city 7591 258 3% 8788 457 5% Sonoma city 6054 246 4% 8121 418 5%WT02-B15-13IA090-000969-B028-167http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/hspn-census/cityhsp5.htm 128.120.36.171 19970122205503 text/html 17015HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 20:55:59 GMTLast-Modified: Tuesday, 21-Jan-97 21:07:07 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 16758 City 401-454 Manhattan Beach city 31542 1365 4% 32063 1645 5% San Marino city 13307 626 5% 12959 655 5% Los Gatos town 26906 1157 4% 27357 1367 5% Palo Alto city 55225 2091 4% 55900 2792 5% Seal Beach city 25975 910 4% 25098 1253 5% Cupertino city 34015 1477 4% 40263 1986 5% Scotts Valley city 6891 264 4% 8615 421 5% Fairfax town 7391 289 4% 6931 337 5% Eureka city 24153 1003 4% 27025 1298 5% Arcata city 12340 556 5% 15197 721 5% Walnut Creek city 53643 1778 3% 60569 2869 5% Anderson city 7381 280 4% 8299 393 5% La Canada Flintridge city 20153 678 3% 19378 892 5% San Anselmo town 12053 520 4% 11743 530 5% Rolling Hills Estates city 7701 297 4% 7789 339 4% Sutter Creek city 1705 60 4% 1835 79 4% Auburn city 7540 298 4% 10592 454 4% Mount Shasta city 2837 121 4% 3460 148 4% Monte Sereno city 3434 132 4% 3287 139 4% Rolling Hills city 2049 92 4% 1871 79 4% Corte Madera town 8074 305 4% 8272 348 4% Atherton town 7797 260 3% 7163 295 4% Danville city 26446 832 3% 31306 1288 4% Hillsborough town 10451 354 3% 10667 436 4% Jackson city 2331 123 5% 3545 144 4% Newport Beach city 62556 1701 3% 66643 2648 4% Redding city 41995 1174 3% 66462 2632 4% Grass Valley city 6697 156 2% 9048 358 4% Larkspur city 11064 304 3% 11070 432 4% Woodside town 5291 184 3% 5035 192 4% Tehama city 365 10 3% 401 15 4% Del Mar city 5017 189 4% 4860 177 4% Moraga Town city 15014 455 3% 15852 553 3% Paradise town 22571 614 3% 25408 874 3% Yreka city 5916 185 3% 6948 238 3% Tiburon town 6685 219 3% 7532 256 3% Saratoga city 29261 805 3% 28061 940 3% Nevada City city 2431 35 1% 2855 94 3% Lafayette city 20879 554 3% 23501 761 3% Piedmont city 10498 312 3% 10602 341 3% Sausalito city 7338 176 2% 7152 225 3% Carmel-by-the-Sea city 4707 106 2% 4239 132 3% Montague city 1285 25 2% 1415 44 3% Plymouth city 699 37 5% 811 25 3% Los Altos city 25769 708 3% 26303 795 3% Portola Valley town 3939 109 3% 4194 124 3% Palos Verdes Estates city 14376 331 2% 13512 398 3% Mill Valley city 12967 383 3% 13038 365 3% Los Altos Hills town 7421 188 3% 7514 202 3% Blue Lake city 1201 13 1% 1235 30 2% Orinda city 16825 323 2% 16642 403 2% Ferndale city 1367 32 2% 1331 32 2% Ross town 2801 89 3% 2123 45 2% Indian Wells city 1394 30 2% 2647 54 2% Belvedere city 2401 35 1% 2147 40 2% Etna city 754 14 2% 835 15 2% Trinidad city 379 14 4% 362 6 2% TOTAL: 18357959 3634593 20% 23475269 6346990 27%WT02-B15-14IA090-000969-B028-190http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/hspn-census/citychn1.htm 128.120.36.171 19970122205513 text/html 32065HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 20:56:09 GMTLast-Modified: Tuesday, 21-Jan-97 21:07:07 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 31808 California cities sorted by percentage change in Hispanic: 1980-90 California 23,667,902 4,544,331 19% 29,760,021 7,687,938 26% 35% City Total Population 1980 Hispanic: Total 1980 1980 % Hispanic Total Population 1990 Hispanic: Total 1990 1990 % Hispanic Percentage Change from 1980-90 Point Arena city 425 17 4 407 96 24 490% Amador City city 136 3 2 196 18 9 316% Mammoth Lakes town 3929 174 4 4785 692 14 227% San Rafael city 44700 2135 5 48404 6951 14 201% Solvang city 3091 166 5 4741 757 16 197% Chowchilla city 5122 254 5 5930 840 14 186% East Palo Alto city 18191 2568 14 23451 8527 36 158% South Lake Tahoe city 20681 1508 7 21586 4003 19 154% Hesperia city 13540 1011 7 50418 9573 19 154% Cloverdale city 3989 262 7 4924 791 16 145% Orland city 4031 351 9 5052 1073 21 144% Tustin city 32317 2826 9 50689 10508 21 137% Palmdale city 12277 1147 9 68842 15154 22 136% Desert Hot Springs city 5941 514 9 11668 2378 20 136% Corning city 4745 308 6 5870 882 15 131% Nevada City city 2431 35 1 2855 94 3 129% Fort Jones city 544 15 3 639 40 6 127% Apple Valley town 14305 802 6 46079 5813 13 125% Blue Lake city 1201 13 1 1235 30 2 124% Williams city 1655 312 19 2297 970 42 124% Rio Vista city 3142 112 4 3316 264 8 123% Ukiah city 12035 635 5 14599 1709 12 122% Fort Bragg city 5019 320 6 6078 833 14 115% San Marcos city 17479 2233 13 38974 10702 27 115% Lancaster city 48027 3435 7 97291 14816 15 113% Ripon city 3509 224 6 7455 1009 14 112% Ione city 2207 231 10 6516 1445 22 112% West Sacramento city 10875 1261 12 28898 7060 24 111% Half Moon Bay city 7282 775 11 8886 1978 22 109% Waterford city 2683 311 12 4771 1152 24 108% Palm Springs city 32271 2894 9 40181 7504 19 108% Compton city 81286 17137 21 90454 39510 44 107% Hemet city 22454 1624 7 36094 5383 15 106% La Habra Heights city 4786 253 5 6226 678 11 106% Willows city 4777 254 5 5988 647 11 103% San Juan Capistrano city 18959 2049 11 26183 5703 22 102% Covina city 33751 4285 13 43207 11042 26 101% Inglewood city 94245 18060 19 109602 42249 39 101% Gustine city 3142 313 10 3931 779 20 99% Willits city 4008 254 6 5027 629 13 97% Costa Mesa city 82562 8475 10 96357 19319 20 95% Coalinga city 6593 1073 16 8212 2593 32 94% Yucaipa city 23345 1323 6 32824 3609 11 94% Fontana city 37111 6905 19 87535 31597 36 94% Adelanto city 2164 195 9 8517 1475 17 92% Downey city 82602 13910 17 91444 29569 32 92% Montclair city 22628 4541 20 28434 10849 38 90% Yuba City city 18736 1773 9 27437 4905 18 89% Fetters Hot Springs-Agua Calie 1675 100 6 2024 226 11 87% Sand City city 182 30 16 192 59 31 86% Napa city 50879 4165 8 61842 9425 15 86% Laguna Niguel city 12237 511 4 44400 3451 8 86% Orange city 91788 11372 12 110658 25278 23 84% Folsom city 11003 652 6 29802 3245 11 84% Anaheim city 219311 37676 17 266406 83755 31 83% Biggs city 1413 121 9 1581 244 15 80% Signal Hill city 5734 693 12 8371 1822 22 80% Rancho Palos Verdes city 36577 1085 3 41659 2215 5 79% Coronado city 16859 782 5 26540 2191 8 78% Highland city 10908 1401 13 34439 7839 23 77% El Cajon city 73892 5862 8 88693 12387 14 76% Seaside city 36567 3646 10 38901 6787 17 75% Bradbury city 846 69 8 829 118 14 75% Garden Grove city 123307 16589 13 143050 33579 23 74% Tulelake city 783 131 17 1010 294 29 74% Dorris city 836 50 6 892 92 10 72% Lakeport city 3675 149 4 4390 306 7 72% Vernon city 90 41 46 152 119 78 72% Bishop city 3333 221 7 3475 395 11 71% Placerville city 6739 259 4 8355 548 7 71% Ridgecrest city 15929 741 5 27725 2198 8 70% Ceres city 13281 1768 13 26314 5960 23 70% Grass Valley city 6697 156 2 9048 358 4 70% La Quinta city 3328 516 16 11215 2944 26 69% Lodi city 35221 3525 10 51874 8766 17 69% Glendora city 38654 3479 9 47828 7250 15 68% Long Beach city 361334 50700 14 429433 101419 24 68% Pomona city 92742 28287 31 131723 67533 51 68% Santa Rosa city 83320 4697 6 113313 10727 9 68% San Mateo city 77561 7160 9 85486 13235 15 68% Avalon city 2022 484 24 2918 1170 40 68% Rialto city 37474 7056 19 72388 22787 31 67% Whittier city 69717 16279 23 77671 30278 39 67% Menlo Park city 26369 1529 6 28040 2710 10 67% Thousand Oaks city 77072 4469 6 104352 10019 10 66% Berkeley city 103328 5219 5 102724 8589 8 66% West Covina city 80291 16854 21 96086 33253 35 65% Burlingame city 26173 1622 6 26801 2731 10 64% Stanton city 23723 4857 20 30491 10209 33 64% Colusa city 4075 798 20 4934 1580 32 64% Dos Palos city 3123 779 25 4196 1706 41 63% Lynwood city 48548 20990 43 61945 43565 70 63% Morro Bay city 9064 432 5 9664 744 8 62% Bellflower city 53441 7934 15 61815 14776 24 61% Riverside city 170876 27604 16 226505 58826 26 61% Escondido city 64355 9378 15 108635 25380 23 60% Alturas city 3025 124 4 3231 212 7 60%WT02-B15-15IA090-000969-B028-201http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/hspn-census/citychn2.htm 128.120.36.171 19970122205522 text/html 31996HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 20:56:18 GMTLast-Modified: Tuesday, 21-Jan-97 21:07:07 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 31739 City 101-200 by percent change Laguna Beach city 17901 768 4 23170 1590 7 60% Montague city 1285 25 2 1415 44 3 60% Exeter city 5606 914 16 7276 1893 26 60% Chula Vista city 83927 19624 23 135163 50376 37 59% Norco city 21126 2593 12 23302 4556 20 59% Concord city 103255 7438 7 111348 12765 11 59% Westminster city 71133 8542 12 78118 14896 19 59% Clearlake city 4983 179 4 11804 672 6 58% Red Bluff city 9490 537 6 12363 1106 9 58% San Pablo city 19750 3356 17 25158 6737 27 58% Fullerton city 102034 13801 14 114144 24304 21 57% Chico city 26603 1476 6 40079 3484 9 57% El Paso de Robles (Paso Robles 9163 1063 12 18583 3367 18 56% Novato city 43916 2045 5 47585 3460 7 56% Modesto city 106602 11180 10 164730 26920 16 56% Santa Cruz city 41483 3623 9 49040 6662 14 56% West Hollywood city 35703 2006 6 36118 3153 9 55% Monrovia city 30531 5595 18 35761 10177 28 55% Crescent City city 3075 151 5 4380 334 8 55% Petaluma city 33834 2012 6 43184 3985 9 55% Loma Linda city 10694 937 9 17400 2365 14 55% Arcadia city 45994 3164 7 48290 5146 11 55% La Mesa city 50308 3177 6 52931 5176 10 55% Escalon city 3127 318 10 4437 697 16 54% Hidden Hills city 1760 84 5 1729 127 7 54% Ontario city 88820 24072 27 133179 55542 42 54% Redwood City city 54951 8617 16 66072 15935 24 54% Gridley city 3982 683 17 4631 1219 26 53% San Clemente city 27325 2296 8 41100 5285 13 53% Fortuna city 7591 258 3 8788 457 5 53% La Habra city 45232 10052 22 51266 17395 34 53% Industry city 664 220 33 631 319 51 53% Ojai city 6816 546 8 7613 928 12 52% Sonora city 3247 181 6 4153 352 8 52% Shafter city 7010 2298 33 8409 4179 50 52% Hawthorne city 56447 11636 21 71349 22219 31 51% Rancho Mirage city 6281 288 5 9778 674 7 50% Dana Point city 10602 979 9 31896 4425 14 50% Sebastopol city 5595 298 5 7004 560 8 50% Healdsburg city 7217 1034 14 9469 2026 21 49% Atwater city 17530 2179 12 22282 4124 19 49% Pasadena city 118550 21772 18 131591 35912 27 49% Imperial city 3451 1229 36 4113 2176 53 49% Palm Desert city 11801 1094 9 23252 3196 14 48% Turlock city 26287 3726 14 42198 8849 21 48% Lompoc city 26267 4796 18 37649 10100 27 47% Grand Terrace city 8498 1053 12 10946 1991 18 47% Santee city 47080 3448 7 52902 5685 11 47% Santa Ana city 203713 90646 44 293742 191383 65 46% Newport Beach city 62556 1701 3 66643 2648 4 46% Lemoore city 8832 1281 15 13622 2886 21 46% Temple City city 28972 3740 13 31100 5862 19 46% California City city 2743 193 7 5955 611 10 46% San Buenaventura (Ventura) cit 74393 8970 12 92575 16251 18 46% Upland city 47647 5741 12 63374 11115 18 46% Los Banos city 10341 2560 25 14519 5218 36 45% Los Angeles city 2966850 816076 28 3485398 1391411 40 45% Oakland city 339337 32492 10 372242 51711 14 45% Bonadelle Ranchos-Madera Ranch 3272 344 11 5705 870 15 45% Lake Elsinore city 5982 1074 18 18285 4757 26 45% Taft city 5316 270 5 5902 433 7 44% San Luis Obispo city 34252 2233 7 41958 3951 9 44% Vista city 35834 6163 17 71872 17804 25 44% Oroville city 8683 343 4 11960 679 6 44% Victorville city 14220 2282 16 40674 9353 23 43% Live Oak city 3103 807 26 4320 1606 37 43% Walnut Creek city 53643 1778 3 60569 2869 5 43% El Cerrito city 22731 1056 5 22869 1518 7 43% Huntington Beach city 170505 13427 8 181519 20397 11 43% Seal Beach city 25975 910 4 25098 1253 5 43% South Gate city 66784 38969 58 86284 71727 83 42% Larkspur city 11064 304 3 11070 432 4 42% Suisun City city 11087 1255 11 22686 3645 16 42% Lemon Grove city 20780 2909 14 23984 4764 20 42% Santa Barbara city 74414 16500 22 85571 26920 31 42% Sierra Madre city 10837 746 7 10762 1050 10 42% Redding city 41995 1174 3 66462 2632 4 42% Maricopa city 946 70 7 1193 125 10 42% Kerman city 4002 1494 37 5448 2871 53 41% Porterville city 19707 4865 25 29563 10299 35 41% Richmond city 74676 7713 10 87425 12690 15 41% Mountain View city 58655 6713 11 67460 10821 16 40% Newman city 2785 855 31 4151 1784 43 40% Farmersville city 5544 2310 42 6235 3636 58 40% Villa Park city 7137 269 4 6299 331 5 39% Claremont city 30950 2281 7 32503 3334 10 39% Lindsay city 6924 3228 47 8338 5410 65 39% Yountville town 2893 208 7 3259 326 10 39% Burbank city 84625 13761 16 93643 21172 23 39% San Diego city 875538 130613 15 1110549 229519 21 39% Buena Park city 64165 11386 18 68784 16879 25 38% Carmel-by-the-Sea city 4707 106 2 4239 132 3 38% Cathedral City city 4130 1116 27 30085 11197 37 38% Mission Viejo city 50666 2839 6 72820 5615 8 38% La Mirada city 40986 7714 19 40452 10459 26 37% Moreno Valley city 1175 196 17 118779 27165 23 37% King City city 5495 2673 49 7634 5091 67 37% La Canada Flintridge city 20153 678 3 19378 892 5 37% Bell city 25450 16028 63 34365 29583 86 37% Santa Maria city 39685 13281 33 61284 28014 46 37%WT02-B15-16IA090-000969-B028-222http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/hspn-census/citychn3.htm 128.120.36.171 19970122205536 text/html 31852HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 20:56:31 GMTLast-Modified: Tuesday, 21-Jan-97 21:07:07 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 31595 Cities 201 to 300 by % change Calistoga city 3879 698 18 4468 1098 25 37% Tehama city 365 10 3 401 15 4 37% Bakersfield city 105611 15886 15 174820 35854 21 36% Bell Gardens city 34117 21932 64 42355 37075 88 36% Simi Valley city 77500 7219 9 100217 12707 13 36% San Bernardino city 117490 29858 25 164164 56755 35 36% Portola city 1885 131 7 2193 207 9 36% Colma town 395 99 25 1103 375 34 36% Chino city 40165 10733 27 59682 21588 36 35% Gardena city 45165 7736 17 49847 11506 23 35% Cotati city 3475 220 6 5714 487 9 35% Angels city 2302 96 4 2409 135 6 34% Atascadero city 16232 1030 6 23138 1972 9 34% Fairfield city 58099 5746 10 77211 10208 13 34% Brea city 27913 3234 12 32873 5078 15 33% Vacaville city 43367 5182 12 71479 11366 16 33% San Dimas city 24014 3128 13 32397 5612 17 33% Salinas city 80479 30655 38 108777 55084 51 33% Poway city 32263 1686 5 43516 3023 7 33% Imperial Beach city 22689 4831 21 26512 7502 28 33% Millbrae city 20058 1691 8 20412 2279 11 32% Davis city 36640 2051 6 46209 3425 7 32% Hughson city 2943 792 27 3259 1161 36 32% Palo Alto city 55225 2091 4 55900 2792 5 32% Kingsburg city 5115 1219 24 7205 2265 31 32% Paramount city 36407 16808 46 47669 28998 61 32% Wasco city 9613 4619 48 12412 7858 63 32% Port Hueneme city 17803 4035 23 20319 6063 30 32% Oakdale city 8474 1097 13 11961 2038 17 32% Manteca city 24925 3369 14 40773 7241 18 31% Holtville city 4399 2092 48 4820 3011 62 31% Sausalito city 7338 176 2 7152 225 3 31% Visalia city 49729 9538 19 75636 19005 25 31% Danville city 26446 832 3 31306 1288 4 31% El Centro city 23996 11983 50 31384 20482 65 31% South Pasadena city 22681 2330 10 23936 3213 13 31% Capitola city 9095 581 6 10171 848 8 31% Madera city 21732 9033 42 29281 15759 54 29% Arvin city 6863 3973 58 9286 6960 75 29% Monterey city 27558 1663 6 31954 2495 8 29% San Bruno city 35417 5096 14 38961 7252 19 29% National City city 48772 18708 38 54249 26914 50 29% Reedley city 11071 4988 45 15791 9196 58 29% Beverly Hills city 32367 1356 4 31971 1725 5 29% Rohnert Park city 22965 1601 7 36326 3247 9 28% St. Helena city 4898 793 16 4990 1034 21 28% Palos Verdes Estates city 14376 331 2 13512 398 3 28% Cudahy city 17984 12508 70 22817 20288 89 28% Campbell city 27067 2255 8 36048 3839 11 28% Belvedere city 2401 35 1 2147 40 2 28% Scotts Valley city 6891 264 4 8615 421 5 28% Hawaiian Gardens city 10548 5516 52 13639 9078 67 27% Banning city 14020 2562 18 20570 4776 23 27% Vallejo city 80303 6823 8 109199 11777 11 27% Lomita city 18807 2877 15 19382 3756 19 27% Sonoma city 6054 246 4 8121 418 5 27% Lakewood city 74654 8630 12 73557 10763 15 27% Fresno city 218202 51489 24 354202 105787 30 27% Paradise town 22571 614 3 25408 874 3 26% Pittsburg city 33034 6204 19 47564 11288 24 26% Azusa city 29380 12437 42 41333 22092 53 26% Pinole city 14253 1109 8 17460 1715 10 26% Orinda city 16825 323 2 16642 403 2 26% San Joaquin city 1930 1161 60 2311 1743 75 25% Anderson city 7381 280 4 8299 393 5 25% Watsonville city 23543 11509 49 31099 18927 61 24% Fairfax town 7391 289 4 6931 337 5 24% Galt city 5514 1091 20 8889 2187 25 24% Clovis city 33021 4334 13 50323 8206 16 24% Solana Beach city 13047 1545 12 12962 1907 15 24% Dinuba city 9907 4818 49 12743 7693 60 24% Livermore city 48349 3843 8 56741 5587 10 24% Selma city 10942 5413 49 14757 9043 61 24% Fillmore city 9602 4602 48 11992 7111 59 24% Marysville city 9898 875 9 12324 1347 11 24% Cypress city 40391 4417 11 42655 5765 14 24% Atherton town 7797 260 3 7163 295 4 24% Encinitas city 10796 1340 12 55386 8446 15 23% Hanford city 20958 5046 24 30897 9131 30 23% Oceanside city 76698 14118 18 128398 28982 23 23% Rancho Cucamonga city 55250 9019 16 101409 20298 20 23% Oxnard city 108195 48034 44 142216 77320 54 22% Sutter Creek city 1705 60 4 1835 79 4 22% South San Francisco city 49393 10953 22 54312 14731 27 22% Perris city 6827 2008 29 21460 7704 36 22% Lafayette city 20879 554 3 23501 761 3 22% Baldwin Park city 50554 29363 58 69330 49051 71 22% Saratoga city 29261 805 3 28061 940 3 22% Beaumont city 6818 1344 20 9685 2323 24 22% Placentia city 35041 7121 20 41259 10174 25 21% Diamond Bar city 28045 3937 14 53672 9136 17 21% Tulare city 22526 6290 28 33249 11250 34 21% Indio city 21611 12152 56 36793 25068 68 21% Arroyo Grande city 11290 842 7 14378 1298 9 21% Fowler city 2496 1206 48 3208 1874 58 21% Gonzales city 2891 1968 68 4660 3828 82 21% Hillsborough town 10451 354 3 10667 436 4 21% Torrance city 129881 10839 8 133107 13398 10 21% Lawndale city 23460 6664 28 27331 9359 34 21% Dublin city 13496 1174 9 23229 2429 10 20%WT02-B15-17IA090-000969-B028-242http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/hspn-census/citychn4.htm 128.120.36.171 19970122205547 text/html 31888HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 20:56:42 GMTLast-Modified: Tuesday, 21-Jan-97 21:07:07 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 31631 Cities 301 to 400 by % change Camarillo city 37797 3803 10 52303 6326 12 20% San Fernando city 17731 12219 69 22580 18683 83 20% Dunsmuir city 2253 187 8 2129 212 10 20% Riverbank city 5695 2010 35 8547 3619 42 20% La Puente city 30882 19291 62 36955 27663 75 20% Livingston city 5326 3253 61 7317 5354 73 20% Carson city 81221 18926 23 83995 23413 28 20% Fountain Valley city 55080 3738 7 53691 4357 8 20% San Jose city 629442 140529 22 782248 208388 27 19% Pleasant Hill city 25124 1400 6 31585 2099 7 19% Norwalk city 85286 34231 40 94279 45118 48 19% Orange Cove city 4026 2905 72 5604 4820 86 19% Carpinteria city 10835 3330 31 13747 5026 37 19% Brawley city 14946 8688 58 18923 13076 69 19% Grover City city 8827 1454 16 11656 2280 20 19% Avenal city 4137 1863 45 9770 5224 53 19% Lathrop city 3717 1176 32 6841 2568 38 19% Manhattan Beach city 31542 1365 4 32063 1645 5 19% Hayward city 94167 19029 20 111498 26671 24 18% Twentynine Palms city 7465 651 9 11821 1219 10 18% El Monte city 79494 48782 61 106209 76991 72 18% Glendale city 139060 24685 18 180038 37731 21 18% Culver City city 38139 6428 17 38793 7667 20 17% San Carlos city 24710 1367 6 26167 1691 6 17% San Leandro city 63952 8323 13 68223 10363 15 17% La Verne city 23508 3702 16 30897 5675 18 17% Santa Paula city 20552 10376 50 25062 14753 59 17% Blythe city 6805 2711 40 8428 3909 46 16% Del Rey Oaks city 1557 87 6 1661 108 7 16% Belmont city 24505 1532 6 24127 1755 7 16% Los Gatos town 26906 1157 4 27357 1367 5 16% Greenfield city 4181 2781 67 7464 5763 77 16% Daly City city 78519 15134 19 92311 20634 22 16% Maywood city 21810 17546 80 27850 25931 93 16% Firebaugh city 3740 2607 70 4429 3573 81 16% Eureka city 24153 1003 4 27025 1298 5 16% Woodland city 30235 6850 23 39802 10413 26 15% Artesia city 14301 4961 35 15464 6194 40 15% El Segundo city 13752 1082 8 15223 1382 9 15% Woodlake city 4343 2811 65 5678 4238 75 15% Duarte city 16766 5039 30 20688 7160 35 15% Moraga Town city 15014 455 3 15852 553 3 15% Loomis town 1284 81 6 5705 414 7 15% Yorba Linda city 28254 2319 8 52422 4948 9 15% Brisbane city 2969 364 12 2952 415 14 15% Walnut city 12478 2562 21 29105 6836 23 14% Sacramento city 275741 39161 14 369365 60007 16 14% Sunnyvale city 106618 12288 12 117229 15444 13 14% Montebello city 52929 31387 59 59564 40263 68 14% Benicia city 15376 998 6 24437 1808 7 14% Huntington Park city 46223 37328 81 56065 51496 92 14% Cupertino city 34015 1477 4 40263 1986 5 14% San Francisco city 678974 83373 12 723959 100717 14 13% San Jacinto city 7098 2110 30 16210 5455 34 13% Stockton city 149779 33050 22 210943 52653 25 13% Rolling Hills Estates city 7701 297 4 7789 339 4 13% Redlands city 43619 7373 17 60394 11450 19 12% Hermosa Beach city 18070 1122 6 18219 1267 7 12% Antioch city 42683 5958 14 62195 9719 16 12% Clayton city 4325 205 5 7317 388 5 12% Santa Fe Springs city 14520 8745 60 15520 10456 67 12% Corte Madera town 8074 305 4 8272 348 4 11% Newark city 32126 6619 21 37861 8672 23 11% Guadalupe city 3629 2711 75 5479 4546 83 11% Calipatria city 2636 1762 67 2690 1995 74 11% Mendota city 5038 4266 85 6821 6405 94 11% Sanger city 12542 8251 66 16839 12269 73 11% Corona city 37791 10416 28 76095 23101 30 10% Monte Sereno city 3434 132 4 3287 139 4 10% Los Altos city 25769 708 3 26303 795 3 10% Susanville city 6520 446 7 7279 547 8 10% San Ramon city 22356 1190 5 35303 2064 6 10% Woodside town 5291 184 3 5035 192 4 10% Martinez city 22582 1734 8 31808 2676 8 10% Yreka city 5916 185 3 6948 238 3 10% Winters city 2652 976 37 4639 1868 40 9% McFarland city 5151 3904 76 7005 5809 83 9% Westmorland city 1590 1051 66 1380 997 72 9% Pico Rivera city 53459 40705 76 59177 49237 83 9% Pismo Beach city 5364 317 6 7669 495 6 9% Delano city 16491 9464 57 22762 14214 62 9% South El Monte city 16623 12927 78 20850 17633 85 9% Marina city 20647 2038 10 26436 2837 11 9% Alameda city 63852 5342 8 76459 6950 9 9% Auburn city 7540 298 4 10592 454 4 8% Tehachapi city 4126 806 20 5791 1226 21 8% Piedmont city 10498 312 3 10602 341 3 8% Soledad city 5928 4906 83 7146 6394 89 8% Santa Monica city 88314 11485 13 86905 12210 14 8% Pacific Grove city 15755 875 6 16117 967 6 8% Milpitas city 37820 6541 17 50686 9434 19 8% San Marino city 13307 626 5 12959 655 5 7% Dixon city 7541 2001 27 10401 2958 28 7% Wheatland city 1474 178 12 1631 211 13 7% Portola Valley town 3939 109 3 4194 124 3 7% Coachella city 9129 8148 89 16896 16107 95 7% Parlier city 2902 2641 91 7938 7707 97 7% Commerce city 10509 8937 85 12135 11006 91 7% Los Altos Hills town 7421 188 3 7514 202 3 6% Merced city 36499 10291 28 56216 16786 30 6%WT02-B15-18IA090-000969-B028-259http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/hspn-census/citychn5.htm 128.120.36.171 19970122205556 text/html 18397HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 20:56:53 GMTLast-Modified: Tuesday, 21-Jan-97 21:07:07 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 18140 Cities 400 to 454 by % change Temecula city 1783 245 14 27099 3939 15 6% Huron city 2768 2528 91 4766 4597 96 6% Pleasanton city 35160 2233 6 50553 3383 7 5% Arcata city 12340 556 5 15197 721 5 5% Rio Dell city 2687 191 7 3012 225 7 5% Barstow city 17690 5278 30 21472 6726 31 5% Gilroy city 21641 9760 45 31487 14885 47 5% San Anselmo town 12053 520 4 11743 530 5 5% Santa Clara city 87746 12865 15 93613 14260 15 4% Tiburon town 6685 219 3 7532 256 3 4% Rocklin city 7344 496 7 19033 1333 7 4% Irvine city 62134 3752 6 110330 6902 6 4% Pacifica city 36866 4825 13 37670 5099 14 3% Los Alamitos city 11529 1398 12 11676 1460 13 3% La Palma city 15399 1822 12 15392 1872 12 3% Emeryville city 3714 357 10 5740 567 10 3% Ferndale city 1367 32 2 1331 32 2 3% Hollister city 11488 6305 55 19212 10786 56 2% Carlsbad city 35490 4790 13 63126 8700 14 2% Calexico city 14412 13566 94 18633 17806 96 2% Isleton city 914 197 22 833 181 22 1% Redondo Beach city 57102 6542 11 60167 6917 11 0% Mount Shasta city 2837 121 4 3460 148 4 0% Corcoran city 6454 3334 52 13364 6919 52 0% San Juan Bautista city 1276 587 46 1570 714 45 -1% Irwindale city 1030 897 87 1050 899 86 -2% Hercules city 5963 642 11 16829 1758 10 -3% Morgan Hill city 17060 4112 24 23928 5594 23 -3% Etna city 754 14 2 835 15 2 -3% Del Mar city 5017 189 4 4860 177 4 -3% Alhambra city 64615 24287 38 82106 29626 36 -4% Fremont city 131945 18423 14 173339 23091 13 -5% San Gabriel city 30072 11477 38 37120 13471 36 -5% Needles city 4120 742 18 5191 887 17 -5% Indian Wells city 1394 30 2 2647 54 2 -5% Mill Valley city 12967 383 3 13038 365 3 -5% Rolling Hills city 2049 92 4 1871 79 4 -6% Albany city 15130 1320 9 16327 1324 8 -7% Patterson city 3908 2051 52 8626 4156 48 -8% Tracy city 18428 4889 27 33558 8145 24 -9% Foster City city 23287 1472 6 28176 1627 6 -9% Weed city 2879 328 11 3062 318 10 -9% Union City city 39406 11008 28 53762 13484 25 -10% Colton city 21310 11925 56 40213 20000 50 -11% Cerritos city 53020 7532 14 53240 6666 13 -12% Roseville city 24347 3009 12 44685 4825 11 -13% Rosemead city 42604 24453 57 51638 25641 50 -13% Lincoln city 4132 1208 29 7248 1796 25 -15% Monterey Park city 54338 21079 39 60738 19031 31 -19% Brentwood city 4434 1753 40 7563 2405 32 -20% Colfax city 981 79 8 1306 81 6 -23% Jackson city 2331 123 5 3545 144 4 -23% Ross town 2801 89 3 2123 45 2 -33% Loyalton city 1030 127 12 931 74 8 -36% Plymouth city 699 37 5 811 25 3 -42% Trinidad city 379 14 4 362 6 2 -55% Moorpark city 4030 2152 53 25494 5613 22 -59%WT02-B15-19IA090-000969-B028-275http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/hspn-census/city25-2.htm 128.120.36.171 19970122205608 text/html 39382HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 20:57:03 GMTLast-Modified: Tuesday, 21-Jan-97 21:07:07 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 39125 Solana Beach city 13,047 1,545 12% 12,962 1,907 15% 24% Mammoth Lakes town 3,929 174 4% 4,785 692 14% 227% Bradbury city 846 69 8% 829 118 14% 75% Chowchilla city 5,122 254 5% 5,930 840 14% 186% Brisbane city 2,969 364 12% 2,952 415 14% 15% Palm Desert city 11,801 1,094 9% 23,252 3,196 14% 48% Fort Bragg city 5,019 320 6% 6,078 833 14% 115% Loma Linda city 10,694 937 9% 17,400 2,365 14% 55% Ripon city 3,509 224 6% 7,455 1,009 14% 112% South Pasadena city 22,681 2,330 10% 23,936 3,213 13% 31% Wheatland city 1,474 178 12% 1,631 211 13% 7% Willits city 4,008 254 6% 5,027 629 13% 97% Los Alamitos city 11,529 1,398 12% 11,676 1,460 13% 3% Ojai city 6,816 546 8% 7,613 928 12% 52% La Palma city 15,399 1,822 12% 15,392 1,872 12% 3% Ukiah city 12,035 635 5% 14,599 1,709 12% 122% Bishop city 3,333 221 7% 3,475 395 11% 71% Fetters Hot Springs-Agua Calie 1,675 100 6% 2,024 226 11% 87% Millbrae city 20,058 1,691 8% 20,412 2,279 11% 32% Marysville city 9,898 875 9% 12,324 1,347 11% 24% La Habra Heights city 4,786 253 5% 6,226 678 11% 106% Willows city 4,777 254 5% 5,988 647 11% 103% Maricopa city 946 70 7% 1,193 125 10% 42% Dublin city 13,496 1,174 9% 23,229 2,429 10% 20% Hercules city 5,963 642 11% 16,829 1,758 10% -3% Weed city 2,879 328 11% 3,062 318 10% -9% Dorris city 836 50 6% 892 92 10% 72% Twentynine Palms city 7,465 651 9% 11,821 1,219 10% 18% California City city 2,743 193 7% 5,955 611 10% 46% Yountville town 2,893 208 7% 3,259 326 10% 39% Dunsmuir city 2,253 187 8% 2,129 212 10% 20% Emeryville city 3,714 357 10% 5,740 567 10% 3% Pinole city 14,253 1,109 8% 17,460 1,715 10% 26% Sierra Madre city 10,837 746 7% 10,762 1,050 10% 42% Portola city 1,885 131 7% 2,193 207 9% 36% Amador City city 136 3 2% 196 18 9% 316% El Segundo city 13,752 1,082 8% 15,223 1,382 9% 15% Arroyo Grande city 11,290 842 7% 14,378 1,298 9% 21% Red Bluff city 9,490 537 6% 12,363 1,106 9% 58% Cotati city 3,475 220 6% 5,714 487 9% 35% Atascadero city 16,232 1,030 6% 23,138 1,972 9% 34% Sonora city 3,247 181 6% 4,153 352 8% 52% Capitola city 9,095 581 6% 10,171 848 8% 31% Albany city 15,130 1,320 9% 16,327 1,324 8% -7% Sebastopol city 5,595 298 5% 7,004 560 8% 50% Rio Vista city 3,142 112 4% 3,316 264 8% 123% Loyalton city 1,030 127 12% 931 74 8% -36% Morro Bay city 9,064 432 5% 9,664 744 8% 62% Crescent City city 3,075 151 5% 4,380 334 8% 55% Susanville city 6,520 446 7% 7,279 547 8% 10% Rio Dell city 2,687 191 7% 3,012 225 7% 5% Benicia city 15,376 998 6% 24,437 1,808 7% 14% Hidden Hills city 1,760 84 5% 1,729 127 7% 54% Taft city 5,316 270 5% 5,902 433 7% 44% Belmont city 24,505 1,532 6% 24,127 1,755 7% 16% Loomis town 1,284 81 6% 5,705 414 7% 15% Rocklin city 7,344 496 7% 19,033 1,333 7% 4% Lakeport city 3,675 149 4% 4,390 306 7% 72% Hermosa Beach city 18,070 1,122 6% 18,219 1,267 7% 12% Rancho Mirage city 6,281 288 5% 9,778 674 7% 50% Laguna Beach city 17,901 768 4% 23,170 1,590 7% 60% El Cerrito city 22,731 1,056 5% 22,869 1,518 7% 43% Alturas city 3,025 124 4% 3,231 212 7% 60% Placerville city 6,739 259 4% 8,355 548 7% 71% Del Rey Oaks city 1,557 87 6% 1,661 108 7% 16% Pismo Beach city 5,364 317 6% 7,669 495 6% 9% Fort Jones city 544 15 3% 639 40 6% 127% Colfax city 981 79 8% 1,306 81 6% -23% Pacific Grove city 15,755 875 6% 16,117 967 6% 8% Clearlake city 4,983 179 4% 11,804 672 6% 58% Oroville city 8,683 343 4% 11,960 679 6% 44% Angels city 2,302 96 4% 2,409 135 6% 34% Clayton city 4,325 205 5% 7,317 388 5% 12% Villa Park city 7,137 269 4% 6,299 331 5% 39% Fortuna city 7,591 258 3% 8,788 457 5% 53% Sonoma city 6,054 246 4% 8,121 418 5% 27% San Marino city 13,307 626 5% 12,959 655 5% 7% Scotts Valley city 6,891 264 4% 8,615 421 5% 28% Fairfax town 7,391 289 4% 6,931 337 5% 24% Arcata city 12,340 556 5% 15,197 721 5% 5% Anderson city 7,381 280 4% 8,299 393 5% 25% La Canada Flintridge city 20,153 678 3% 19,378 892 5% 37% San Anselmo town 12,053 520 4% 11,743 530 5% 5% Rolling Hills Estates city 7,701 297 4% 7,789 339 4% 13% Sutter Creek city 1,705 60 4% 1,835 79 4% 22% Auburn city 7,540 298 4% 10,592 454 4% 8% Mount Shasta city 2,837 121 4% 3,460 148 4% 0% Monte Sereno city 3,434 132 4% 3,287 139 4% 10% Rolling Hills city 2,049 92 4% 1,871 79 4% -6% Corte Madera town 8,074 305 4% 8,272 348 4% 11% Atherton town 7,797 260 3% 7,163 295 4% 24% Hillsborough town 10,451 354 3% 10,667 436 4% 21% Jackson city 2,331 123 5% 3,545 144 4% -23% Grass Valley city 6,697 156 2% 9,048 358 4% 70% Larkspur city 11,064 304 3% 11,070 432 4% 42% Woodside town 5,291 184 3% 5,035 192 4% 10% Tehama city 365 10 3% 401 15 4% 37% Del Mar city 5,017 189 4% 4,860 177 4% -3% Moraga Town city 15,014 455 3% 15,852 553 3% 15% Yreka city 5,916 185 3% 6,948 238 3% 10% Tiburon town 6,685 219 3% 7,532 256 3% 4% Nevada City city 2,431 35 1% 2,855 94 3% 129% Lafayette city 20,879 554 3% 23,501 761 3% 22% Piedmont city 10,498 312 3% 10,602 341 3% 8% Sausalito city 7,338 176 2% 7,152 225 3% 31% Carmel-by-the-Sea city 4,707 106 2% 4,239 132 3% 38% Montague city 1,285 25 2% 1,415 44 3% 60% Plymouth city 699 37 5% 811 25 3% -42% Portola Valley town 3,939 109 3% 4,194 124 3% 7% Palos Verdes Estates city 14,376 331 2% 13,512 398 3% 28% Mill Valley city 12,967 383 3% 13,038 365 3% -5% Los Altos Hills town 7,421 188 3% 7,514 202 3% 6% Blue Lake city 1,201 13 1% 1,235 30 2% 124% Orinda city 16,825 323 2% 16,642 403 2% 26% Ferndale city 1,367 32 2% 1,331 32 2% 3% Ross town 2,801 89 3% 2,123 45 2% -33% Indian Wells city 1,394 30 2% 2,647 54 2% -5% Belvedere city 2,401 35 1% 2,147 40 2% 28% Etna city 754 14 2% 835 15 2% -3% Trinidad city 379 14 4% 362 6 2% -55% TOTAL: 1,680,954 351,218 21% 2,174,503 590,239 27% 30% Number of California Cities with Populations 50,000 and <100,000: Percentage of California's total population: Percentage of California's total Hispanic population: Percentage of California's Cities with Populations 50,000 and <100,000: Percentage of California's total population: Percentage of California's total Hispanic population: 236 7% 8% 52% 7% 8% WT02-B15-20IA090-000969-B028-307http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/By-Month/MN-Vol-3-96/Prop_187_Opinion.html 128.120.36.171 19970122205659 text/html 145302HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 20:57:33 GMTLast-Modified: Sunday, 02-Jul-95 17:41:14 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 145045                LEAGUE OF UNITED LATIN AMERICAN CITIZENS, etal., LEAGUE OF UNITED LATIN AMERICANCITIZENS, et al., Plaintiffs, v. PETE WILSON, et al., Defendants.CHILDREN WHO WANT AN EDUCATION, et al., Plaintiffs, v. PETE WILSON,et al., Defendants. BARBARA AYALA, et al., Plaintiffs, v. PETE B. WILSON, et al., Defendants. GREGORIO T., by and through hisguardian ad litem, JOSE T.; et al., Plaintiffs, v. PETE WILSON,in his capacity as Governor of the State of California; et al.,Defendants. CARLOS P., et al., Plaintiffs, v. PETE B. WILSON, etal., Defendants. CASE NO. CV 94-7569 MRP, CASE NO. CV 94-7570 MRP, CASE NO. CV 94-7571 MRP, CASE NO. CV 94-7652 MRP, CASE NO. CV 94-0187 MRP UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT FOR THE CENTRAL DISTRICT OF CALIFORNIA November 20, 1995, DATED November 20, 1995, FILED COUNSEL: For CHILDREN WHO WANT AN EDUCATION, WHO ARE UNDOCUMENTED IN AMERICA,WHO WILL BE ADVERSELY AFFECTED BY CALIFORNIA PROPOSITION 187, section 7 J Q, BG, D B, A B, E R, & E R, all minors & all by & through their nextfriend, ROSA URIAS, plaintiffs: Stephen Yagman, Marion Yagman, Yagman &Yagman, Venice, CA. For LOS ANGELES UNITED SCHOOL DISTRICT, defendant: Bradley Stuart Phillips,Vilma S Martinez, Eva Orlebeke Caldera, Munger Tolles & Olson, Los Angeles,CA. Howard Friedman, Los Angeles Unified School District, Office of the LegalAdviser, Los Angeles, CA. JUDGES: Mariana R. Pfaelzer, United States District Judge OPINION BY: Mariana R. Pfaelzer OPINION: OPINION Proposition 187 is an initiative measure which was submitted to the votersof the State of California in the November 8, 1994 general election. It waspassed by a vote of 59% to 41% and became effective the following day. Thestated purpose of Proposition 187 is to "provide for cooperation between [the]agencies of state and local government with the federal government, and toestablish a system of required notification by and between such agencies toprevent illegal aliens in the United States from receiving benefits or publicservices in the State of California." Prop. 187, @ 1. The initiative'sprovisions require law enforcement, social services, health care and publiceducation personnel to (I) verify the immigration status of persons with whomthey come in contact; (ii) notify certain defined persons of their immigrationstatus; (iii) report those persons to state and federal officials; and (iv)deny those persons social services, health care, and education. After the initiative was passed, several actions challenging theconstitutionality of Proposition 187 were commenced in state and federalcourts in California. Ultimately, five actions filed in the United StatesDistrict Court were consolidated in this Court for purposes of motions,hearings, petitions and trial (collectively, the consolidated actions"). n1n2 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -- n1 Those cases are as follows: (1) League of United Latin American Citizens v. Wilson, Case No. CV 94-7569MRP (the "LULAC Action"). The LULAC Action is a class action on behalf of allpersons who: (a) are required to be questioned regarding their citizenship orfederal immigration status, or required to produce documentation of theircitizenship or federal immigration status, pursuant to @@ 4, 5, 6, 7 and 9 ofProposition 187; (b) are rendered ineligible for public social services, healthcare, or education pursuant to @@ 5, 6 and 7 of Proposition 187; or arerequired to be reported as not having legal status or notified either to obtainlegal status or leave the United States pursuant to @@ 4, 5, 6, 7, or 9 ofProposition 187. (2) Children Who Want an Education v. Wilson, Case No. CV 94-7570 MRP. (3) Ayala v. Pete B. Wilson, Case No. CV 94-7571 MRP. (4) Gregorio T. v. Wilson, Case No. CV 94-7652 MRP. (5) Carlos P. v. Wilson, Case No. CV 95-0187 MRP. n2 The Court has permitted the following parties to intervene as plaintiffs:(1) the-City of Los Angeles; (2) the California Association of CatholicHospitals and the Catholic Health Association of the United States(collectively "Catholic Hospitals"); (3) California Teachers Association,California Faculty Association, American Federation of State, County andMunicipal Employees AFL-CIO, and Service Employees International Union AFL-CIOcollectively and (4) Islamic Center of Southern California, Muslim PublicAffairs Council and California Council of Churches (collectively "IslamicCenter"). - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -- The plaintiffs in the consolidated actions have brought suit for declaratoryand injunctive relief seeking to bar California Governor Pete Wilson("Wilson"), Attorney General Dan Lungren ("Lungren"), and other state actors n3(collectively, defendants) from enforcing the provisions of Proposition 187.n4 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -- n3 All plaintiffs have sued Governor Pete Wilson and Attorney General DanLungren. In addition, LULAC plaintiffs named Acting State Superintendent of PublicInstruction William Dawson ("Dawson") (Dawson has been replaced by the currentSuperintendent Delaine Eastin ("Eastin")); director of Department of SocialServices Eloise Anderson ("Anderson"); Director of Department of HealthKimberly Belshe ("Belshe"); California State Board of Education; Department ofEducation; Orange Unified School District; Tustin Unified School District; andSan Diego Unified School District. Children plaintiffs also named Los AngelesUnified School District and the State of California. Ayala plaintiffs also named Dawson; Alhambra Unified School District; andSuperintendent of the Alhambra Unified School District Heber Meeks. GregorioT. plaintiffs also named Dawson (who was replaced by Eastin); Anderson;Belshe; individuals who are the members of the California State Board ofEducation, in their official capacities; individuals who are the Regents of theUniversity of California, in their official capacities; Jack Peltason,president of the University of California; individuals who are the Trustees ofthe California State University, in their official capacities; Barry Munitz,the Chancellor of the California State University, individuals who are themembers of the Board of Governors of the California Community Colleges, andDavid Mertes, Chancellor of the California Community Colleges. Catholic Hospitals, Islamic Center, and CTA, plaintiffs-in-intervention,each filed a complaint against the same persons who were named as defendants bythe Gregorio T. plaintiffs. n4 In February 1995, Defendants Wilson, Belshe and Anderson brought a motionfor abstention, or in the alternative, to dismiss for failure to state claim.Lungren joined in the motion for abstention and also moved to dismiss. In March1995, the Court denied these motions and set this case for trial. - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -- On November 16, 1994, the Court entered a temporary restraining orderenjoining the implementation of sections 4, 5, 6, 7 and 9 of the initiative. OnDecember 14, 1995, the Court granted plaintiffs' motions for preliminaryinjunction, enjoining the implementation and enforcement of those sections. On May 1, 1995, the League of United Latin American Citizens ("LULAC") andGregorio T. plaintiffs brought motions for summary judgment in which theycontend that Proposition 187 is unconstitutional on the sole ground that theinitiative is preempted by the federal government's exclusive constitutionalauthority over the regulation of immigration, Congress' exercise of that powerthrough the Immigration and Nationality Act ("INA"), and other federalstatutes. n5 n6 Defendants n7 oppose the LULAC and Gregorio T. motions on thegrounds that Proposition 187 is not preempted and, alternatively, that if anyportion of the initiative is preempted, the remaining portions are valid andmust be upheld. - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - n5 The following parties joined in LULAC's motion: Defendant San Diego UnifiedSchool District; defendant and amicus curiae Los Angeles Unified SchoolDistrict; and plaintiffs-intervenors Catholic Hospitals and Islamic Center. The following parties joined in Gregorio T.'s motion: Carlos P. and Ayalaplaintiffs; plaintiffs-intervenors City of Los Angeles, CTA, CatholicHospitals, and Islamic Center; and defendant and amicus curiae Los AngelesUnified School District. n6 Catholic Hospitals and Islamic Center brought independent motions forsummary judgment motions based on preemption as well, on May 12, 1995 and May16, 1995, respectively. Catholic Hospitals and Islamic Center each joined inthe other's motion. To the extent that those motions are brought on grounds other than thoseraised in the LULAC and Gregorio T. motions, they are denied. To the extentthat those motions rely on the same arguments raised in the LULAC and GregorioT. motions, those motions are granted in part and denied in part in accordancewith the ruling set forth in this Opinion. n7 For the purposes of this Opinion, "defendants" means all named defendantsexcept for the following, who do not oppose the plaintiffs' motions: (1) thedefendants who joined in the motions for summary judgment (listed in footnote5); (2) the Regents of the University of California, who filed a notice ofnon-opposition to all motions for summary judgment filed herein; (3) Eastin,who stipulated to the entry of summary judgment against her on July 28, 1995;and (4) the State Board of Education, which adopted a resolution declaringneutrality in this litigation on November 21, 1994. - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -- The Court grants in part and denies in part the motions for summary judgmentin accordance with the conclusions reached below. Because the Court's rulingwith respect to these motions does not dispose of this case in its entirety,the preliminary injunction shall remain in effect until further order of theCourt. I. Purpose and Effect of Proposition 187 Proposition 187 consists of ten sections: a preamble (section 1), a sectionpertaining to the amendment and severability of the initiative (section 10) andeight substantive sections (sections 2-9). n8 Within the eight substantivesections of the initiative, there are the following five types of provisions: (1) provisions which require state officials to verify or determine theimmigration status of arrestees, applicants for social services and healthcare, and public school students and their parents, by either classifyingpersons based on state-created categories of immigration status (the"classification" provisions) or verifying immigration status by reference tofederal immigration laws (the "remaining verification" provisions) ( Prop. 187@@ 4(b); 5(b), (c); 6(b), (c); 7(a)-(e); 8(a)-(c)) n9; (2) provisions which require state officials to notify individuals that theyare apparently present in the United States unlawfully and that they must"either obtain legal status or leave the United States" (the "notification"provisions) ( Prop. 187 @@ 4(b)(2); 5(c)(2); 6(c)(2)); (3) provisions which require state agencies to report immigration statusinformation to state and federal authorities, and to cooperate with the INSregarding persons whose immigration status is suspect (contained in Sections4-9) (the cooperation/reporting" provisions) ( Prop. 187 @@ 4(b)(3);5(c)(3); 6(c)(3); 7(e); 8(c); 9); (4) provisions which require facilities to deny social services, health careservices and public education to individuals based on immigration status (the"benefit denial" provisions) ( Prop. 187 @@ 5(b), (c)(1); 6(b), (c)(1);7(a)(c); 8(a)-(b)); and (5) criminal penalties for falsifying immigrationdocuments ( Prop. 187 @@ 2, 3). The full text of the initiative is set forth in Appendix A. - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -- n8 The eight substantive sections of the statute are codified as follows:Section 2 is codified at Cal. Penal Code @ 113. Section 3 is codified at CalPenal. Code @ 114. Section 4 is codified at Cal. Penal Code @ 834b. Section 5is codified at Cal. Welf. & Inst. Code @ 10001.5. Section 6 is codified atCal. Health & Safety Code @ 130. Section 7 is codified at Cal. Educ. Code@ 48215. Section 8 is codified at Cal. Educ. Code @ 66010.8. For the purposes of this Opinion, the initiative's provisions are referredto by their initiative section numbers rather than by their California codesection numbers (i.e., Cal. Penal Code @ 834b(a) is referred to as section4(a)"). n9 The verification provisions are of two types. The first type requires stateagents to classify persons based on three state-created categories of "legalstatus" without any reference to federal immigration laws. Specifically, stateagents must determine who is a "citizen" and who is "lawfully admitted" as apermanent resident or for a temporary period of time. @@ 5(b); 6(b); 7(d).These provisions are referred to collectively as "classification" provisions.The remaining verification provisions contain a "catch-all" category exemptingfrom Proposition 187's denial of benefits, notification and reportingprovisions persons who are otherwise lawfully present in the United Statesunder federal law. @@ 4(b)(1); 5(c); 6(c); 7(b), (c); 8(b). These provisionsare referred to collectively as the remaining verification" provisions. - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -- The initiative has a dual purpose and effect. The classification,notification and cooperation/reporting provisions taken together constitute aregulatory scheme designed to deter illegal aliens from entering or remainingin the United States by (1) detecting those persons present in the UnitedStates in violation of either state-created criteria for lawful immigrationstatus or federal immigration laws; (2) notifying those persons of theirpurported unlawful status and ordering them to obtain legal status or leave thecountry; and (3) maintaining a system of reporting and cooperation betweenstate and federal agencies to effect the removal of those persons. Theseprovisions cannot be read except as a regulatory scheme; and indeed, defendantshave not seriously urged any other reading. While the benefits denialprovisions also have the purpose of deterring illegal aliens from entering orremaining in the United States, and arguably may be viewed as part of the sameregulatory scheme, they have the additional purpose of forbidding the use ofpublic funds to provide social services, health care and education to personsdeemed to be present in the United States illegally. II. Severability of the Initiative In determining the validity of Proposition 187, the Court is mindful of itsobligation to uphold the initiative to the fullest extent possible. Californialaw holds that "all presumptions favor the validity of initiative measures andmere doubts as to validity are insufficient." Legislature v. Eu, 54 Cal. 3d492, 501, 286 Cal. Rptr. 283, 287, 816 P.2d 1309 (1991). Initiatives "must beupheld unless their unconstitutionality clearly, positively, and unmistakablyappears." Id. A finding that a section, subsection or subpart of Proposition187 is preempted by federal law does not end the Court's inquiry with respectto the validity of the initiative. Rather, a finding that any provision ispreempted requires the Court to determine whether that provision is severablefrom the balance of the initiative so that the remainder may take effect. SeeCalfarm Ins. Co. v. Deukmejian, 48 Cal. 3d 805, 821, 258 Cal. Rptr. 161, 170,771 P.2d 1247 (1989) (a holding that a subdivision of an initiative is invalidunder the state and federal Constitutions requires a determination as towhether the invalid provision is severable from the initiative). Whether anypreempted provision of Proposition 187 is severable from the remainder of theinitiative is determined pursuant to California law. National Broiler Councilv. Voss, 44 F.3d 740, 748 n.12 (9th Cir. 1994). Section 10 of Proposition 187 provides: In the event that any portion of this act or the application thereof to anyperson or circumstance is held invalid, that invalidity shall not affect anyother provision or application of the act, which can be given effect withoutthe invalid provision or application, and to that end the provisions of thisact are severable. "'Although not conclusive, a severability clause normally calls for sustainingthe valid part of the enactment, especially when the invalid part ismechanically severable . . . [citation]'" Calfarm, 48 Cal. 3d at 821, 258 Cal.Rptr. at 170 (citation omitted). The existence of a severability clause doesnot conclusively resolve the severability inquiry, however. Rather, "the finaldetermination depends on whether 'the remainder . . . is complete in itself andwould have been adopted by the legislative body had the latter foreseen thepartial invalidity of the statute . . .' and 'is not so connected with the restof the statute as to be inseparable.'" Santa Barbara Sch. Dist. v. SuperiorCourt, 13 Cal. 3d 315, 331, 118 Cal. Rptr. 637, 650, 530 P.2d 605 (1975)(citations omitted). California courts have prescribed three criteria by which a reviewing courtmust assess the severability of invalid provisions of statutes. In order to beseverable, "the invalid provision must be grammatically, functionally, andvolitionally separable." Calfarm, 48 Cal. 3d at 821, 258 Cal. Rptr. at 170. Aprovision is grammatically severable if "it constitutes a distinct and separateprovision . . . which can be removed as a whole without affecting the wordingof any other provision," 48 Cal. 3d at 822, 258 Cal. Rptr. at 170, or "wherethe valid and invalid parts can be separated by paragraph, sentence, clause,phrase or even single words." Santa Barbara Sch. Dist., 13 Cal. 3d at 330, 118Cal. Rptr. at 649. However, where "the defect cannot be cured by excising anyword or group of words, the problem is quite different," and severance isinappropriate. Santa Barbara Sch. Dist., 13 Cal. 3d at 331, 118 Cal. Rptr. at649. A provision is functionally severable if the remaining provisions can "standon their own," are capable of "separate enforcement," People's Advocate, Inc.v. Superior Court, 181 Cal. App. 3d 316, 331-32, 226 Cal. Rptr. 640, 649(1986), can be "given effect," Raven v. Deukmejian, 52 Cal. 3d 336, 355, 276Cal. Rptr. 326, 338, 801 P.2d 1077 (1990), or can operate . . . independently"of the invalid provisions. Eu, 54 Cal. 3d at 535, 286 Cal. Rptr. at 310. Theremaining provisions must neither be "rendered vague" by the absence of theinvalid provisions nor "inextricably connected to them by policyconsiderations." People's Advocate, 181 Cal. App. 3d at 332, 226 Cal. Rptr. at649. Finally, an invalid provision is volitionally severable if the remainingprovisions "would likely have been adopted by the people had they foreseen theinvalidity" of the challenged provision, or if the provision was not "socritical to the enactment of [the initiative] that the measure would not havebeen enacted in its absence." Calfarm, 48 Cal. 3d at 822, 258 Cal. Rptr. at170. Stated differently, the test [for volitional severability] is whether itcan be said with confidence that the electorate's attention was sufficientlyfocused upon the parts to be severed so that it would have separatelyconsidered and adopted them in the absence of the invalid portions." People'sAdvocate, 181 Cal. App. 3d at 333, 226 Cal. Rptr. at 650. Under the volitionalseverability test, even if the "'heart of [the] proposition'" is foundinvalid, if some "'substantive provisions remain,'" the invalid part should besevered to enforce the valid provisions and achieve at least "some substantialportion of [the voters'] purpose." Gerken v. Fair Political Practices Co., 6Cal. 4th 707, 714-15, 25 Cal. Rptr. 2d 449, 457, 863 P.2d 694 (1993) (quotingCity of Woodlake v. Logan, 230 Cal. App. 3d 1058, 1070, 282 Cal. Rptr. 27(1991); Santa Barbara Sch. Dist., 13 Cal. 3d at 332, 118 Cal. Rptr. at 650). Plaintiffs contend that Proposition 187 is not severable because its"pervasive unconstitutionality" leaves nothing to salvage. In addition, theyargue that the provisions of the initiative fail to meet the three criteria forseverability. They contend, for example, that the classification provisions arenot grammatically severable because their absence would render the remainingverification provisions unintelligible. They argue that none of theverification provisions are functionally severable because their absence wouldrender the denial of benefits provisions inoperable. Finally, they argue thatthe notification and reporting provisions are not volitionally severable fromthe benefits denial provisions because the intention of the electorate inpassing the initiative was to enact a comprehensive scheme to "stop illegalaliens," and severing the notification and reporting provisions to salvage thebenefits denial provisions would frustrate the electorate's intent. Defendants counter that the initiative meets all three severability tests.That is, defendants argue that the initiative is volitionally severable becausethe severability clause reflects the electorate's intent to accept theimplementation of any valid provisions notwithstanding the invalidation ofothers, grammatically severable because each section, subsection and subpart ofthe initiative can be severed from the others without rendering remainingsections unintelligible and functionally severable because each section,subsection and subpart is capable of operating independently from the others. Before analyzing the severability of each of the challenged provisions ofProposition 187, two general comments on the grammatical and volitionalseverability of the initiative as a whole are warranted. First, defendants arecorrect that each of Proposition 187's ten sections, and their respectivesubsections, is a distinct grammatical unit and thus is capable of beingsevered from the other sections and subsections without affecting the wordingof any other section or rendering what remains unintelligible. Accordingly,any section or subsection within Proposition 187 which is found to be invalidis grammatically severable from the remainder of the initiative. Second, defendants are also correct that the initiative is volitionallyseverable. Plaintiffs' contention to the contrary -- that, for example, thedenial of benefits or criminal penalties provisions would not have been adoptedhad the people foreseen the success of challenges to the reporting andnotification provisions -- is unavailing. Proposition 187's declaration intentexplicitly states that a substantial purpose of the initiative is to "preventillegal aliens in the United States from receiving benefits or public servicesin the State of California." @ 1. Elsewhere in the initiative it is stated thatit is "the intention of the People of California that only citizens of theUnited States and aliens lawfully admitted . . . may receive the benefits" ofpublic social services, health care, and education. @@ 5(a); 6(a); 7(a); 8(a).Further, "even though . . . the full purpose of [the initiative] cannot berealized, it seems eminently reasonable to suppose that those who favor theproposition would be happy to achieve at least some substantial portion oftheir purpose." Santa Barbara Sch. Dist., 13 Cal. 3d at 331-32, 118 Cal. Rptr.at 650. It cannot be disputed that the denial of benefits to "illegal aliens"(in sections 5 through 8) and the criminalization of the manufacture and use offalse immigration documents (in sections 2 and 3) serve a significant part ofthe initiative's purpose. The Court is therefore convinced that if the votershad known that some of the initiative's provisions would be held invalid, theywould have preferred the implementation of the remaining portions, rather thanthe invalidation of the entire initiative. Any provisions of Proposition 187found to be invalid are volitionally severable from the remainder. Thus, the provisions of Proposition 187 which are preempted must be severedfrom the initiative. A copy of the initiative as severed in accordance withthisOpinion follows in Appendix B. The Court's preemption analysis follows. III. Whether Proposition 187 is Preempted Under Federal Law The question of whether provisions of Proposition 187 are preempted byfederal law is governed by the Supreme Court's decision in De Canas v. Bica,424 U.S. 351, 47 L. Ed. 2d 43, 96 S. Ct. 933 (1976) (California statuteprohibiting an employer from knowingly employing an alien who is not entitledto lawful residence in the United States held not preempted under federal law).In De Canas, the Supreme Court set forth three tests to be used in determiningwhether a state statute related to immigration is preempted. Pursuant to DeCanas, if a statute fails any one of the three tests, it is preempted byfederal law. Under the first test, the Court must determine whether a state statute is a"regulation of immigration." Since the "power to regulate immigration isunquestionably exclusively a federal power, id. at 354, any state statute whichregulates immigration is "constitutionally proscribed." Id. at 356. Under the second test, even if the state law is not an impermissibleregulation of immigration, it may still be preempted if there is a showing thatit was the "clear and manifest purpose of Congress to effect a "complete ousterof state power -- including state power to promulgate laws not in conflict withfederal laws" with respect to the subject matter which the statute attempts toregulate. Id. at 357. In other words, under the second test, a statute ispreempted where Congress intended to "occupy the field" which the statuteattempts to regulate. Under the third test, a state law is preempted if it "stands as an obstacleto the accomplishment and execution of the full purposes and objectives ofCongress. Id. at 363 (citing Hines v. Davidowitz, 312 U.S. 52, 67, 85 L. Ed.581, 61 S. Ct. 399 (1941)). Stated differently, a statute is preempted underthe third test if it conflicts with federal law making compliance with bothstate and federal law impossible. Michigan Canners & Freezers v.Agricultural Marketing and Bargaining Board, 467 U.S. 461, 469, 81 L. Ed. 2d399, 104 S. Ct. 2518 (1984); Florida Lime & Avocado Growers v. Paul, 373U.S. 132, 142-43, 10 L. Ed. 2d 248, 83 S. Ct. 1210 (1963). A. Whether Proposition 187 Constitutes an Impermissible Regulation ofImmigration. The federal government possesses the exclusive power to regulateimmigration. De Canas, 424 U.S. at 354-355 ("Power to regulate immigration isunquestionably exclusively a federal power.") That power derives from theConstitution's grant to the federal government of the power to "establish auniform Rule of Naturalization," U.S. Const. art. I, @ 8, cl. 4., and to"regulate Commerce with foreign Nations." Id., cl. 3. In addition, the SupremeCourt has held that the federal government's power to control immigration isinherent in the nation's sovereignty. See, e.g., Nishimura Ekiu v. UnitedStates, 142 U.S. 651, 659, 35 L. Ed. 1146, 12 S. Ct. 336 (1892) (recognizinginherent power of sovereign nation to control its borders); Plyler v. Doe, 457U.S. 202, 225, 72 L. Ed. 2d 786, 102 S. Ct. 2382 (1982) ("Drawing upon [itsArticle I, section 8] power, upon its plenary authority with respect to foreignrelations and international commerce, and upon the inherent power of asovereign to close its borders, Congress has developed a complex schemegoverning admission to our Nation and status within our borders"); Fiallo v.Bell, 430 U.S. 787, 792, 52 L. Ed. 2d 50, 97 S. Ct. 1473 (1977) ("Our cases'have long recognized the power to expel or exclude aliens as a fundamentalsovereign attribute exercised by the Government's political departments . ..'" (citation omitted). Congress has exercised its power over immigration in the Immigration andNaturalization Act, 8 U.S.C. @ 1101 et seq. (the "INA"). The INA is acomprehensive regulatory scheme which regulates the authorized entry, length ofstay, residence status and deportation of aliens. See Gonzales v. City ofPeoria, 722 F.2d 468, 474-75 (9th Cir. 1983) (recognizing that the regulatoryscheme created by the INA is so pervasive as to be consistent with theexclusive federal power over immigration). The INA delegates enforcement dutiesto the Immigration and Naturalization Service ("INS"). Because the federal government bears the exclusive responsibility forimmigration matters, the states "can neither add to nor take from theconditions lawfully imposed by Congress upon admission, naturalization andresidence of aliens in the United States or the several states." Takahashi v.Fish & Game Comm'n, 334 U.S. 410, 419, 92 L. Ed. 1478, 68 S. Ct. 1138(1948). See also Plyler v. Doe, 457 U.S. 202 at 225, 72 L. Ed. 2d 786, 102 S.Ct. 2382 (1982) ("The States enjoy no power with respect to the classificationof aliens." (citing Hines v. Davidowitz, 312 U.S. 52, 85 L. Ed. 581, 61 S. Ct.399 (1941). In De Canas, in reasserting the rule that "power to regulate immigration isunquestionably exclusively a federal power," the Supreme Court emphasized thatthe mere fact that a state statute pertains to aliens does not require afinding that it is preempted: "the Court has never held that every stateenactment which in any way deals with aliens is a regulation of immigration andthus per se preempted by this constitutional power . . ." 424 U.S. at 355. TheCourt stressed that "the fact that aliens are the subject of a state statutedoes not render it a regulation of immigration, which is essentially adetermination of who should or should not be admitted into the country, and theconditions under which a legal entrant may remain." 424 U.S. at 355. In this case, plaintiffs urge that the entirety of Proposition 187constitutes a scheme to regulate immigration and is therefore preempted. Theyassert that the initiative as a whole is a regulation of immigration because itforces state employees to make judgments as to an individual's immigrationstatus, gives them the power to effectuate removal of immigrants from thecountry and thereby establishes California's own INS. Defendants counter thatpursuant to De Canas, "regulation of immigration" has a "narrow, technicalmeaning"; that a facial challenge to this statute requires a "painstakingline-by-line analysis" of the statute; and that such analysis reveals that,standing alone, none of Proposition 187's individual sections or subsections is"essentially a determination of who should or should not be admitted into thecountry and on what terms those lawfully admitted can remain here." De Canas,424 U.S. at 355. In De Canas, the statute at issue provided that "no employer shall knowinglyemploy an alien who is not entitled to lawful residence in the United States ifsuch employment would have an adverse effect on lawful resident workers." Id.at 352 n. 1; Cal. Lab. Code @ 2805. Noting that in that case, California had"sought to strengthen its economy by adopting federal standards in imposingcriminal sanctions against state employers who knowingly employ aliens who haveno federal right to employment within the country," the Supreme Court foundthat the statute did not constitute an immigration regulation, but rather, hadonly "some purely speculative and indirect impact on immigration." Id. at355. Unlike the statute at issue in De Canas, various of Proposition 187'sprovisions have much more than a "purely speculative and indirect impact onimmigration." Indeed, Proposition 187's verification, notification andcooperation/reporting requirements directly regulate immigration by creating acomprehensive scheme to detect and report the presence and effect the removalof illegal aliens. The scheme requires state agents to question all arrestees,applicants for medical and social services, students, and parents of studentsabout their immigration status; to obtain and examine documents relating to theimmigration status of such persons; to identify "suspected" "illegal"immigrants present in California; to report suspected "illegal" immigrants tostate and federal authorities; and to instruct people suspected of being in theUnited States illegally to obtain "legal status" or "leave the country." Thus,Proposition 187's scheme has a direct and substantial impact on immigration. Further, certain of Proposition 187's provisions require state agents tomake independent determinations of who is subject to the initiative's benefitsdenial, notification and cooperation/reporting provisions and who may lawfullyremain in the United States. Unlike the statute at issue in De Canas, whichadopted federal standards to determine whether an individual's immigrationstatus subjected an employer to liability, Proposition 187's classificationprovisions create an entirely independent set of criteria by which to classifyindividuals based on immigration status. See, e.g., Prop. 187 @@ 5(b); 6(b);7(d). On the other hand, the benefits denial provisions of sections 5 through 8may be likened to the statute at issue in De Canas. While the denial ofbenefits to persons not lawfully present in the United States may indirectly orincidentally affect immigration by causing such persons to leave the state ordeterring them from entering California in the first place, such a denial doesnot amount to a "determination of who should or should not be admitted into thecountry." De Canas, 424 U.S. at 355. Accordingly, the benefits denialsprovisions are not impermissible regulations of immigration and thus are notpreempted under the first De Canas test. It is true, as plaintiffs argue, that benefits denial can only occur afteran applicant's legal status has been "determined." That is, absentverification process, eligibility for benefits based on immigration statuswould be impossible. Moreover, state agents are unqualified--and alsounauthorized--to make independent determinations of immigration status.Congress has exclusively reserved that power to the INS and to immigrationjudges pursuant to the INA. See 8 U.S.C. @ 1252(b); 8 C.F.R. @ 242.1(a).Indeed, determinations of immigration status by state agents amounts toimmigration regulation whether made for the purposes of notifying aliens oftheir unlawful status and reporting their presence to the INS or for thelimited purpose of denying benefits. Defendants contend that because state agents are required to and do makedeterminations of immigration status in administering benefits under certainfederal-state cooperative programs, eligibility for which Congress hasconditioned on lawful immigration status, such determinations may also be madeby state agents for purposes of denying benefits under Proposition 187. Indeed,the Systematic Alien Verification for Entitlements program ("SAVE"), 42U.S.C. @ 1320b-7, is an existing federal eligibility system used to verifystatus for various federal-state cooperative programs such as the Aid toFamilies with Dependent Children ("AFDC"), Food Stamps, Medicaid andUnemployment Compensation programs under which eligibility is dependent onlawful immigration status. See 42 U.S.C. @ 1320b-7(b)(1) and 45 C.F.R. @233.50 (AFDC); 42 U.S.C. @@ 1320b-7(b)(2) and 1396b(v)(1) (Medicaid); 7 U.S.C. @ 2015(f) and 42 U.S.C. @ 1320b-7(b)(4) (Food Stamps). These benefitsprograms require state agents to verify immigration status by accessing federalimmigration status information through SAVE. In administering state-federalcooperative benefits programs, however, state agents perform a ministerialrather than a discretionary function in verifying immigration status. That is,state agents merely access INS information to verify an applicant's immigrationstatus -- no independent determinations are made and no state-created criteriaare applied. A requirement that state agents merely verify immigration statusby referring to INS information is much different from a requirement that stateagents actually make determinations as to who is, and who is not, deportableunder federal law. Permitting state agents, who are untrained -- andunauthorized -- under federal law to make immigration status decisions, incursthe risk that inconsistent and inaccurate judgments will be made. On the otherhand, requiring state agents simply to verify a person's status with the INSinvolves no independent judgment on the part of state officials and ensuresuniform results consistent with federal determinations of immigration status. The benefits denial provisions of Proposition 187 may therefore beimplemented without impermissibly regulating immigration if state agencies, inverifying eligibility for services and benefits, rely on federal determinationsof status made by the INS and accessible through SAVE. Because stateregulations implementing Proposition 187 could require state agencies to verifyimmigration status through reference to INS information and could deny stateactors discretion to apply non-federal criteria for benefits eligibility,Proposition 187's benefits denial provisions are not an impermissibleregulation of immigration and therefore withstand scrutiny under the first DeCanas test. Accordingly, the classification, notification and cooperation/reportingprovisions of the initiative, contained in sections 4 through 9 and in thepreamble, which are aimed solely at regulating immigration, are preempted. Theprovisions which have the permissible purpose and effect of denyingstate-funded benefits to persons who are unlawfully present in the UnitedStates are not a regulation of immigration and therefore survive the first DeCanas test. 1. Section 4 Section 4, entitled "Law Enforcement Cooperation with the INS," requires lawenforcement agencies to verify the legal status of every arrestee who is"suspected of being present in the United States in violation of federalimmigration laws" by "questioning the person" and "demanding documentation." @4(b)(1). Section 4 requires law enforcement agencies to "notify the person ofhis or her apparent status as an alien who is present in the United States inviolation of federal immigration laws and inform him or her that . . . he orshe must either obtain legal status or leave the United States. @ 4(b)(2). Inaddition, section 4 requires the agency to "notify the Attorney General . . .and the [INS] of the apparent illegal status." @ 4(b)(3). Finally, section 4requires law enforcement agencies to "fully cooperate with the [INS] regardingany person who is arrested if he or she is suspected" of being in the UnitedStates illegally and prohibits any local governmental agency from limiting suchcooperation in any way. @ 4(a), (c). Under the first De Canas test, a state may not require its agents to (i)make independent determinations of who is and who is not in this country inviolation of immigration laws;" (ii) report such determinations to state andfederal authorities; or (iii) "cooperate" with the INS, solely for the purposeof ensuring that such persons leave the country. The sole stated purpose andthe sole effect of section 4 is to impermissibly regulate immigration.Accordingly, section 4 is entirely preempted by federal law under the first DeCanas test. 2. Sections 5 and 6 Section 5, entitled "Exclusion of Illegal Aliens from Public SocialServices," and section 6, entitled, "Exclusion of Illegal Aliens from PubliclyFunded Health Care," differ from section 4 in that their stated purpose andeffect is not solely to ensure the ouster of persons suspected of being inthis country unlawfully. Rather, they have the additional purpose and effect ofexcluding persons from obtaining public social and health care services. To theextent that state actors deny benefits to persons based on determinations byfederal authorities that those individuals are deportable pursuant to federallaw, benefits denial is not a direct regulation of immigration, but rather, hasonly the possible indirect effect of deterring "illegal" aliens from coming toCalifornia or causing them to leave. Sections 5 and 6 do not merely deny benefits, however. Both sections containclassification, notification and cooperation/reporting provisions which areroughly parallel those contained in section 4. See @@ 5(b), (c)(1), (c)(2);6(b), (c)(1), (c)(2). These provisions are entirely unnecessary to theimplementation of the benefits denial provisions. That is, without those threesets of provisions, both sections 5 and 6 still require public entities andpublicly-funded health care facilities to deny benefits to persons who aredetermined to be in the United States in violation of federal law. See @@5(c)(1), 6(c)(1). n10 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -- n10 As explained above, the benefits denial provisions in subsection (c) ofsections 5 and 6 may be constitutionally implemented only through a regulationwhereby state agents do not themselves determine a whether a person is lawfullypresent in the United States and only verify a person's immigration status forbenefits denial purposes by relying on determinations made by the INS andaccessible through SAVE. - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -- The classification, notification and cooperation/reporting provisions insections 5 and 6 add nothing to the statute except that they expand Proposition187's impermissible scheme of immigration regulation -- by requiring agents ofthe state (i) to make independent determinations of who is and who is not"lawfully admitted" in this country, based on state-created criteria(subsection (b)); and (ii) to report such determinations to state and federalauthorities solely for the purpose of ensuring that such persons leave thecountry (subsections (c)(1) and (c)(2)). In addition, subsection (b) is an impermissible immigration regulationbecause, unlike the statute at issue in De Canas, the classification of personsas (1) citizens; (2) lawfully admitted as a permanent resident or (3) lawfullyadmitted for a temporary period is not in any way tied to federal standards.Thus, the state has created its own scheme setting forth who is, and who is not, entitled to be in the United States. As discussed below, the INS'sstandards for who is and who is not deportable are entirely different fromthose set forth in subsection (b). See, e.g., 8 U.S.C. @ 1251(a). As theSupreme Court held in De Canas, a state cannot, on its own, determine who isor is not entitled to be present in the United States. See De Canas, 424 U.S.at 355. Defendants contend that the Court should construe the term "lawfullyadmitted" in subsections (b)(1) and (b)(2) as applying "to persons who arepresent in the United States unlawfully, not to those who entered unlawfully."They argue that such a construction avoids preemption, because "lawfullypresent" is an immigration status standard applied under the INA, and thus theclassification of persons required under subsection (b) of sections 5 and 6would be tied to federal standards, rather than to state-created criteria. Thisargument is not persuasive. As plaintiffs point out, the term "lawfullyadmitted" has its own established meaning under the INA. See 8 U.S.C. @ 1182.n11 Thus, there is no basis for the Court to replace the word "admitted," withthe word "present." Moreover, even if the Court were to do so, the statutestill would not be tied to federal standards. - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -- n11 Those lawfully "admitted" under federal immigration law are those who animmigration officer determines to satisfy admissibility criteria at the time ofentry. 8 U.S.C. @ 1182. Thus, it is likely that there are aliens who arelawfully present in the United States, but who were never lawfully "admitted"as federal law defines that term. These include, for example, persons whoentered illegally but then were granted asylum under 8 U.S.C. @ 1158.Conversely, some aliens who were lawfully "admitted" under the INA, but haveoverstayed their visas, may no longer be lawfully present. The plain languageof subsection (b)(3) would include these aliens while the construction urged bydefendants would exclude them. - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -- The impermissible classification, notification, and cooperation/reportingrequirements of sections 5 and 6, subsections (b), (c)(2), and (c)(3), aretherefore preempted. In the absence of the scheme created by those sections, the remainingsubstantive provisions of sections 5 and 6 are contained in subsections 5(c)(1)and 6(c)(1). Those provisions, standing alone, require that state agents denybenefits to persons who are determined or suspected to be "in the UnitedStates in violation of federal law. Defendants contend that (c)(1) is not animmigration regulation because, absent the classification, notification, andreporting provisions, (c)(1)'s effect is solely to deny benefits -- not todetermine who should or should not be permitted to remain in the UnitedStates. Indeed, in the absence of subsections (b), (c)(2) and (c)(3), subsection(c)'s verification component is utilized solely for the purpose of denyingbenefits. Unlike subsection (b), subsection (c)(1)'s verification component istied to federal immigration standards, so that under subsection (c)(1),benefits are denied based on an individual's federally-determined immigrationstatus and not on any independent criteria developed by the state. Plaintiffs counter that (c)(1) is not tied to any federal or stateimmigration standards and is therefore preempted because, on its face,subsection (c)(1) would deny benefits not only to aliens who are deportableunder federal immigration law but also to aliens who have, for example, failedto file their tax returns, because technically such persons would be "alien[s]in the United States in violation of federal law." This is a tortured readingof the provision. The Court is obliged to uphold subsection (c)(1) if there isany construction of the provision which is constitutional. Clearly (c)(1) can,and should, be understood to require denial of benefits solely to deportablealiens (i.e., those aliens whose presence in the United States is in violationof federal immigration law). The Court must conclude that subsection (c)(1)denies benefits based on federal determinations of immigration status and isnot an impermissible regulation of immigration. Such benefits denial is notpreempted under the first De Canas test. One additional problem remains. Subsection (c)(1) requires state agents todeny benefits to any individual who is "determined or "reasonably suspected" tobe present in the United States in violation of federal law. Thus, on its face,(c)(1) requires state actors to make independent determinations as to whether aperson is deportable under federal law. As discussed above, under the first DeCanas test, state actors may not make independent determinations as to persons'immigration status. Only the INS can make such determinations, and so (c)(1)may survive only if benefits are denied only to those persons determined to bedeportable by the INS. This problem is not irremediable, however. If the words"or reasonably suspects, based on the information provided to it," are severedfrom the subsection (c), sections 5 and 6 no longer would deny benefits topersons who are merely suspected by a state agent, rather than determined bythe INS, to be deportable. And those words indeed are grammatically,functionally, and volitionally severable. The language "or reasonably suspects,based on the information provided to it," is grammatically severable, sincewhen it is omitted, the remaining language makes sense. The offending languageis also functionally severable, because denial of benefits can be implementedin its absence. That is, a person can be denied benefits if the administratingagent "determines," rather than merely "reasonably suspects . . ." that theperson is present in the country in violation of federal laws. Finally, the"reasonably suspects" language is volitionally severable because theseverability clause evidences the intent of the electorate to permit theseverance of offending portions, and because it cannot be argued that thelanguage was crucial to the passage of the initiative. Even in the absenceof the "reasonably suspects" language, however, it is still possible that undersubsection (c)(1) state actors could be required to deny benefits based ontheir own independent determinations as to persons' immigration status. Toavoid this result, the state could implement a regulation requiring officialsto verify eligibility for services and benefits by accessing INS determinationsof individuals' immigration status through the SAVE system. If the "reasonablysuspects" language is omitted, and a regulation implementing the benefitsdenial provisions required state agencies to utilize INS determinations indenying benefits, subsection (c)(1) would not impermissibly regulateimmigration. It would then withstand scrutiny under the first De Canas test. The question remains whether the invalid provisions of sections 5 and 6 areseverable from the remainder of the initiative. Plaintiffs contend thatsubsections (b), (c)(2) and (3) are not functionally severable from theremaining provisions in sections 5 and 6 and that a finding that subsections(b), (c)(2) and (c)(3) are preempted requires a finding that all of sections 5and 6 are preempted. However, as set forth above, subsection (c)(1) can operateindependently as a benefits denial provision absent the impermissibleimmigration regulation scheme. Therefore, subsections (b), (c)(2) and (c)(3)are functionally severable from the initiative. Because it is reasonable toconclude that the electorate would have preferred the implementation of thebenefits denial provisions rather than the invalidation of the entireinitiative had they foreseen the invalidity of the classification, notificationand cooperation/reporting provisions, subsections (b), (c)(2) and (c)(3) arevolitionally severable. Finally, subsection (c)(1) makes grammatical senseabsent the severed provisions. Accordingly, subsections (b), (c)(2) and (c)(3)are severable. 3. Section 7 Section 7 is entitled "Exclusion of Illegal Aliens From Public Elementaryand Secondary Schools." Like sections 5 and 6, section 7 containsclassification, notification and cooperation/reporting requirements that, takentogether, serve only to further the scheme to regulate immigration and areunnecessary to the denial of public education. In section 7, subsections (a) through (c) require schools to verify theimmigration status of children for the purposes of denying access to publicelementary and secondary education. Subsection (d) requires verification of theimmigration status of parents of school children. Subsection (e) requiresschool districts to report the "illegal" status of any parent, guardian,enrollee or pupil to state agencies and the INS. Subsection (f) requires schooldistricts to "fully cooperate" in "accomplishing an orderly transition to aschool in the child's country of origin." Subsections (a), (b) and (c), together, assure that undocumented childrenwill be denied access to public education. Subsection (d) is wholly unnecessaryto implementing the denial of education mandated by section 7, because thestate has no need to know the immigration status of parents in order to denybenefits to children. Like subsection (b) in sections 5 and 6, the only purposeand effect of subsections (d), (e), and (f) is to ensure that personsdetermined by the state to be in the United States unlawfully are"transitioned" to the "country of their origin." Subsections (d), (e) and (f)are part of an impermissible scheme to regulate immigration and are thereforepreempted under the first De Canas test. In any event, an analysis of section 7 under the rigors of the first DeCanas test is not necessary to sustain the Court's ruling on these motions. Inlight of the United States Supreme Court's decision in Plyler v. Doe, 457 U.S.202, 72 L. Ed. 2d 786, 102 S. Ct. 2382 (1982), in which the Court held that theEqual Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment prohibits states fromexcluding undocumented alien children from public schools, section 7 in itsentirety conflicts with and is therefore preempted by federal law. 4. Section 8 Subsection (a) of Section 8 prohibits public postsecondary educationalinstitutions from providing education to persons who are not "authorized underfederal law" to be in the United States. Subsection (b) requires suchinstitutions to verify the immigration status of each person enrolled orattending to ensure that education is provided only to persons who are"authorized under federal law" to be in the United States. Subsection (c)requires admissions officers to report any persons who are "determined to be,or . . . under reasonable suspicion of being in the United States in violationof federal immigration laws" to state and federal authorities. Subsection 8(c), like the reporting requirements in sections 5 and 6, cannotsurvive because it has no purpose other than to regulate immigration. On theother hand, subsections (a) and (b), like the denial of benefits in sections 5and 6, are not regulations of immigration since they do not amount todeterminations of who may and may not remain in this country. In the absence ofsubsection (c)'s reporting requirements, the verification components ofsubsections (a) and (b) are permissible because their only purpose is todetermine who may and who may not receive postsecondary education. Also, theverification components of subsections (a) and (b) are tied to federalstandards rather than to an impermissible state classification scheme. Becausesubsections (a) and (b) may be implemented by requiring state actors to rely onfederal determinations rather than their own independent determinations ofimmigration status to deny public postsecondary education, subsections (a) and(b) are not preempted under the first De Canas test. The final question is whether subsection (c) is functionally, volitionallyand grammatically severable from the remaining provisions of section 8. Sincethe absence of the impermissible reporting requirements does not impair thestate's ability to deny public postsecondary education, subsection (c) isfunctionally severable. Subsection (c) is grammatically severable because theremoval of subsection (c) does not render the remaining provisions of section 8unintelligible. Finally, because it is reasonable to conclude that theelectorate would have preferred the implementation of the remaining provisionsrather than the invalidation of the entire section had they foreseen theinvalidity of the cooperation/reporting provision, subsection (c) isvolitionally severable. 5. Section 9 Section 9, entitled, "Attorney General cooperation with the INS," requiresthe state attorney general to maintain records of, and to transmit to the INS,all reports received from state agencies pertaining to persons who are"suspected of being present in the United States in violation of federalimmigration laws." This section is preempted under the first De Canas testbecause it has no purpose or effect except to further Proposition 187'simpermissible immigration regulation scheme. Section 9 is a separate and distinct section of Proposition 187, theseverance of which does not impair the meaning of any remaining sections. Itis, therefore, grammatically severable from the remainder of the initiative.Section 9 is functionally severable because it merely imposes additionalreporting and record-keeping requirements beyond those required by the othersections of the initiative and eliminating these additional requirements doesnot impair the operation of the remaining sections. Finally, because theinitiative's remaining benefits denial and criminal penalty provisions serve asubstantial purpose of the electorate and would have been approved even absentthe invalid provisions, section 9 is volitionally severable. n12 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - n12 Section 1, entitled "Findings and Declaration," contains the followingconclusion: Therefore, the People of California declare their intention to provide forcooperation between their agencies of state and local government with thefederal government, and to establish a system of required notification by andbetween such agencies to prevent illegal aliens in the United States fromreceiving benefits or public services in the State of California. (emphasis added). Since Proposition 187's cooperation/reporting requirementsare preempted, the underlined portion of the preamble states an impermissiblepurpose. However, because the preamble has no practical effect absent theinvalid substantive provisions, it is not subject to the preemption inquiry. - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -- 6. Sections 2 and 3 Sections 2 and 3 criminalize making and using false documents "to conceal"the "true citizenship or resident alien status" of a person. These provisions,though they may indirectly affect immigration in some way, n13 can hardly besaid to be a "determination of who should or should not be admitted in to thecountry." Like the benefit denial provisions, the criminal penalties,criminalizing conduct that is dishonest and deceptive, are a legitimateexercise of the police power of the state. - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -- n13 Plaintiffs have not provided the Court with any example of how suchcriminal penalties would even indirectly regulate immigration -- and the Courtis hard pressed to come up with any such examples on its own. - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -- Plaintiffs contend that criminal penalties are part of the overallimmigration regulation scheme. Absent the verification, notification andcooperation/reporting elements of the initiative, however, the criminalpenalties do not serve the impermissible goal of ensuring that "illegal" aliensleave the country. Accordingly, sections 2 and 3 are not preempted under thefirst De Canas test. B. Whether Proposition 187 Is Preempted Because Congress Intended to Occupythe Field. Under the second De Canas test, even if a statute is not an impermissibleregulation of immigration, it may still be preempted if there is a showing thatCongress intended to "occupy the field" which the statute attempts to regulate.De Canas, 424 U.S. at 357. As discussed above, the Constitution commits the power to regulateimmigration exclusively to the federal government. De Canas, 424 U.S. at 354,356. Congress has fully occupied the field of immigration regulation throughenactment and implementation of the INA. See, e.g., Gonzales v. City of Peoria,722 F.2d 468 (9th Cir. 1983) ("We assume that the civil provisions of the [INA]regulating authorized entry, length of stay, residence status, and deportation,constitute such a pervasive regulatory scheme, as would be consistent with theexclusive federal power over immigration."). Since the classification,notification and cooperation/reporting requirements contained in sections 1 and4 through 9 constitute a scheme to regulate immigration, those provisions arenecessarily preempted under the second De Canas test as well. Because the Court has determined that the benefits denial and criminalprovisions in sections 2 and 3 are not impermissible regulations ofimmigration, the question remains whether these provisions are neverthelesspreempted because Congress has intended to occupy the field on which theytouch. Under the second De Canas test, the benefits denial provisions ofsections 5 through 8 are preempted only if they regulate a field in whichCongress intended a "complete ouster" of state power, even if a stateregulation in that field is not in conflict with federal law. See De Canas,424 U.S. at 356, 357. In De Canas, the Supreme Court defined the field on whichthe statute in question touched not as the broad field of immigrationregulation, but, rather, the more narrow field of employment of illegal aliens.Id. Finding nothing in the INA which indicated Congressional intent to precludestate regulation touching on the employment of illegal aliens, the Courtrefused to "presume that Congress . . . intended to oust state authority toregulate the employment relationship covered by the [statute]," and held thatthe statute was not preempted. Id. at 357. Similarly, the field on which Proposition 187's benefits denial provisionstouch is not the broad field of immigration regulation but, rather, the publicbenefits field, specifically alien eligibility for public benefits. Sincenothing in the wording or legislative history of the INA "unmistakablyconfirms" an intent to oust state authority to regulate in the public benefitsfield, and because, as in De Canas, such an intent cannot be "derived from thescope and detail of the INA . . . governing entry and stay of aliens," id. at359, Proposition 187's benefits denial provisions are not preempted under thesecond De Canas test. n14 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -- n14 The Court in De Canas also recognized that because certain federallegislation pertaining to farm labor contractor registration explicitlycontemplated supplementary and consistent "appropriate State law andregulation," 7 U.S.C. @ 2051, the INA could "not be taken as legislation byCongress expressing its judgment to have uniform federal regulations in mattersaffecting employment of illegal aliens, and therefore barring statelegislation" such as the statute at issue. De Canas, 424 U.S. at 361-62.Likewise in this case, the public benefits scheme in this country ispredominantly a cooperative federal-state effort based on voluntary stateparticipation in federally-funded public benefits programs such as AFDC,Medicaid and Food Stamps and the states' optional provision of state fundedpublic benefits not within the federal scheme. Thus, it cannot be said that theINA was unmistakably intended to preclude states from regulating, to the extentconsistent with federal law, the provision of public benefits and services. - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - -- - - - - Likewise, the criminal provisions set forth in sections 2 and 3 are notpreempted under the second De Canas test. Plaintiffs have made no showingwhatsoever that Congress intended to effect a "complete ouster of state power-- including state power to promulgate laws not in conflict with federal laws"with respect to criminalizing the falsification and use of forgedidentification documents. 424 U.S. at 357. The field on which sections 2 and 3touch is not the broad field of immigration regulation but, rather, the fieldof the criminal law as it relates to false documents. Since nothing in thelegislative history of the INA, or in the INA itself, reveals an intent to ouststate authority to criminalize the production or use of false identification,sections 2 and 3 are not preempted under the second De Canas test. C. Whether Proposition 187 Is Preempted Because It Directly Conflicts WithFederal Law The final inquiry under De Canas is whether, "although the INA contemplatessome room for state legislation," De Canas, 424 U.S. at 363, Proposition 187 ispreempted in whole or in part because it "stands as an obstacle to theaccomplishment and execution of the full purposes and objectives ofCongress." Id. (citing Hines v. Davidowitz, 312 U.S. 52, 67, 85 L. Ed. 581, 61S. Ct. 399 (1941)). Stated differently, the provisions of Proposition 187 maybe preempted because they conflict with federal law making compliance with bothstate and federal law impossible. Michigan Canners & Freezers, 467 U.S. at469. 1. Classification, Notification, and Reporting Provisions As set forth above, Proposition 187's classification, notification andcooperation/reporting provisions are preempted under the first and second DeCanas tests because taken together, they constitute an impermissible scheme forthe regulation of immigration. Those same provisions also violate the third DeCanas test, because they are in conflict with federal laws governing thedeportation of aliens. The INA specifies an exclusive list of grounds for deportation, 8 U.S.C.1251(a), and provides that that procedure shall be the "sole and exclusiveprocedure for determining the deportability of an alien." 8 U.S.C. @ 1252(b)(emphasis added). The procedure requires, among other things, that only a"special inquiry officer" (an immigration judge) may conduct deportationproceedings. Id. The INA's accompanying regulations require "every proceedingto determine the deportability of an alien in the United States [to be]commenced by the filing of an order to show cause with the Office of theImmigration Judge." 8 C.F.R. @ 242.1(a); 8 U.S.C. 1252a. The authority to issuesuch orders is delegated to a discrete list of federal officers. Id. Onlyspecified federal officials can commence deportation proceedings, and only animmigration judge in deportation proceedings can determine that an alien isdeportable and order the alien to leave the United States. Id.; 8 U.S.C. @@1252(a), 1252(b). Then, after a "final order" of deportation issues, only theAttorney General may "effect the alien's departure from the United States." 8U.S.C. @ 1252(c). Proposition 187's classification, notification and cooperation/reportingprovisions directly contradict the INA's mandate that the procedure outlined inthe INA "shall be the sole and exclusive procedure for determining thedeportability of an alien." These provisions create a new, wholly independentprocedure, pursuant to which state law enforcement, welfare, health care, andeducation officials--rather than federal officials and immigration judges--arerequired to determine the deportability of aliens and effect their deportation.The classification, notification and cooperation/ reporting provisions delegateto state agents tasks which federal law delegates exclusively to federalagents. These provisions are in direct conflict with and are preempted byfederal law. 2. Denial of Benefits Provisions a. Conflicts based on classification and remaining verification provisions Proposition 187 requires, for the implementation of its benefits denialprovisions, that public social service agencies, public health care facilitypersonnel, public school districts and postsecondary educational institutionsclassify or verify the immigration status of applicants for benefits andservices. Plaintiffs argue that because the classification provisions define legalimmigration status more narrowly than federal law, and because the remainingverification provisions require state agents to classify persons' immigrationstatus based on "suspicion," those provisions will result in the denial ofbenefits to persons who fail to meet state criteria but are neverthelesslawfully present in the United States under federal law. The plaintiffs contendthat both types of verification provisions are preempted under the third DeCanas test. Defendants argue that the initiative "does not set up a classificationsystem" at all and that the classification provisions, like the remainingverification provisions which are tied to federal standards, should beconstrued as applying only to persons who are present in the United States inviolation of federal immigration laws. (1) The classification provisions As discussed above, Proposition 187 establishes three state-createdcategories of lawful immigration status on which the denial of benefits isbased. These categories define persons as "legal" and entitled to receivebenefits if they are citizens of the United States, aliens lawfully admitted aspermanent residents and aliens lawfully admitted for a temporary period oftime. See @@ 5(b)(1)-(3), 6(b)(1)-(3), 7(d)(1)-(3). These three categories,however, fail to recognize several federal categories of persons who are notcitizens, not admitted as permanent residents and not admitted for a temporaryperiod of time but who are nevertheless present in the United States,authorized to remain here and eligible for certain benefits in accordance withfederal law. For example, federal law authorizes certain refugees, n15 asylees,n16 persons granted withholding of deportation, n17 parolees, n18 personsprotected by "family unity" status, n19 persons present under temporaryprotected status, n20 persons granted deferred enforced departure ("DED"), n21persons eligible for suspension or stay of deportation n22 and batteredimmigrant women and children n23 to remain in the United States permanently,indefinitely or temporarily. None of these categories of lawful immigrationstatus is accounted for by Proposition 187's classification scheme. - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -- n15 8 U.S.C. @@ 1101(a)(42), 1157. Refugees are persons determined by theINS to have been persecuted or to have a well founded fear of persecution basedon race, religion, nationality, membership in a particular social group ofpolitical opinion. n16 8 U.S.C. @ 1101(a)(42)(A), 1158. Persons who meet the statutorydefinition of refugee are eligible for asylum and may apply for permanentresidency after one year. Asylees are entitled to remain in the United Stateson an indefinite basis unless asylee status is revoked by the INS. n17 8 U.S.C. @ 1253(h). A person is eligible for withholding of deportationif her "life or freedom would be threatened in [the home] country on account ofrace, religion, nationality, membership in a particular social group, orpolitical opinion. n18 8 U.S.C. @ 1182(d)(5). Persons paroled by the INS into the UnitedStates based on humanitarian or public interest considerations may beauthorized for indefinite stays. n19 8 C.F.R. @ 242.6. The spouses and children of aliens legalized under theImmigration Reform and Control Act's ("IRCA") amnesty provisions are protectedfrom deportation by family unity status. n20 8 U.S.C. @ 1254a. Aliens living in the United States may be grantedtemporary protected status where unsafe conditions in their countries of originmake it a hardship to return. n21 57 Fed. Reg. 28700-28701 (1992). Salvadorans granted DED status thatofficially expired at the end of 1994 remain in the United States with thepermission of the INS on the basis of family relationships, continuingeligibility for work authorization and other grounds. n22 8 U.S.C. @@ 1105a(a)(3) (stay), 1254(a) (suspension). An alien founddeportable and ordered deported by an immigration judge may be eligible forsuspension or stay of deportation for emergent or humanitarian reasons. n23 8 U.S.C. @ 1154. The Violence Against Women Act of 1994 (Title IV ofthe Violent Crime Control and Law Enforcement Act of 1994) provides thatbattered immigrant women and children may become legalized by self-petition forimmediate relative or second preference status under the INA or by applicationfor suspension of deportation on the basis of abuse. - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -- Sections 5, 6 and 7 utilize this underinclusive classification scheme todeny benefits and services to persons who fail to meet state criteria forlawful immigration status but are lawfully present in the United States andentitled to receive benefits and services under federal law. Congress hasconditioned eligibility for some federal-state cooperative benefits programscovered by sections 5 and 6 on lawful immigration status under federalimmigration laws. For example, eligibility for the Medicaid, Aid to Familieswith Dependent Children ("AFDC") and Food Stamps programs depends onverification of immigration status through the SAVE system. In administeringthese programs, state agencies verify recipient immigration status by accessingINS information. Since some persons otherwise eligible for benefits underfederal standards would be excluded by Proposition 187's underinclusiveclassification scheme, denying services based on the classification schemeconflicts with the existing federal eligibility system for programsadministered under SAVE. This classification scheme, preempted under the firstand second De Canas tests, is also preempted under the third De Canas test asused to deny social and health services under sections 5 and 6 and educationunder section 7. The question remains whether the impermissible classification scheme insubsection (b) of sections 5 and 6 and subsection (d) of section 7 is severablefrom the remainder of the initiative. The subsections are grammaticallyseverable because their absence does not render the remaining subsectionsunintelligible. The subsections are functionally severable because the benefitsdenial provisions may be implemented by utilizing the remaining verificationprovisions in subsection (c) of sections 5 and 6 and subsections (b) and (c) ofsection 7 which bases denial of benefits and services on federal immigrationstandards. Finally, the subsections are volitionally severable because itcannot be said that voter approval of the initiative was dependent on anyparticular classification scheme as long as the effect was the denial ofbenefits and services to illegal aliens. Thus, subsection (b) of section 5 and6 and subsection (d) of section 7 are preempted by federal law but may besevered from the remainder of the initiative. (2) The remaining verification provisions Subsection (c) of sections 5 and 6 provides that if any public entity"determines or reasonably suspects, based on the information provided to it,"that an applicant for benefits or services is an "alien in the United States inviolation of federal law," the entity shall deny the benefits or services. @@5(c), 6(c). Subsection (b) of sections 7 and 8 likewise calls for verificationof status based on federal immigration standards by requiring school districtsand postsecondary educational institutions to verify that students and/orparents are "authorized under federal law to be present in the United States."@@ 7(b), 8(b). Because these provisions require verification by reference tofederal immigration standards, conflict with that law is not readily apparent.Because Congress conditions eligibility for benefits under the AFDC, FoodStamps and Medicaid programs on lawful immigration status and requires stateagents to verify applicant eligibility by accessing INS information through theSAVE system, section 5's denial of benefits to persons "in the United States inviolation of federal law" does not conflict with or impede the objectives offederal law. Section 5 is not preempted to the extent that it applies tofederally funded programs for which Congress has conditioned benefiteligibility on lawful immigration status. Plaintiffs contend, however, that the verification procedure required bysubsection (c) of sections 5 and 6, based on the reasonable suspicion of stateagents, cannot be constitutionally implemented because denying benefits tothose merely suspected of being present in violation of federal laws conflictswith federal law which entitles those lawfully present in the United States tothe receipt of certain benefits. In other words, because benefits may be deniedunder Proposition 187 to individuals who are in fact lawfully present in theUnited States if the administering agent merely reasonably suspects they are present in violation of federal law, the verification procedureconflicts with and impedes the objective of federal law with respect toimmigrant benefit eligibility. Plaintiffs are correct. Because the only constitutional implementation ofProposition 187's benefits denial provisions would require state agents toutilize federal determinations of immigration status, and because a stateagent's "reasonable suspicion" of unlawful immigrant status is not the same asa federal determination of immigration status, the "reasonably suspects"language conflicts with federal law. It is therefore preempted under the thirdDe Canas test. The "reasonably suspects" language in subsection (c) may besevered from the remainder of subsection (c). The remaining verification provisions in sections 7 and 8 pertaining to thedenial of public education do not suffer from the same defect as theircounterparts in sections 5 and 6 because public school authorities are merelyrequired to verify a student's immigration status as lawful under federal law.No "reasonable suspicions" are involved. Because verification of immigrationstatus by reference to INS information is permissible through programs such asSAVE, the remaining verification provisions of sections 7 n24 and 8 are not inconflict with federal law and are not preempted under the third De Canas test. - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -- n24 Because all of Section 7 is necessarily preempted by the Supreme Court'sdecision in Plyler v. Doe as discussed below, that Section 7's verificationprovision does not conflict with federal law cannot save it from preemption onother grounds. - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -- b. Conflicts based on benefits denial provisions As applied to federally-funded programs and federally-funded health carefacilities, the benefits denial provisions of sections 5 and 6, even ifimplemented to deny benefits and services only to persons present in the UnitedStates in violation of federal immigration laws, appear to conflict withvarious federal laws. It is unclear, however, from the showing made herewhether, under Ray v. Atlantic Richfield Co., 435 U.S. 151, 158-160, 55 L. Ed.2d 179, 98 S. Ct. 988 (1978), these apparent conflicts render the denial ofbenefits provisions completely preempted or preempted only to the extent thatthey apply to federally-funded benefits. Moreover, even if the Court were tohold that the apparent conflicts with federal laws do not completely defeat thedenial of benefits provisions, the defendants have made only a generalrepresentation to the Court that there are purely state-funded benefits andservices to which the initiative could apply. Because the implications of Rayare unclear and because the Court is not convinced that there actually are anysuch wholly state-funded benefits programs and health care facilities, theCourt declines to rule on whether the denial of benefits provisions arepreempted. Nevertheless the Court sees several apparent conflicts between theoperation of the benefits denial provisions and various federal laws. (1) Section 5 The remaining benefits denial provision of section 5 provides that "anypublic entity" shall not provide benefits or services to persons determined tobe "alien[s] in the United States in violation of federal law." @ 5(c)(1). Byits plain language, section 5 applies to "any public entity" in the state ofCalifornia and covers "public social services" or "benefits andservices"administered by those entities. Id. "Public social services" isbroadly defined under California law to include: those activities andfunctions of state and local government administered or supervised by thedepartment [of Social Services] or the State Department of Health Services andinvolved in providing aid or services or both . . . to those people of thestate who, because of their economic circumstances or social condition, are inneed thereof and may benefit thereby. Cal. Welf. & Inst. Code @ 10051. The Court concludes that section 5 broadlydenies any and all aid, services and programs administered or supervised by thestate departments of social and health services to persons without lawfulimmigration status under federal law. Accordingly, to the extent that section 5would deny public social services to persons entitled to receive them underfederal law, section 5 conflicts with federal law. Plaintiffs argue thatsection 5's denial of public social services conflicts with federal lawregardless of whether eligibility is based on the impermissible underinclusiveclassification scheme in subsection (b), or on federal immigration standardsreferenced in subsection (c), because Proposition 187 conditions eligibilityfor some federal-state cooperative programs on lawful immigration status wherethe federal legislation authorizing such programs imposes no such requirements.Specifically, plaintiffs contend that there is a conflict between section 5 andthe Women, Infants, and Children program n25 and child welfare services n26because benefits are available under these federally-funded programs regardlessof immigration status. - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -- n25 42 U.S.C. @ 1786; 7 C.F.R. @ 246 (providing supplemental food,nutrition, counseling and health care referral for low-income pregnant women,new mothers, infants and children who are at "nutritional risk"). n26 Child welfare services are defined under federal law as public socialservices directed toward child well-being, including programs to protect andpromote child welfare generally, to prevent, or remedy neglect, abuse,exploitation and delinquency of children, to restore children to their familiesafter protective removals and to place children and assure adequate care insuitable adoptive or other homes. See 42 U.S.C. @ 625. Federal grants are madeto qualified state child welfare service programs. See 42 U.S.C. @@ 601 etseq.; 42 U.S.C. @@ 620 et seq.; 42 U.S.C. @@ 670 et seq.; 42 U.S.C. @ 5101(providing emergency response, family reunification and other benefits andservices to children or needy families with children regardless of immigrationstatus). - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -- The Women, Infants and Children program is a federally-funded programadministered by California through the Department of Health Services. Welf.& Inst. Code @ 15500 et seq. The federal statutes governing the program donot condition eligibility on lawful immigration status. See 42 U.S.C. @ 1786.Defendants concede, as they must, that if the Women, Infants and Childrenprogram is a "public social service" within the meaning of section 5,conditioning eligibility for benefits under the program on lawful immigrationstatus conflicts with the federal law which makes those benefits availableregardless of immigration status. Given California's broad definition of"public social service," section 5's denial of public social services clearlyapplies to the Women, Infants and Children program. Therefore, section 5'sdenial of social services as applied to the program conflicts with federallaw. Qualified child welfare services programs administered by states receivegrants of federal funding under various federal laws. n27 Defendants do notdispute that section 5 conflicts with these laws if construed to apply tofederally-funded child welfare programs for which federal law does notcondition eligibility on immigration status. Rather, defendants argue thatchild welfare services are entirely outside the scope of section 5 as a matterof statutory construction. Defendants contend that subsection 5(c)(1) appliesonly to public social service programs to which persons voluntarily andaffirmatively apply. They argue that because child welfare services aregenerally extended to children who are involuntarily placed in the protectivecustody of the state and are not benefits for which a person voluntarilyapplies, section 5 is inapplicable to child welfare services. This distinctionis specious. Section 5 applies broadly to deny "public social services" and"benefits and services" to persons present in the United States in violation offederal law. @ 5(c)(1). Child welfare services fall squarely withinCalifornia's definition of public social services. See Cal. Welf. & Inst.Code @ 16500. Moreover, some children do affirmatively seek state intervention (either personally or through a representative). Thus, defendants' construction of section 5 would deny benefits to children who actively seek placement withchild welfare services, while granting the same services to children who wait for the state to intervene. Because this absurd result could not have been contemplated by the voters and because child welfare services fall squarely within California's definition of public social services, child welfareservices are not excluded from section 5's coverage. - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -- n27 See supra n.26. - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -- The question remains, however, whether the application of section 5 to childwelfare services conflicts with federal law. Plaintiffs identify severalfederal provisions allocating money to and governing child welfare services n28that are available to children regardless of immigration status. Section 5conditions receipt of child welfare services on lawful immigration status.Therefore, section 5, as applied to child welfare services, conflicts withfederal law. - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -- n28 See supra n.26. - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -- Finally, section 5 may serve to deny state-administered public socialservices that are not part of any federal-state cooperative program and do notreceive any federal funding. As noted above, the Court is unable to concludethat such wholly state-funded programs in fact exist. n29 If such programs doexist, it does not appear that section 5's denial of wholly state-fundedbenefits would conflict with and be preempted by federal law. That the state'sdenial of such benefits may be unconstitutional on other grounds is not aquestion before the Court at this time. - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - n29 Defendants assert generally that such programs exist.However, they have not specifically identified any such program. - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -- In sum, section 5's benefits denial provisions conflict with federal law asapplied to public social services funded in any part by the federal governmentand made available to persons under the authorizing federal statutes regardlessof immigration status. Section 5, to the extent that it denies benefits underwholly state-funded programs and under federal-state cooperative programs suchas Medicaid, Food Stamps and AFDC, eligibility for which Congress has alreadyconditioned on lawful immigration status, does not appear to conflict withfederal law. The Court makes no determination, however, as to whether section5's benefits denial provision is wholly preempted. A further showing would berequired to reach this conclusion. (2) Section 6 The remaining benefits denial provision of section 6 requires "any publiclyfunded health care facility" in California to deny services "other thanemergency medical care as required by federal law" to persons determined to be"alien[s] in the United States in violation of federal law." @@ 6(c),6(c)(1). Plaintiffs contend that subsection (c)(1) of section 6, as applied to healthcare facilities which receive any federal funding, conflicts with and ispreempted by federal laws, specifically the Hill-Burton Act, n30 the PublicHealth Services Act ("PHSA"), n31 and the Emergency Medical Treatment andActive Labor Act ("EMTALA"), n32 which require the provision of emergency andother health care services regardless of immigration status. - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -- n30 42 U.S.C. @ 291c(e); 42 C.F.R. @ 124.603(a)(1) (requiring Hill-Burtonfunding recipient facilities to make services "available to all personsresiding in the territorial area" of the facilities regardless of immigrationstatus). n31 42 U.S.C. @ 254c; 42 C.F.R. @ 51c.303(v) (federal grant recipientpublic and nonprofit private "community health centers" serving "medicallyunderserved populations" to provide health care regardless of immigrationstatus). n32 42 U.S.C. @ 1395dd (requiring hospitals that receive Medicarereimbursements to screen and stabilize emergency patient regardless ofpatient's immigration status). - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -- Defendants respond that because the goal of section 6 is to prevent the useof public funds to provide health care services to persons not lawfully in thecountry, Hill-Burton and PHSA facilities are not prevented from providing allservices to unlawful immigrants but, rather, are merely denied publicreimbursement for the services so provided. Further, defendants contend thatemergency medical care required by EMTALA is explicitly excluded from the scopeof section 6. (a) The Hill-Burton Act The Hill-Burton Act, 42 U.S.C. @ 291 et seq., provides for allocation offederal funds to states for the rehabilitation, construction or modernizationof public and nonprofit hospitals. See 42 U.S.C. @ 291c. In an application forfunds under the Act, the applicant state and institution must make assurancesthat: (1) the facility or portion thereof to be constructed or modernized will bemade available to all persons residing in the territorial area of theapplicant; and (2) there will be made available in the facility or portionthereof to be constructed or modernized a reasonable volume of services topersons unable to pay therefor . . . . 42 U.S.C. @ 291c(e). The regulationspromulgated pursuant to the Act interpret the assurance that the facilitieswill be made available to "all persons" to mean that services be provided toall persons residing . . . in the facility's service area, withoutdiscrimination on the ground of race, color, national origin, creed or anyother ground unrelated to an individual's need for the service or theavailability of the needed service in the facility. 42 C.F.R. @ 124.603(a)(1) (emphasis added). Plaintiffs argue that section 6conflicts with federal law because it requires Hill-Burton facilities to denyhealth services based on immigration status, a ground unrelated to theindividual's need or the availability of needed services. Plaintiffs contendthat section 6 must be read to prohibit the provision of all health services toundocumented persons, even services to be self-paid by the patient or funded byprivate charity, and therefore cannot be construed to avoid conflict with theHill-Burton Act. Defendants argue that Hill-Burton facilities are not prohibited fromproviding all services to undocumented persons but, rather, are merelyprohibited from providing publicly-funded services to such persons. In otherwords, relying on language in the preamble of section 6 evidencing an intent todeny "publicly-funded health care" to persons present in violation of federalimmigration laws, defendants argue that Hill-Burton facilities may provideself-paid or charitable services to undocumented persons, and therefore noconflict with federal law exists. See @ 6(a). The plain language of subsection 6(c)(1) broadly prohibits "anypublicly-funded health care facility" n33 from providing "health care services"or "services" other than emergency services required by federal law. @ 6(c)(1).Despite the language in subsection 6(a) evidencing an intent to denyundocumented persons "the benefits of publicly-funded health care" and to"protect public funds from misuse," subsection (c) contains no such limitinglanguage, and proscribes the provision of "services," generally, bypublicly-funded health care facilities to persons unlawfully present in theUnited States. @@ 6(a), (c). Further, health care facilities do not, as apractical matter, at the service provider level, make distinctions betweenservices that are "publicly-funded" and services that are funded by othersources. It is difficult for the Court to conceive of a manner in which section6 could operate under the construction urged by the defendants. The Courtthus declines to eschew the plain language of the statute in favor of defendant's interpretation. Section 6 must be construed to require publicly-funded health care facilities to deny all services other than emergency medical carerequired by federal law. Because Hill-Burton facilities must make their services available to all persons without regard to immigration status, the operationof section 6 conflicts with the requirements of the Hill-Burton Act. - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -- n33 Subsection (d) of section 6 provides that the term "publicly-funded health care facility" is to be defined as specified in Sections 1200 and 1250of the California Health and Safety Code. Section 1250 defines "health facility" as: any facility, place or building which is organized, maintained, and operatedfor the diagnosis, care, prevention, and treatment of human illness, physical or mental, including convalescence and rehabilitation and including care duringand after pregnancy, or for any one or more of these purposes, for one or more persons, to which the persons are admitted for a 24-hour stay or longer. Cal. Health & Safety Code @ 1250. Section 1200 defines "clinic" asfollows:an organized outpatient health facility which provides direct medical,surgical,dental, optometric, or podiatric advice, services or treatment topatients whoremain less than 24 hours, and which may also provide diagnostic ortherapeuticservices to patients in the home as an incident to care provided atthe clinicfacility. Cal. Health & Safety Code @ 1200. While these sections define "healthcarefacility," they fail to explain what is intended by the term"publicly-funded."Under these broad definitions, section 6 must be construed toapply to allhospitals that receive any "public" funding, state or federal. - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -- Even if section 6's denial of health care services is construed to applyonlyto publicly-funded services, denying "free" services based on immigrationstatusnevertheless conflicts with the Hill-Burton Act's requirement thateachrecipient facility provide a "reasonable volume of services to personsunable topay therefor," 42 U.S.C. @ 291c(e)(2), without discrimination basedonany ground "unrelated to an individual's need for the service ortheavailability of the needed service in the facility . . ." 42 C.F.R.@124.603(a)(1). This does not mean that a Hill-Burton facility is requiredtotreat any person, regardless of his or her ability to pay, who appears atthedoors simply because the person resides in the facility's area.Rather,Hill-Burton facilities are required to provide a "reasonable volume ofservices"to persons unable to pay without discriminating between these personson anybasis unrelated to patient need or service availability. That is,Hill-Burtonfacilities may not close the door on a person based merely onimmigrationstatus. Section 6's denial of health care services, to the extent itapplies toHill-Burton facilities, conflicts with federal law. (b) Public Health Service Act Under the Public Health Service Act, 42 U.S.C. @ 201 et seq., grantsoffederal funds are available to public and nonprofit private entitiesforprojects to plan and develop "community health centers" to servemedicallyunderserved populations. 42 U.S.C. @ 254c(c). The Public HealthServicesAct defines "community health center" as an entity which, "through itsstaff . .. or through cooperative arrangements with other public or privateentities"provides health and health-related information and referral servicestoresidents of the area it serves (the "catchment area"). 42 U.S.C. @254c(a).The Act provides for grants of federal funds to community healthcenters servingareas designated as having a shortage of personal healthservices. 42 U.S.C. @@254c(c); 254(b)(3). Any hospital or otherfacility receiving grants under thissection for the purpose of serving amedically underserved population is a"community health facility" within themeaning of the Public Health ServicesAct. Community health centers funded undersection 254c(c) must be administeredto ensure that services are made availableand accessible in a manner "assuringcontinuity of service to theresidents of the center's catchment area." 42C.F.R. @ 51c.303(a). Plaintiffs argue that section 6, which prohibits community health centersfrom providing any services to catchment area residents in the United Statesunlawfully, conflicts with and is preempted by the Act which requires suchfacilities to make services available to catchment area residents regardlessofthose persons' immigration status. Defendants respond that facilitiesdeemed"community health centers" by virtue of their receipt of federal fundingunder the Act are only prohibited from providing publicly-funded healthservices andmay provide self-paid or privately-funded services to undocumentedpersons.However, because section 6 requires all "publicly-funded health carefacilities"to deny "health care services" and "services" other than emergencymedical services, and does not by its language limit such denial to servicesfor which reimbursements with public money are made, section 6 conflicts withthe PublicHealth Service Act provisions pertaining to federally-fundedcommunity healthcenters. (c) Emergency Medical Treatment and Active Labor Act EMTALA, 42 U.S.C. @ 1395dd, requires hospitals underMedicare provideragreements with the federal government to provide "anappropriate medicalscreening examination" to "any individual" requestingmedical treatment fromhospital emergency departments regardless of the person'sability to pay. 42U.S.C. @ 1395dd(a). The screening must include allroutinely available ancillaryservices, and, if the patient is found to have an"emergency condition," thehospital is required to provide the care necessary tostabilize the patient'scondition. 42 U.S.C. @ 1395dd(b). The hospital may not delay in providing ascreening or treatment required to stabilize anemergency condition in order toinquire about an individual's insurance orability to pay for services. 42U.S.C. @ 1395dd(h). Plaintiffs contend that section 6 conflicts with EMTALA because itprecludeshealth care facilities from providing the required screening topersons whose conditions do not appear to require "emergency medical care," theonly services exempted from section 6. @@ 6(a), 6(c). n34 Defendants argue thatsubsections (a) and (c), by creating an exception for "emergency medical careas required by federal law," exempt all of EMTALA's screening, stabilizationand treatment requirements and therefore do not conflict with federal law. Id.Because the clear intent of the enacting body was to exempt "emergency medicalcare as required by federal law," and it is reasonable to interpret thisexemption to include all of EMTALA's screening, stabilization and treatmentrequirements, the Court concludes that section 6's denial of health servicesdoes not conflict with but, rather, is entirely consistent with, federal lawpertaining to emergency medical services. - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -- n34 Plaintiffs also argue that subsection (b) of section 6 conflicts withEMTALA by delaying the provision of care until the patient's immigration statusis determined. Since subsection (b) is preempted under both the first and thirdDe Canas tests, this argument merits no further discussion here. - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -- In sum, section 6 must be construed to require all publicly-funded healthcare facilities to deny all medical services, except emergency screening andtreatment procedures required by federal law, to persons not lawfully presentin the United States under federal law. To the extent that section 6 applies tofacilities that receive federal funding under programs such as the Hill-Burtonand Public Health Services Act and requires denial of non-emergency medicalservices to persons unlawfully present where the federal legislation enablingthe programs is silent with respect to the immigration status of medical carerecipients, section 6 conflicts with federal law. However, to the extent thatsection 6 applies to wholly state-funded health care facilities, if in factsuch facilities exist n35, the denial of non-emergency health services topersons unlawfully present in the United States does not appear to conflictwith any federal law. While recognizing these conflicts, the Court cannotdetermine on the record before it whether section 6's denial of benefitsprovision is entirely preempted or preempted only to the extent that it appliesto federal grant recipient health care facilities. - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -- n35 Defendants have not identified any wholly state-funded health carefacilities. - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -- (3) Section 7 Section 7 denies public elementary and secondary education to (i) childrenwho are in the United States in violation of federal law, and (ii) childrenwho are citizens or otherwise legally present, but whose parents or guardiansare in the United States unlawfully. See @@ 7(a), 7(e), 7(f). This denial ofpublic education directly conflicts with federal law as announced in theSupreme Court's decision in Plyler v. Doe, 457 U.S. 202, 72 L. Ed. 2d 786, 102S. Ct. 2382 (1982). n36 In Plyler, the Supreme Court held that the EqualProtection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment prohibits a state from denying"to undocumented school-age children the free public education that it providesto children who are citizens of the United States or legally admitted aliens."Plyler, 457 U.S. at 205. The Supreme Court rejected each of the state'sproffered justifications for denying education to undocumented children,including the desire "to protect itself from an influx of illegal immigrants,"to "preserve . . . the state's limited resources for the education of itslawful residents," and to remove the alleged "special burdens [undocumentedchildren] impose on the State's ability to provide high-quality publiceducation," as constitutionally insufficient to deny children access to a basiceducation and noted the conflict that would result if the state were to denyeducation to "a child enjoying an inchoate federal permission to remain." Id.at 226-230. Clearly, then, section 7's denial of a public education based onthe immigration status of the child or the child's parent or guardian conflictswith and is preempted by federal law as announced by the Supreme Court inPlyler. n37 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -- n36 Although plaintiffs did not assert Plyler as a basis for conflictpreemption of section 7 in their motions for summary judgment, the Court isnevertheless constrained to consider the irreconcilable conflict betweensection 7 and federal law as announced by the Supreme Court in that case. TheAyala plaintiffs have also alleged that section 7 directly conflicts with theIndividuals With Disabilities Education Act, 20 U.S.C. @ 1400 et seq. (the"IDEA"), because the IDEA specifically guarantees a free appropriate publiceducation to all disabled children, regardless of immigration status. Since theCourt finds here that section 7 is preempted in its entirety as applied to allchildren, this separate ground for summary judgment need not be considered. n37 In finding the state's reasons for attempting to withhold publiceducation from undocumented children constitutionally "insubstantial," theSupreme Court in Plyler was particularly concerned with the state statutebecause it was directed at children, persons the Court deemed "special members"of the "underclass" of undocumented aliens present in this country. Plyler, 457U.S. at 219. Distinguishing undocumented children, who are capable of affecting"'neither their parents' conduct nor their own status,'" from their adultparents, who are willingly present in violation of federal immigration laws,the Court concluded that it is "difficult to conceive of a rationaljustification for penalizing these children for their presence within theUnited States." Id. at 219-220 (citing Trimble v. Gordon, 430 U.S. 762, 770,52 L. Ed. 2d 31, 97 S. Ct. 1459 (1977)). While "persuasive arguments supportthe view that a State may withhold its beneficence from those whose verypresence within the United States is the product of their own unlawfulconduct," the "arguments do not apply with the same force to classificationsimposing disabilities on the minor children of such illegal entrants." Id.Recognizing the costs the state statute imposed on "the innocent children who[were] its victims, the Court concluded that the statute failed equalprotection scrutiny, despite the fact that classifications based onundocumented alien status are not suspect and education is not a fundamentalright, because it failed to further "some substantial goal of the State." Id.at 224. The Supreme Court's reasoning and ruling in Plyler appears to compel afinding that section 6's denial of health care services, as applied toundocumented children, is equally without "rational justification" andoffensive to the principles of equal protection. Id. at 220. Although the Courtdeclines at this time to rule on this extension of Plyler, it does note thatsection 6, to the extent it denies health care services to undocumentedchildren, appears to be in direct conflict with federal law. - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - The remaining provisions of section 7, subsections (b), (c), (d) and (e),require school districts to verify the immigration status of prospective andcurrent students and their parents or guardians, to notify students and parentsor guardians of their suspected unlawful status and to report such informationto state and federal officials. These provisions, aimed at regulatingimmigration or effecting a denial of public education that is prohibited byfederal law, have no permissible purpose. Section 7 is preempted in itsentirety. n38 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -- n38 Because severing section 7 in its entirety does not impede thefunctioning of the remainder of the initiative, does not render the remainderunintelligible, and cannot be said to be so crucial to the passage of theinitiative that the initiative would have failed in its absence, section 7 isfunctionally, grammatically, and volitionally severable from the remainingsections. - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -- (4) Section 8 Section 8 prohibits public postsecondary educational institutions fromadmitting, enrolling or permitting the attendance of persons who are not"authorized under federal law to be present in the United States." @ 8(a).Plaintiffs do not identify any provision of federal law that conflicts withsection 8's denial of education. On its face, subsection (a) is consistent withthe INS statement permitting aliens "considered to be residing permanently inthe United States under color of law" to study in the country. Section 8'sdenial of education to persons who are not "authorized under federal law to bepresent in the United States," does not appear to conflict with any federallaw. Subsection (a) of section 8 is not preempted under the third De Canastest. 3. Criminal Penalty Provisions Sections 2 and 3 of Proposition 187 make it a crime to manufacture,distribute, sell or use false documents to conceal true citizenship orimmigration status. Violations of these statutes are punishable by imprisonmentfor up to five years or, in the case of manufacturing, distributing or sellingfalse documents, a fine of up to $ 75,000 and for use of such documents, a fineof up to $ 25,000. @@ 2, 3. Plaintiffs argue that by imposing differentpenalties than those already imposed under federal laws regulating theproduction or use of false citizenship, naturalization and alien registrationpapers and the misuse or forgery of passports and visas, n39 sections 2 and 3conflict with federal law. There has been no showing that the criminalpenalties contemplated by sections 2 and 3 conflict with or impede theobjectives of federal law. Sections 2 and 3 are not preempted under the thirdDe Canas test. - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -- n39 See 8 U.S.C. @ 1306(d) (false alien registration cards); 18 U.S.C. @@1424, 1425 (false papers in naturalization proceedings); 18 U.S.C. @ 1028(production, possession or use of false identification documents); 18 U.S.C. @1426 (false naturalization, citizenship or alien registration papers); 18U.S.C. @@ 1542-1543 (forgery or false use of passport); 18 U.S.C. @ 1544(misuse of passport); 18 U.S.C. @ 1546 (fraud and misuse of visas); 18 U.S.C. @911 (false claim to citizenship). - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -- IV. Conclusion The California voters' overwhelming approval of Proposition 187 reflectstheir justifiable frustration with the federal government's inability toenforce the immigration laws effectively. No matter how serious the problem maybe, however, the authority to regulate immigration belongs exclusively to thefederal government and state agencies are not permitted to assume thatauthority. The State is powerless to enact its own scheme to regulateimmigration or to devise immigration regulations which run parallel to orpurport to supplement the federal immigration laws. The classification, notification and cooperation/reporting provisions insections 4 through 9 of the initiative, taken together, constitute a regulatoryscheme (1) to detect persons present in California in violation ofstate-created categories of lawful immigration status; (2) to notify state andfederal officials of their purportedly unlawful status; and (3) to effect theirremoval from the United States. These provisions create an impermissible statescheme to regulate immigration and are preempted under the first and second DeCanas tests. Plaintiffs' motions for summary judgment are granted with respectto these provisions. The benefits denial provisions of the initiative -- if implemented by stateregulations which would require verification of immigration status by referenceto federal determinations of status -- have only an incidental impact onimmigration and thus do not violate the first De Canas test. Nor do thoseprovisions violate the second De Canas test. Plaintiffs have failed to directthe Court to any authority for the proposition that Congress intended tocompletely oust state authority to legislate in the area of benefits denial.Consequently, the Court must conclude that those provisions are preempted onlyif their operation conflicts with or impedes the objectives of federal laws. Section 7's denial of primary and secondary education conflicts with federallaw as announced by the Supreme Court in Plyler v. Doe and is thereforepreempted. Section 8's denial of postsecondary education does not appear toconflict with any federal law and thus is not preempted. With respect to thebenefits denial provisions in sections 5 and 6, to the extent that they denyfederally-funded benefits and services, those provisions conflict with federallaws authorizing such benefits and services without reference to immigrationstatus. It is unclear from the showing made whether the existence of suchconflicts render sections 5 and 6 wholly preempted or preempted only to theextent that they conflict with federal law. Moreover, the Court may not need toreach that issue, for while it appears that the state could permissibly denywholly state-funded benefits and services without impeding the objectives offederal law, it is unclear from the record whether any such purely state-fundedprograms or health care facilities in fact exist. The showing made on thesemotions is inadequate to permit the Court to resolve the issue of whether theprovisions are wholly preempted or whether they are preempted only to a limitedextent. For these reasons, plaintiffs' motions with respect to the denial ofbenefits provisions in sections 5 and 6 are denied. Finally, for the reasons set forth above, sections 2 and 3 are notpreempted. Plaintiffs' motions with respect to those sections are denied. The preliminary injunction entered by the Court on December 14, 1994, shallremain in effect until further order of the Court. DATED: November 20, 1995 Mariana R. Pfaelzer United States District Judge Appendix A PROPOSITION 187 TEXT SECTION 1. Findings and Declaration. The People of California find anddeclare as follows: That they have suffered and are suffering economic hardship caused by thepresence of illegal aliens in this state. That they have suffered and are suffering personal injury and damage by thecriminal conduct of illegal aliens in this state. That they have a right to the protection of their government from any personor persons entering this country unlawfully. Therefore, the People of California declare their intention to provide forcooperation between their agencies of state and local government with thefederal government, and to establish a system of required notification by andbetween such agencies to prevent illegal aliens in the United States fromreceiving benefits or public services in the State of California. SECTION 2. Manufacture, Distribution or Sale of False Citizenship orResident Alien Documents: Crime and Punishment. Section 113. is added to the Penal Code, to read: Section 113. Any person who manufactures, distributes or sells falsedocuments to conceal the true citizenship or resident alien status of anotherperson is guilty of a felony, and shall be punished by imprisonment in thestate prison for five years or by a fine of seventy-five thousand dollars ($75,000). SECTION 3. Use of False Citizenship or Resident Alien Documents: Crime andPunishment. Section 114. is added to the Penal Code, to read: Section 114. Any person who uses false documents to conceal his or her truecitizenship or resident alien status is guilty of a felony, and shall bepunished by imprisonment in the state prison for five years or by a fine oftwenty-five thousand dollars ($ 25,000). SECTION 4. Law Enforcement Cooperation with INS. Section 834b is added to the Penal Code, to read: Section 834b. (a) Every law enforcement agency in California shall fullycooperate with the United States Immigration and Naturalization Serviceregarding any person who is arrested if he or she is suspected of being presentin the United States in violation of federal immigration laws. (b) With respect to any such person who is arrested, and suspected of beingpresent in the United States in violation of federal immigration laws, everylaw enforcement agency shall do the following: (1). Attempt to verify the legal status of such person as a citizen of theUnited States, an alien lawfully admitted as a permanent resident, an alienlawfully admitted for a temporary period of time or as an alien who is presentin the United States in violation of immigration laws. The verification processmay include, but shall not be limited to, questioning the person regarding hisor her date and place of birth and entry into the United States, and demandingdocumentation to indicate his or her legal status. (2). Notify the person of his or her apparent status as an alien who ispresent in the United States in violation of federal immigration laws andinform him or her that, apart from any criminal justice precedings [sic], he orshe must either obtain legal status or leave the United States. (3). Notify the Attorney General of California and the United StatesImmigration and Naturalization Service of the apparent illegal status andprovide any additional information that may be requested by any other publicentity. (c) Any legislative, administrative, or other action by a city, county, orother legally authorized local governmental entity with jurisdictionalboundaries, or by a law enforcement agency, to prevent or limit the cooperationrequired by subdivision (a) is expressly prohibited. SECTION 5. Exclusion of Illegal Aliens from Public Social Services. Section 10001.5. is added to the Welfare and Institutions Code, to read: Section 10001.5. (a) In order to carry out the intention of the People ofCalifornia that only citizens of the United States and aliens lawfully admittedto the United States may receive the benefits of public social services and toensure that all persons employed in the providing of those services shalldiligently protect public funds from misuse, the provisions of this section areadopted. (b) A person shall not receive any public social services to which he or shemay be otherwise entitled until the legal status of that person has beenverified as one of the following: (1). A citizen of the United States. (2). An alien lawfully admitted as a permanent resident. (3). An alien lawfully admitted for a temporary period of time. (c) If any public entity in this state to whom a person has applied forpublic social services determines or reasonably suspects, based upon theinformation provided to it, that the person is an alien in the United States inviolation of federal law, the following procedures shall be followed by thepublic entity: (1). The entity shall not provide the person with benefits or services. (2). The entity shall, in writing, notify the person of his or her apparentillegal immigration status, and that the person must either obtain legal statusor leave the United States. (3). The entity shall also notify the State Director of Social Services, theAttorney General of California and the United States Immigration andNaturalization Service of the apparent illegal status, and shall provide anyadditional information that may be requested by any other public entity. SECTION 6. Exclusion of Illegal Aliens from Publicly Funded Health Care. Chapter 1.3 (commencing with Section 130) is added to Part 1 of Division 1of the Health and Safety Code, to read: CHAPTER 1.3. PUBLICLY-FUNDED HEALTH CARE SERVICES Section 130. (a) In order to carry out the intention of the People ofCalifornia that, excepting emergency medical care as required by federal law,only citizens of the United States and aliens lawfully admitted to the UnitedStates may receive the benefits of publicly-funded health care, and to ensurethat all persons employed in the providing of those services shall diligentlyprotect public funds from misuse, the provisions of this section are adopted. (b) A person shall not receive any health care services from apublicly-funded health care facility, to which he or she is otherwise entitleduntil the legal status of that person has been verified as one of thefollowing: (1). A citizen of the United States. (2). An alien lawfully admitted as a permanent resident. (3). An alien lawfully admitted for a temporary period of time. (c) If any publicly-funded health care facility in this state from whom aperson seeks health care services, other than emergency medical care asrequired by federal law, determines or reasonably suspects, based upon theinformation provided to it, that the person is an alien in the United States inviolation of federal law, the following procedures shall be followed by thefacility: (1). The facility shall not provide the person with services. (2). The facility shall, in writing, notify the person of his or herapparent illegal immigration status, and that the person must either obtainlegal status or leave the United States. (3). The facility shall also notify the State Director of Social Services,the Attorney General of California and the United States Immigration andNaturalization Service of the apparent illegal status, and shall provide anyadditional information that may be requested by any other public entity. (d) For purposes of this section "publicly-funded health care facility"shall be defined as specified in Section 1200 and 1250 of the Health and SafetyCode as of January 1, 1993. SECTION 7. Exclusion of Illegal Aliens From Public Elementary and SecondarySchools Section 48215. is added to the Education Code to read: Section 48215. (a) No public elementary or secondary school shall admit, orpermit the attendance of, any child who is not a citizen of the United States,an alien lawfully admitted as a permanent resident, or a person who isotherwise authorized under federal law to be present in the United States. (b) Commencing January 1, 1995, each school district shall verify the legalstatus of each child enrolling in the school district for the first time inorder to ensure the enrollment or attendance only of citizens, aliens lawfullyadmitted as permanent residents, or persons who are otherwise authorized to bepresent in the United States. (c) By January 1, 1996, each school district shall have verified the legalstatus of each child already enrolled and in attendance in the school districtin order to ensure the enrollment or attendance only of citizens, alienslawfully admitted as permanent residents, or persons who are otherwiseauthorized under federal law to be present in the United States. (d) By January 1, 1996, each school district shall also have verified thelegal status of each parent or guardian of each child referred to insubdivision (b) and (c) above, to determine whether such parent or guardian isone of the following: (1). A citizen of the United States. (2). An alien lawfully admitted as a permanent resident. (3). An alien admitted lawfully for a temporary period of time. (e) Each school district shall provide information to the StateSuperintendent of Public Instruction, the Attorney General of California andthe United States Immigration and Naturalization Service regarding any enrolleeor pupil, or parent or guardian, attending a public elementary or secondaryschool in the school district determined or reasonably suspected to be inviolation of federal immigration laws within forty five days after becomingaware of an apparent violation. The notice shall also be provided to the parentor legal guardian of the enrollee or pupil, and shall state that an existingpupil may not continue to attend the school after ninety calendar days from thedate of the notice, unless legal status is established. (f) For each child who cannot establish legal status in the United States,each school district shall continue to provide education for a period of ninetydays from the date of the notice. Such ninety day period shall be utilized toaccomplish an orderly transition to a school in the child's country of origin.Each school district shall fully cooperate in this transition effort to ensurethat the educational needs of the child are best served for that period oftime. SECTION 8. Exclusion of Illegal Aliens from Public Postsecondary EducationalInstitutions. Section 66010.8. is added to the Education Code, to read: Section 66010.8. (a) No public institution of postsecondary education shalladmit, enroll, or permit the attendance of any person who is not a citizen ofthe United States, an alien lawfully admitted as a permanent resident, in theUnited States, or a person who is otherwise authorized under federal law to bepresent in the United States. (b) Commencing with the first term or semester that begins after January 1,1995, and at the commencement of each term or semester thereafter, each publicpostsecondary educational institution shall verify the status of each personenrolled or in attendance at that institution in order to ensure the enrollmentor attendance only of United States citizens, aliens lawfully admitted aspermanent residents in the United States, and persons who are otherwiseauthorized under federal law to be present in the United States. (c) No later than 45 days after the admissions officer of a publicpostsecondary educational institution becomes aware of the application,enrollment, or attendance of a person determined to be, or who is underreasonable suspicion of being, in the United States in violation of federalimmigration laws, that officer shall provide that information to the StateSuperintendent of Public Instruction, the Attorney General of California andthe United States Immigration and Naturalization Service. The information shallalso be provided to the applicant, enrollee, or person admitted. SECTION 9. Attorney General cooperation with the INS. Section 53069.65. is added to the Government Code, to read: 53069.65. Whenever the state or a city, or a county, or any other legallyauthorized local governmental entity with jurisdictional boundaries reports thepresence of a person who is suspected of being present in the United States inviolation of federal immigration laws to the Attorney General of California,that report shall be transmitted to the United States Immigration andNaturalization Service. The Attorney General shall be responsible formaintaining on-going and accurate records of such reports, and shall provideany additional information that may be requested by any other governmententity. SECTION 10. Amendment and Severability. The statutory provisions contained in this measure may not be amended by theLegislature except to further its purposes by statute passed in each house byroll call vote entered in the journal, two-thirds of the membership concurring,or by a statute that becomes effective only when approved by the voters. In the event that any portion of this act or the application thereof to anyperson or circumstance is held invalid, that invalidity shall not affect anyother provision or application of the act, which can be given effect withoutthe invalid provision or application, and to that end the provisions of thisact are severable. Appendix B PROPOSITION 187 TEXT SECTION 1. Findings and Declaration. The People of California find anddeclare as follows: That they have suffered and are suffering economic hardship caused by thepresence of illegal aliens in this state. That they have suffered and are suffering personal injury and damage by thecriminal conduct of illegal aliens in this state. That they have a right to the protection of their government from any personor persons entering this country unlawfully. Therefore, the People of California declare their intention to provide forcooperation between their agencies of state and local government with thefederal government, and to establish a system of required notification by andbetween such agencies to prevent illegal aliens in the United States fromreceiving benefits or public services in the State of California. SECTION 2. Manufacture, Distribution or Sale of False Citizenship orResident Alien Documents: Crime and Punishment. Section 113. is added to the Penal Code, to read: Section 113. Any person who manufactures, distributes or sells falsedocuments to conceal the true citizenship or resident alien status of anotherperson is guilty of a felony, and shall be punished by imprisonment in thestate prison for five years or by a fine of seventy-five thousand dollars ($75,000). SECTION 3. Use of False Citizenship or Resident Alien Documents: Crime andPunishment. Section 114. is added to the Penal Code, to read: Section 114. Any person who uses false documents to conceal his or her truecitizenship or resident alien status is guilty of a felony, and shall bepunished by imprisonment in the state prison for five years or by a fine oftwenty-five thousand dollars ($ 25,000). [EDITOR'S NOTE: TEXT WITHIN THESE SYMBOLS [O> <O] IS OVERSTRUCK IN THESOURCE.] [O>SECTION 4. Law Enforcement Cooperation with INS. Section 834b is added to the Penal Code, to read: Section 834b. (a) Every law enforcement agency in California shall fullycooperate with the United States Immigration and naturalization Serviceregarding any person who is arrested if he or she is suspected of being presentin the United States in violation of federal immigration laws. (b) With respect to any such person who is arrested, and suspected of beingpresent in the United States in violation of federal immigration laws, everylaw enforcement agency shall do the following: (1). Attempt to verify the legal status of such person as a citizen of theUnited States, an alien lawfully admitted as a permanent resident, an alienlawfully admitted for a temporary period of time or as an alien who is presentin the United States in violation of immigration laws. The verification processmay include, but shall not be limited to, questioning the person regarding hisor her date and place of birth and entry into the United States, and demandingdocumentation to indicate his or her legal status. (2). Notify the person of his or her apparent status as an alien who ispresent in the United States in violation of federal immigration laws andinform him or her that, apart from any criminal justice proceedings [sic], heor she must either obtain legal status or leave the United States. (3). Notify the Attorney General of California and the United StatesImmigration and Naturalization Service of the apparent illegal status andprovide any additional information that may be requested by any other publicentity. (c) Any legislative, administrative, or other action by a city, county, orother legally authorized local governmental entity with jurisdictionalboundaries, or by a law enforcement agency, to prevent or limit the cooperationrequired by subdivision (a) is expressly prohibited.<O] SECTION 5. Exclusion of Illegal Aliens from Public Social Services. Section 10001.5. is added to the Welfare and Institutions Code, to read: Section 10001.5. (a) In order to carry out the intention of the People ofCalifornia that only citizens of the United States and aliens lawfully admittedto the United States may receive the benefits of public social services and toensure that all persons employed in the providing of those services shalldiligently protect public funds from misuse, the provisions of this section areadopted. [O>(b) A person shall not receive any public social services to which heor she may be otherwise entitled until the legal status of that person has beenverified as one of the following: (1). A citizen of the United States. (2). An alien lawfully admitted as a permanent resident. (3). An alien lawfully admitted for a temporary period of time.<O] (c) If any public entity in this state to whom a person has applied forpublic social services determines [O>or reasonably suspects, based upon theinformation provided to it,<O] that the person is an alien in the UnitedStates in violation of federal law, the [O>following procedures shall befollowed by the public entity: (1). The<O] entity shall not provide the person with benefits orservices. [O>(2). The entity shall, in writing, notify the person of his or herapparent illegal immigration status, and that the person must either obtainlegal status or leave the United States. (3). The entity shall also notify theState Director of Social Services, the Attorney General of California and theUnited States Immigration and Naturalization Service of the apparent illegalstatus, and shall provide an additional information that may be requested byany other public entity.<O] SECTION 6. Exclusion of Illegal Aliens from Publicly Funded Health Care. Chapter 1.3 (commencing with Section 130) is added to Part 1 of Division 1of the Health and Safety Code, to read: CHAPTER 1.3. PUBLICLY-FUNDED HEALTH CARE SERVICES Section 130. (a) In order to carry out the intention of the People ofCalifornia that, excepting emergency medical care as required by federal law,only citizens of the United States and aliens lawfully admitted to the UnitedStates may receive the benefits of publicly-funded health care, and to ensurethat all persons employed in the providing of those services shall diligentlyprotect public funds from misuse, the provisions of this section are adopted. [O>(b) A person shall not receive any public social services to which heor she may be otherwise entitled until the legal status of that person has beenverified as one of the following: (1). A citizen of the United States. (2). An alien lawfully admitted as a permanent resident. (3). An alien lawfully admitted for a temporary period of time.<O] (c) If any publicly-funded health care facility in this state from whom aperson seeks health care services, other than emergency medical care asrequired by federal law, determines [O>or reasonably suspects, based uponthe information provided to it,<O] that the person is an alien in the UnitedStates in violation of federal law, the [O>following procedures shall befollowed by the facility: (1). The<O] facility shall not provide the person with services. [O>(2). The facility shall, in writing, notify the person of his or herapparent illegal immigration status, and that the person must either obtainlegal status or leave the United States. (3). The facility shall also notify the State Director of Social Services,the Attorney General of California and the United States Immigration andNaturalization Service of the apparent illegal status, and shall provide anyadditional information that may be requested by any other publicentity.<O] (d) For purposes of this section "publicly-funded health care facility"shall be defined as specified in Section 1200 and 1250 of the Health and SafetyCode as of January 1, 1993. [O>SECTION 7. Exclusion of Illegal Aliens From Public Elementary andSecondary Schools. Section 48215. is added to the Education Code to read: Section 48215. (a) No public elementary or secondary school shall admit, orpermit the attendance of, any child who is not a citizen of the United States,an alien lawfully admitted as a permanent resident, or a person who isotherwise authorized under federal law to be present in the United States. (b) Commencing January 1, 1995, each school district shall verify the legalstatus of each child enrolling in the school district for the first time inorder to ensure the enrollment or attendance only of citizens, aliens lawfullyadmitted as permanent residents, or persons who are otherwise authorized to bepresent in the United Sates. (c) By January 1, 1996, each school district shall have verified the legalstatus of each child already enrolled and in attendance in the school districtin order to ensure the enrollment or attendance only of citizens, alienslawfully admitted as permanent residents, or persons who are otherwiseauthorized under federal law to be present in the United States. (d) By January 1, 1996, each school district shall also have verified thelegal status of each parent or guardian of each child referred to insubdivision (b) and (a) above, to determine whether such parent or guardian isone of the following: (1). A citizen of the United States. (2). An alien lawfully admitted as a permanent resident. (3). An alien admitted lawfully for a temporary period of time. (e) Each school district shall provide information to the StateSuperintendent of Public Instruction, the Attorney General of California andthe United States Immigration and Naturalization Service regarding any enrolleeor pupil, or parent or guardian, attending a public elementary or secondaryschool in the school district determined or reasonably suspected to be inviolation of federal immigration laws within forty five days after becomingaware of an apparent violation. The notice shall also be provided to the parentor legal guardian of the enrollee or pupil, and shall state that an existingpupil may not continue to attend the school after ninety calendar days from thedate of the notice, unless legal status is established. (f) For each child who cannot establish legal status in the United States,each school district shall continue to provide education for a period of ninetydays from the date of the notice. Such ninety day period shall be utilized toaccomplish an orderly transition to a school in the child's country of origin.Each school district shall fully cooperate in this transition effort to ensurethat the educational needs of the child are best served for that period oftime.<O] SECTION 8. Exclusion of Illegal Aliens from Public Postsecondary EducationalInstitutions. Section 66010.8. is added to the Education Code, to read: Section 66010.8. (a) No public institution of postsecondary education shalladmit, enroll, or permit the attendance of any person who is not a citizen ofthe United States, an alien lawfully admitted as a permanent resident, in theUnited States, or a person who is otherwise authorized under federal law to bepresent in the United States. (b) Commencing with the first term or semester that begins after January 1,1995, and at the commencement of each term or semester thereafter, each publicpostsecondary educational institution shall verify the status of each personenrolled or in attendance at that institution in order to ensure the enrollmentor attendance only of United States citizens, aliens lawfully admitted aspermanent residents in the United States, and persons who are otherwiseauthorized under federal law to be present in the United States. [O>(c) No later than 45 days after the admissions officer of a publicpostsecondary educational institution becomes aware of the application,enrollment, or attendance of a person determined to be, or who is underreasonable suspicion of being, in the United States in violation of federalimmigration laws, that officer shall provide that information to the StateSuperintendent of Public Instruction, the Attorney General of California andthe United States Immigration and Naturalization Service. The Information shallalso be provided to the applicant, enrollee, or person admitted. SECTION 9. Attorney General cooperation with the INS. Section 53069.65. is added to the Government Code, to read: 53069.65. Whenever the state or a city, or a county, or any other legallyauthorized local governmental entity with jurisdictional boundaries reports thepresence of a person who is suspected of being present in the United States inviolation of federal immigration laws to the Attorney General of California,that report shall be transmitted to the United States Immigration andNaturalization Service. The Attorney General shall be responsible formaintaining on going and accurate records of such reports, and shall provideany additional information that may be requested by any other governmententity.<O] SECTION 10. Amendment and Severability. The statutory provisions contained in this measure may not be amended by theLegislature except to further its purposes by statute passed in each house byroll call vote entered in the journal, two-thirds of the membership concurring,or by a statute that becomes effective only when approved by the voters. Inthe event that any portion of this act or the application thereof to any personor circumstance is held invalid, that invalidity shall not affect any otherprovision or application of the act, which can be given effect without theinvalid provision or application, and to that end the provisions of this actare severable. WT02-B15-21IA088-000636-B048-231http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/carucom/descr.html 128.120.36.171 19970122193827 text/html 13517HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:39:18 GMTLast-Modified: Thursday, 08-Aug-96 02:55:22 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 13259 Variable Description Variable Description Abbreviated Name US Census Variable Description Tract Population Total Population Within Census Tract %White Total White Population Within Census Tract/Total Population within Census Tract for Race/Etnicity %Black Total Black Population Within Census Tract/Total Population within Census Tract for Race/Etnicity %Hispanic Total Hispanic Population Within Census Tract/Total Population within Census Tract for Race/Ethnicity %Under 18 Persons under 18 years old %Over 65 Persons >= 65 years old %Under 6 Persons under 6 years old %Foreign Born Total Foreign Born Population Within Census Tract/Total Population within Census Tract for Race/Etnicity Area Population Total Population within the MSA/CMSA Area Foreign Born Population Foreign Born within the MSA/CMSA %Area Foreign Born Residing in County in 1985 Number of Persons>=5 Years Old Residing in the Same County/ Persons>=5 Years Old Education (%pop over 25) % 0-8 years Persons >=25 Years Old Who Have Completed 0-8 years of Schooling/Persons >=25 Years Old % 9-11 years Persons >=25 Years Old Who Have Completed 9-11 years of Schooling/Persons >=25 Years Old %Completed H.S. Persons >=25 Years Old Who Have Completed HIgh School/Persons >=25 Years Old %Some College Persons >=25 Years Old Who Have Completed Some College/Persons >=25 Years Old %Bachelors or Graduate Degree Persons >=25 Years Old Who Have a Bachelors and or Graduate/Professional Degree/Persons >=25 Years Old Persons over 25 Persons >=25 Years Old H.S. Dropout Rate Total Number of Persons16-19 Years Old Neither Enrolled in nor Graduated From High School/Total Number of Persons 16-19 in MSA/MCSA Labor Market Structure Employed Persons Employed Persons >=16 Years Old %Operators, Nonfarm Laborers and Service Persons >=16 Years Old Employed as Operators, Nonfarm Laborers, and Service Workers/Employed Persons >=16 Years Old %Professional & Technical Persons >=16 Years Old Employed Professional and Technical Occupations/Employed Persons >=16 Years Old %Managers & Administrators Persons >=16 years Old Employed as Managers and Administrators/Employed Persons >=16 Years Old %Sales Workers Persons >=16 Years Old Employed as Sales Workers/Employed Persons >=16 Years Old %Clerical Persons >=16 years Old Employed as Administrative Support and Clerical/Employed Persons >=16 Years Old %Craft Workers Persons >=16 Years Old Employed as Craft Workers/Employed Persons >=16 Years Old %Operators Persons >=16 years Old Employed as Operators/Employed Persons >=16 Years Old %Nonfarm Laborers Persons >=16 Years Old Employed as Nonfarm Laborers/Employed Persons >=16 Years Old %Service Workers Persons >=16 years Old Employed asService Workers/Employed Persons >=16 Years Old %Farm Workers Persons >=16 Years Old Employed as Farm Workers or in Forestry and Fishing/Employed Persons >=16 Years Old %Males Working less than 26 weeks Males >=16 Years Old Working <= 26 Weeks in 1989/Males >=16 Years Old Males over 16 Males >=16 Years Old Poverty And Welfare %Persons in Impoverished Families Total Number of Persons below the Poverty Level in 1989/ Total Population within Census Tract for whom Poverty Level is Determined %Whites in Poverty Total Number of White Persons below the Poverty Level in 1989/ Total White Population within Census Tract for whom Poverty Level is Determined %Blacks in Poverty Total Number of Black Persons below the Poverty Level in 1989/ Total Black Population within Census Tract for whom Poverty Level is Determined %Hispanics in Poverty Total Number of Hispanic Persons below the Poverty Level in 1989/ Total Hispanic Population within Census Tract for whom Poverty Level is Determined % Families Receiving Welfare or PA Households With Public Assistance Income in 1989/Total Number of Households in Census Tract Income Aggregate Income Aggregate Family Income Number of Families Total Number of Families within Census Tract Average Family Income Aggregate Family Income/Total Number of Families within Census Tract Aggregate Wage and Salary Income Aggregate Household Wage and Salary Income Wage & Salary Households Number Of Households with Wage and Salary Income Average Wage & Salary Income Aggregate Household Wage and Salary Income/'Number Of Households with Wage and Salary Income Aggregate Self-Employed Income Aggregate Household Self Employment Income Self-Employed Households Number Of Households with Self Employment Income Average Self-Employed Income Aggregate Household Self Employment Income/'Number Of Households with Self Employment Income Aggregate Earned Income Aggregate Household Earned Income Earned Income Households Number Of Households with Earned Income Average Earned Income Aggregate Household Earned Income/'Number Of Households with Earned Income Average Welfare Income per Household Aggregate Household Public Assistance Income/'Number Of Households with Public Assistance Income Households Grouped by Income Level Income Under $5,000 Number Of Households with Income in 1989 Under $5,000 Income of $5,000-9,999 Number Of Households with 5,000-9,999 in Income in 1989 Income of $10,000-14,999 Number Of Households with 10,000-14,999 in Income in 1990 Income of $15,000-24,999 Number Of Households with 15,000-24,999 in Income in 1991 Income of $25,000-49,999 Number Of Households with 25,000-49,999 in Income in 1992 Income over $50,000 Number Of Households with Income in 1989 >=50,000 Last Update: 8/7/96WT02-B15-22IA088-000636-B043-256http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/commodity/alrbdata.html 128.120.36.171 19970122190950 text/html 13622HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:10:44 GMTLast-Modified: Tuesday, 13-Aug-96 17:03:17 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 13365 ALRB Data 881 Data This is wage data from more than seventy different commodities that was entered from paper toMicrosoft Excel 5. The range of years was from 1987 to 1995. The data tracked in theyears were Crop, Activity, Approximate Acreage, Peak Labor Requirement, Estimated Number Working(Manweeks),Wage Range Low, Wage Range High, Wage Range Midpoint, Piece Rate per Bale Low, Piece Rate per BaleHigh, and Piece Rate per Bale Midpoint. Maybe you can find this information useful. Here's a sample of the data. Palo Verde Valley Crop Activity Approximate Acreage Peak Labor Requirement Estimated Number Working (Manweeks) Wage Range Low Wage Range High Wage Range Midpoint Piece Rate per Bale Low Piece Rate per Bale High Piece Rate per Bale Midpoint Jan-87 Alfalfa, Hay Harvest 32,150 350 300 5.00 6.00 5.50 Feb-87 Alfalfa, Hay Harvest 32,150 350 300 5.00 6.00 5.50 Mar-87 Alfalfa, Hay Harvest 32,150 350 300 5.00 6.00 5.50 Apr-87 Alfalfa, Hay Harvest 32,150 350 300 5.00 6.00 5.50 May-87 Alfalfa, Hay Harvest 32,150 350 300 5.00 6.00 5.50 0.06 0.07 0.065 Jun-87 Alfalfa, Hay Harvest 32,150 350 350 5.00 6.00 5.50 0.06 0.07 0.065 Jul-87 Alfalfa, Hay Harvest 32,150 350 350 5.00 6.00 5.50 0.06 0.07 0.065 Aug-87 Alfalfa, Hay Harvest 32,150 350 350 5.00 6.00 5.50 0.06 0.07 0.065 Sep-87 Alfalfa, Hay Harvest 32,150 350 350 5.00 6.00 5.50 0.06 0.07 0.065 Oct-87 Alfalfa, Hay Harvest 31,790 350 350 5.00 6.00 5.50 0.06 0.07 0.065 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...end of sample Download a commodity data spreadsheet. Excel 5.0 format. Alfalfa, Hay Almonds Apples Apricots Artichokes Asparagus Avocados Barley/Oats Bell Peppers Broccoli Brussel Sprouts Bushberries Cabbage Carrots Cauliflower Celery Cherries Chile Peppers Cilantro Citrus Corn Cotton Cucumber Dairy Dates Eggplant Field Flowers Figs Deciduous Fruits Garlic Grain Grapefruit Grapes/Vineyards Green Beans Horticulture Kiwi Lemons Lettuce Melons Milo Mushrooms Mustard Okra Olives Onions Oranges-Tangerines Orchards Organic Vegetables Peaches/Nectarines Pears Peas Pecans Peppers(all kinds) Persimmons Pistachios Plums Pomegranates Potatoes Prunes Pumpkins Raspberries Rice Rose Plants Row Crops Seed Crops Beans, Snap Spinach Squash Strawberries Sugar Beets Tomatoes-straight Tomatoes-weightedB Tomatoes-weightedP Walnuts Wheat WT02-B15-23IA015-000163-B021-347http://stoned.org:80/index.html 205.163.58.29 19970105184924 text/html 10543HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Microsoft-IIS/3.0Date: Sun, 05 Jan 1997 18:51:05 GMTContent-Type: text/htmlAccept-Ranges: bytesLast-Modified: Fri, 03 Jan 1997 18:50:35 GMTContent-Length: 10344 Welcome Here, Stoner. I finally went through the logs and figured that there have been stoned people by this way since 4:20:96. Cast a Vote for Stoned.Org in the Hemp 100 Please show your support for Lawrence Elliott Hirsch and his class action lawsuit against the government. Worthy Cause!!! Legalize | Commercial Hemp | Drug Testing | HempLinks | Non-Weed Links Cool Cursors for Stoners Visit the Glass Pipe Gallery Check out Positronics and the Sinsemilla Fanclub Here's some good info on the Hemp Production Act of 1996 CannaNet The Swiss Hemp-Network Get this cool THC picture Cures Not Wars Online - Cool Stuff Here! Cool cannabis stuff Fitz Hugh Ludlow hypertext library Some Miami Buds The High Times Hemp 100 that I got my daughter mentioned in. The Marijuana and Hemp Online Magazine Big Bong Visit Darral Good's Seattle Hempfest Pictures Information on my favorite intoxicant at World Wide Weed As well as at The Amsterdam HighMarket It's the Emperor This place called HempBC is cool Brush up on your Hemp Facts Here's some High Times Stuff MARIJUANA MYTHS by Paul Hager Read this marijuana law FAQ Visit HempRock Here are some cool things on drugs (I only endorse the weed though) Check out the new Artwork at Hemp Net For more reading material check out the alt.hemp CANNABIS/MARIJUANA FAQ Tom's Legalization Page Hawaiian Indica from the Sensi Seed Bank Best viewed with at a resolution of 800x600 in HiColor Last updated Dec. 5, 1996 scottyo@stoned.org WT02-B15-24IA015-000163-B021-224http://stoned.org:80/help.html 205.163.58.29 19970105184725 text/html 3515HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Microsoft-IIS/3.0Date: Sun, 05 Jan 1997 18:49:07 GMTContent-Type: text/htmlAccept-Ranges: bytesLast-Modified: Tue, 05 Nov 1996 23:26:44 GMTContent-Length: 3317 Help Please! I NEED HELP! I've got huge plans for this place, but nowhere near the time accomplish it all. I'd really love some input as to what people would like to see. But first let me give you some ideas as to where I'd like this site to go. I'd like to make Stoned.Org the web site devoted to the joys of smoking, eating and otherwise ingesting marijuana. I figured that there are tons of sites commited to the legalization struggle, education about hemp, andcommercial hemp products, but I wanted to be about just plain getting stoned. One of the things I'd like to do is develop the largest collection of ganja food recipes on the net. Look for the beginnings of that project soon. I'd love it if people would submit to me any and all recipes they may have, along with anycomments about the preparation, and whether or not you'd like to be listed as the submitter. Another project I'm working on is an online glass pipe museum/gallery. If you have a glass pipe and access to a scanner, then why not take a picture and send it to me?Some suggestions, colored pipes will look best when photographed against a black background, and daylight is the best way to bring out the colors. You can send them to me, but I may soon have an ftp upload directory for anonymous submissions. Either send the files as gifs or jpegs,but I'll probobly compress them to jpeg for the pages. Again, please tell me whether or not you would like to be listed as the submitter. Finally, for now, I would like to offer free hosting for any related material in need of a home. If you have anything , anything at all , I'm willing to consider it.Pictures, icons, cursors, waves and especially midi's will all be glady rewarded with a home for all to access and enjoy. Original web pages (comics, poems, art, etc...) having to anything to do with getting high (marijuana only !) will be happily placed in the stoned.org domain.I beg , please help me ! Send me stuff ! Last updated May 6,1996 scottyo@stoned.org Oops! I almost forgot, send your grow tips here. WT02-B15-25IA015-000163-B021-233http://stoned.org:80/vote.html 205.163.58.29 19970105184735 text/html 2140HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Microsoft-IIS/3.0Date: Sun, 05 Jan 1997 18:49:15 GMTContent-Type: text/htmlAccept-Ranges: bytesLast-Modified: Wed, 11 Dec 1996 10:32:46 GMTContent-Length: 1942 Vote for Stoned.Org Submit a Vote for Stoned.Org to the The Hemp 100 You can submit a vote for Stoned.Org to the Hemp 100 by typing your email address below and clicking "Submit". Your vote will be *Download Joints from http://www.stoned.org/joint420.html* Please type your email address here: Last updated Nov. 25, 1996 scottyo@stoned.org WT02-B15-26IA015-000163-B021-243http://stoned.org:80/legalize.html 205.163.58.29 19970105184749 text/html 2592HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Microsoft-IIS/3.0Date: Sun, 05 Jan 1997 18:49:29 GMTContent-Type: text/htmlAccept-Ranges: bytesLast-Modified: Tue, 05 Nov 1996 23:27:48 GMTContent-Length: 2394 Stoned.Org - Hemp Legalization Sites Hemp Legalization Sites Get Wise...Relegalize - Some stuff on legalization The Washington Hemp Initiative is here! Washington Hemp Education Network NORML Cannabis Action Network HEMP (Help End Marijuana Prohibition) South Austalia Inc. Legalize It! CHA - Coalition for Hemp Awareness CHAs' List of Hemp Organizations Last updated June 6,1996 scottyo@stoned.orgWT02-B15-27IA015-000163-B021-251http://stoned.org:80/commercial.html 205.163.58.29 19970105184755 text/html 3402HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Microsoft-IIS/3.0Date: Sun, 05 Jan 1997 18:49:38 GMTContent-Type: text/htmlAccept-Ranges: bytesLast-Modified: Sat, 14 Dec 1996 00:34:15 GMTContent-Length: 3204 Stoned.Org - Commercial Hemp Sites Commercial Hemp Sites Hempys - the coolest hempwear around! Hemp Industries Association Hemp Essentials Hemp Baby Inc. - Apparel for Children Ecolution Hempilation - Buy This ! HempNet American Hemp Mercantile InLine Classic Cards The Ohio Hempery Sensi Seed Bank U.S. Hemp The Thirteenth Floor Cyber Store The House of Hemp New Earth - HEMP Skinner Butte Hemp Company Hungry Bear Hemp Foods The Canadian Hemp Company Reefer City - The Board Game ! Last updated May 10,1996 scottyo@stoned.orgWT02-B15-28IA015-000163-B021-259http://stoned.org:80/drugtest.html 205.163.58.29 19970105184802 text/html 6894HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Microsoft-IIS/3.0Date: Sun, 05 Jan 1997 18:49:44 GMTContent-Type: text/htmlAccept-Ranges: bytesLast-Modified: Tue, 05 Nov 1996 23:26:30 GMTContent-Length: 6696 Drug Testing For all of the people who send me mail asking about ways to beata drug test I give you this page. The Urine Test Mailing List - As well as more great drugtesting links! Anti Bladder Cops Society - Download a funky MS-DOS exacutable that calculates THC levels!!! HIGH TIMES - Drug Testing Yahoo-Health:Mental Health:Diseases and Conditions:Substance Abuse:Testing No More Drug Testing! What you need to know about drug testing in the workplace Fooling the bladder cops Some Drug stuff and links Urine Testing Miscellaneous articles scarfed off alt.drugs A.C.S. Herbal Tea Co. has a product they claim will clean you out. Someone recently sent me this. I'm not sure if it'll work but here it is. Hey a sure fire way to beat a UA besides drinking alot of cranberry juice is toget some Fruti Pectin Inserto mix it up and drink it with alot of water about aday before the test this should cover up any drugs in yer system. (they don'tget destroyed it just makes them undetectable) Some chemicals will mask traces of drugs in urine. Two products, TestFree and Naturally Klean, claim to clear any drug testing for a few hoursafter taking. The companies recommend abstaining for a day or two anddrinking lots of fluids. Both companies claim to have FDA safe ingredientsalthough they are secretive about the formula. You can contact thecompanies at: Test Free-Zydot Unlimited Inc., 9485 Tulsa OK 74157 918/ 747-2400 Naturally Klean-Houston Enterprises, PO Box 27776, Tempe AZ 85285 602/ 968-0773 Naturally Clean herbal tea also claims to be an effective product indefeating urine drug tests for pot and other drugs. It is consumed shortlybefore a test. A sample can be obtained for a $20 shipping and handlingcharge by calling 800/447-4692. Search AltaVista Search the WebUsenet and Display the Results in Standard Formin Compact Formin Detailed Form Back to the Index scottyo@stoned.org Last updated Oct. 2, 1996 WT02-B15-29IA015-000163-B021-269http://stoned.org:80/hemplink.html 205.163.58.29 19970105184814 text/html 22339HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Microsoft-IIS/3.0Date: Sun, 05 Jan 1997 18:49:51 GMTContent-Type: text/htmlAccept-Ranges: bytesLast-Modified: Tue, 05 Nov 1996 23:27:24 GMTContent-Length: 22140 Hemp Links Lot's 'o Hemp Links I want to look at the results from AltaVista, Lycos, Webcrawler. No, I want to search myself. If anyone wants to see if any of the links from the old page still work, here it is. Results of a search on AltaVista for the word "hemp." HIGH TIMES - Hemp 100: August 95 Hemp Agriculture: Officials Consider Legalization RENEWABLES, Featuring HEMP, THE PREMIER RENEWABLE Canadian Government Wants to Allow Hemp Farming Hemp Plywood Becomes a Reality Summary of Kentucky Hemp Report Hemp Update Colorado Hemp Initiative Project Homepage HempWeb Business Listings HIGH TIMES - Hemp 100: October 95 The Facts Cliff Schaffer's Hemp Page Canadian Hemp Company Hemp-FAQ-part 1 The Ryerson Hemp Club Indian Hemp Report Centennial OnLine Store BioResource Hemp GreenLeaf News 5.2 MARIJUANA SMOKING AS MEDICINE: A CRUEL HOAX A Brief History of HEMP SA Inc. American Hemp Wholesalers SMOKING; the joint/stickie CC Summer 1995: Bioresource Hemp 1995 NYT Magazine Article Industrial Potential of Hemp Hemp History Canadian Hemp Wholesalers 1 World Plaza (Kids) Hemp as biomass Hemp, Farming and the Environment Hemp Industries Association Hemp's Half Acre The Real Story about Hemp The Hemp Page HempWeb.Com History of UK Hemp Culivation Texas Hemp Company - OnLine Tobacco Shop Joe Stroebel - Hemp Farmer The MHA Library Hemp as defined in the Encyclopedia Britannica The Hemp Revolution Comes to the Mountains Canadian Hemp Retailers: Quebec Hemp as Fuel Hemp Bibliography Washington Hemp News Washington Hemp Calander - Fellow Washingtonians, please check this out! To the Top Results of a Lycos search on the word "hemp." Soybean to Hemp Comparison The Industrial Hemp Information Network U.S. HEMP HIGH TIMES - Hemp Around the World Green Lands Hemp.Net Mailing Lists - subscribe NOW Environmental and Economic Benefits of Hemp Hemp Activist Resource List HIGH TIMES - Hemp on the Net The HOTLIST of drug sites Hemp Companies Overview: Hemp Industry, Commerce and Technology Hemp Washington Hemp Activist Site Drug Related Bookmarks Stoned CyberSurfing is Cool The SoapBox WarOnSelectedDrugs Hemp Foods Overview HIGH TIMES - Net Resources Dr. Dave's Hemp Archives HIGH TIMES - Hemp and The New Energy Technologies Hemp Industrial Hemp Industrial Hemp FAQ Online Book Store: Industrial Hemp HIGH TIMES - I'll Gladly Pay You Tuesday... Cannabyte Communications Hemp Information HIGH TIMES - Hemp TV Hemp Gopher Stuff HIGH TIMES - Hemp's New Man Institute for Hemp - FAQ Grass Hemp News - Farmers Support Hemp Coalition of Hemp Activists for a New Green Earth CHA's Homepage Other Hemp Products Hemp Permit Relegalize Cannabis - Commercial Sites, Head Shops Germany lifts ban on Hemp Hemp Industies Association ECOLUTION - Cyber Hemp American Hemp Use in WWII Batik HEMP Clothing More Shameless Hemp Propaganda HIGH TIMES - DARE Charges Store with Counterfeiting Hemp Paper Saves Forest alt.hemp CANNABIS/MARIJUANA FAQ Marijuana/Hemp History To the Top Results of a search on Webcrawler for the word "hemp." Hemp Jewelry James Dawson's Freedom Page Tinaja's Rant Hemp Union Nick Merrill's Guide to Marijuana Resources Hemp: Properties and General Overview Welcome to HempWorld New Age Patriot Dev's Drug Corner 4:20 on 4:20 at 4:20 The Complete History of Cannabis in Canada HIGH TIMES - 1996 Cannabis Cup Info The Marijuana and Hemp Online Magazine The Natural Hemp Company Cat's-Eye Technologies: Hemp Archives Cloud Nine Hemp Products AHM - About Hemp Woodpecker's Hemp Nest Matt's Hemp Jewelry Sale Oxford Hemp Exchange The Flow Tree Free Hemp Paper Educational Cooperative Hemp Organization Keep your Roaches! Grassroots Hemp Catalog Living Tree Paper Company Dave's Drug Links Page Cover the Earth Hemp Textiles International Everything You Wanted to Know about Hemp Marijuana Land The Hemp Store Illinois Marijuana Initiative Dobbstown Victimless Crime My Ass Cheech and Chong Cool Links Drugs and Drug Users Hempilation Drug Related Street Terms/Slang Words Rainbow Family of Living Light Unofficial Home Page Hemp Pictures To the Top Search the WebUsenet and Display the Results in Standard Formin Compact Formin Detailed Form To the Top Back to the stoner page scottyo@stoned.org Last updated Oct. 2, 1996WT02-B15-30IA015-000163-B021-280http://stoned.org:80/other.html 205.163.58.29 19970105184825 text/html 6491HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Microsoft-IIS/3.0Date: Sun, 05 Jan 1997 18:50:05 GMTContent-Type: text/htmlAccept-Ranges: bytesLast-Modified: Tue, 05 Nov 1996 23:28:19 GMTContent-Length: 6293 Stoned.Org - Other links Other Non-Weed Related Links This is all of the other stuff that used to be on the main (only) page. There's some cool shit here that I didn't want to dis on. You know, friends pages and other 'usefull' trinkets. Cool Hip Hop Culture Links Hip Hop Discographies The Totally Unofficial Rap Dictionary Aaron's Tie Dyes Home Page - Buy a dye and register as an internet hippie!!! Cosmo G. Spacely Home Page Deep thought of the Day - By Jack Handy My cheesey Star Wars page The Greatful Dead Olympia Networking Services - Thanks a Bunch!!! Lollapalooza '96 Fractals Tara Thralls Tie Dyes NCSA - A Beginner's Guide to HTML Star Trek Altavista Earth Viewer Hip Hop Lyrics Not all correct, but still cool Waldorf Education FAQ The Scott List and the Seattle Edition Seattle, the Emerald City USA CityLink The Library of Congress Movies and Television Playboy Penthouse Pathfinder The Virtual Garden The Garden Gate The Smithsonian Institution WebMuseum World Wide Web Consortium Internet Links Useless WWW Pages The Spider's Web The Mother of all BBS Stingray Home Page Green Eggs Report Links Open Virtual Reality Testbed Home Page Silicon Surf Corewear Snowboard Clothing The Central Intelligence Agency Last updated May 14,1996 scottyo@stoned.org WT02-B15-31IA015-000163-B021-292http://stoned.org:80/cool_cursors.html 205.163.58.29 19970105184832 text/html 5582HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Microsoft-IIS/3.0Date: Sun, 05 Jan 1997 18:50:15 GMTContent-Type: text/htmlAccept-Ranges: bytesLast-Modified: Fri, 03 Jan 1997 10:58:38 GMTContent-Length: 5384 Stoned.Org - Download Joints, Bongs - all cursors, oh my!! Cool Animated Cursors for Stoners Finally!! All of the cursors in one package!!! Here at last is one file with all six cursors - two joints and four bongs - and in a self-extracting executable. Click here to download the 32bit self extracting file and here for a standard zip file. When you download one of these you will get both Joint420.ani's and both Dabong!.ani's as well as GlassBong.ani and Haze.ani which is like one of those two chambered plastic bongs all the head shops sell. If you have some but not all of these you can also get them individually below. Some Simple Instructions I get a lot of mail asking how to make these work and being a Stoner I felt I should include some instructions here to save me some work in the long run. First of all you need to be running a 32bit version of the Windowsoperating system. Animated cursors will not run on a Win3.1x machine and the same holds true for Macs I believe. So you Win95/NT users just follow these few instructions tobegin using these nifty cursors now. Open you Control Panel Open the Mouse Applet Click on the Pointers Tab Select the cursor you want to replace and click *browse* Navigate to the directory you unzipped to (usually c:\windows\cursors) Click *OK* a couple of times and you're set to go And so you know, I created the Joint420.ani's with Microangelo, the coolest little shareware app for 95. The animator alone is worth whatever it is they ask for it. And if you ever do any cool cursors for Stoners be sure to send em my way!! Individual Cursors And finally the collection of Cursors for Stoners as individual files. Most recently Iwas sent this new cursor called The Haze, or Haze or something by Hitman. This cursor is like one of those two stage plastic things that head shops used to sell, or still do or whatever - it's been a while since I've been in one of those. Anyway, get it as a self extracting executable or a standard zip file. The first cursor I was ever sent was Dabong!. A week later iZero, a.k.a Image Zero, sent me Dabong2! with a note explaining that he forgot to fill the Dabong! with water! And I hadn't even noticed - talk about burnt. Get them both right here as a self extractor or a zip. At some point in the last few months I was happy to get a glass bong in the mail!! That's always cool. And I'm happy to have it for you right here, so it can go on making it's way through the mail. Once again you're welcome to get it as an executable or zip. Send comments here. Now for my personal creations. The Joint420 cursors. Standard Disclaimer: I am not an artist by any means an artist so don't be surpised or disapointed if these are the worst cursors you've ever seen. If you do happen to like them though, don't hesitate to tell me. Grab the self extracting executable here and the standard zip file here. Enjoy now, ya hear? Last updated Jan. 3, 1997 scottyo@stoned.org WT02-B15-32IA015-000163-B021-305http://stoned.org:80/thc.html 205.163.58.29 19970105184844 text/html 1661HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Microsoft-IIS/3.0Date: Sun, 05 Jan 1997 18:50:27 GMTContent-Type: text/htmlAccept-Ranges: bytesLast-Modified: Tue, 05 Nov 1996 23:28:39 GMTContent-Length: 1463 THX rip-off pic This cool pic was sent to me by Hayato Tanaka.It makes great Desktop Wallpaper if you save it as a bitmap. For the Mac I found that it tiled oddly, but I don't know much about Mac's so try yourself. Anyway, click for the full size image (about 114k) Last updated August 28, 1996 scottyo@stoned.org WT02-B15-33IA015-000163-B021-313http://stoned.org:80/miami.html 205.163.58.29 19970105184852 text/html 1920HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Microsoft-IIS/3.0Date: Sun, 05 Jan 1997 18:50:35 GMTContent-Type: text/htmlAccept-Ranges: bytesLast-Modified: Wed, 28 Aug 1996 23:01:24 GMTContent-Length: 1722 Miami Buds Some Miami Buds These are some pictures that I found in my car years ago, when I lived in Miami, FL. A friend grew these plants. Those are his legs in one of the pictures. I don't remember if I smoked any of these particular buds, but I'm sure thatthey were great. Click on an image to get the larger version. Last updated May 14,1996 scottyo@stoned.org WT02-B15-34IA015-000163-B021-325http://stoned.org:80/hemp100.html 205.163.58.29 19970105184902 text/html 1354HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Microsoft-IIS/3.0Date: Sun, 05 Jan 1997 18:50:41 GMTContent-Type: text/htmlAccept-Ranges: bytesLast-Modified: Wed, 14 Aug 1996 00:51:00 GMTContent-Length: 1156 Hemp 100 Gif Here's the hemp 100 from last October in which I got my daughter's birthday mentioned. She does have a cool birthday - April 20th - or 4:20!! She was born at 4:02 AM, almost a double 4:20. I thought of asking my wife to hold off for eighteen minutes, but seeing that she had been in labor for twenty-six hours already, I thought better of it. Anyway, check out number 27. WT02-B15-35IA015-000163-B021-336http://stoned.org:80/myths.html 205.163.58.29 19970105184916 text/html 16842HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Microsoft-IIS/3.0Date: Sun, 05 Jan 1997 18:50:56 GMTContent-Type: text/htmlAccept-Ranges: bytesLast-Modified: Tue, 29 Oct 1996 19:05:23 GMTContent-Length: 16643 Marijuana Myths by Paul Hager Back to the Index                          MARIJUANA MYTHS                          by Paul Hager                   Chair, ICLU Drug Task Force1. Marijuana causes brain damage     The most celebrated study that claims to show brain damage isthe rhesus monkey study of Dr. Robert Heath, done in the late1970s.  This study was reviewed by a distinguished panel ofscientists sponsored by the Institute of Medicine and the NationalAcademy of Sciences.  Their results were published under the title,Marijuana and Health in 1982.  Heath's work was sharply criticizedfor its insufficient sample size (only four monkeys), its failureto control experimental bias, and the misidentification of normalmonkey brain structure as "damaged".  Actual studies of humanpopulations of marijuana users have shown no evidence of braindamage.  For example, two studies from 1977, published in theJournal of the American Medical Association (JAMA) showed noevidence of brain damage in heavy users of marijuana.  That sameyear, the American Medical Association (AMA) officially came out infavor of decriminalizing marijuana.  That's not the sort of thingyou'd expect if the AMA thought marijuana damaged the brain.2. Marijuana damages the reproductive system     This claim is based chiefly on the work of Dr. Gabriel Nahas,who experimented with tissue (cells) isolated in petri dishes, andthe work of researchers who dosed animals with near-lethal amountsof cannabinoids (i.e., the intoxicating part of marijuana).  Nahas'generalizations from his petri dishes to human beings have beenrejected by the scientific community as being invalid.  In the caseof the animal experiments, the animals that survived their ordealreturned to normal within 30 days of the end of the experiment. Studies of actual human populations have failed to demonstrate thatmarijuana adversely affects the reproductive system.3. Marijuana is a "gateway" drug -- it leads to hard drugs     This is one of the more persistent myths.  A real worldexample of what happens when marijuana is readily available can befound in Holland.  The Dutch partially legalized marijuana in the1970s.  Since then, hard drug use -- heroin and cocaine -- haveDECLINED substantially.  If marijuana really were a gateway drug,one would have expected use of hard drugs to have gone up, notdown.  This apparent "negative gateway" effect has also beenobserved in the United States.  Studies done in the early 1970sshowed a negative correlation between use of marijuana and use ofalcohol.  A 1993 Rand Corporation study that compared drug use instates that had decriminalized marijuana versus those that had not,found that where marijuana was more available -- the states thathad decriminalized -- hard drug abuse as measured by emergency roomepisodes decreased.  In short, what science and actual experiencetell us is that marijuana tends to substitute for the much moredangerous hard drugs like alcohol, cocaine, and heroin.4. Marijuana suppresses the immune system     Like the studies claiming to show damage to the reproductivesystem, this myth is based on studies where animals were givenextremely high -- in many cases, near-lethal -- doses ofcannabinoids.  These results have never been duplicated in humanbeings.  Interestingly, two studies done in 1978 and one done in1988 showed that hashish and marijuana may have actually stimulatedthe immune system in the people studied.5. Marijuana is much more dangerous than tobacco     Smoked marijuana contains about the same amount of carcinogensas does an equivalent amount of tobacco.  It should be remembered,however, that a heavy tobacco smoker consumes much more tobaccothan a heavy marijuana smoker consumes marijuana.  This is becausesmoked tobacco, with a 90% addiction rate, is the most addictive ofall drugs while marijuana is less addictive than caffeine.  Twoother factors are important.  The first is that paraphernalia lawsdirected against marijuana users make it difficult to smoke safely. These laws make water pipes and bongs, which filter some of thecarcinogens out of the smoke, illegal and, hence, unavailable.  Thesecond is that, if marijuana were legal, it would be moreeconomical to have cannabis drinks like bhang (a traditional drinkin the Middle East) or tea which are totally non-carcinogenic. This is in stark contrast with "smokeless" tobacco products likesnuff which can cause cancer of the mouth and throat.  When all ofthese facts are taken together, it can be clearly seen that thereverse is true: marijuana is much SAFER than tobacco.6. Legal marijuana would cause carnage on the highways     Although marijuana, when used to intoxication, does impairperformance in a manner similar to alcohol, actual studies of theeffect of marijuana on the automobile accident rate suggest that itposes LESS of a hazard than alcohol.  When a random sample of fatalaccident victims was studied, it was initially found that marijuanawas associated with RELATIVELY as many accidents as alcohol.  Inother words, the number of accident victims intoxicated onmarijuana relative to the number of marijuana users in society gavea ratio similar to that for accident victims intoxicated on alcoholrelative to the total number of alcohol users.  However, a closerexamination of the victims revealed that around 85% of the peopleintoxicated on marijuana WERE ALSO INTOXICATED ON ALCOHOL.  Forpeople only intoxicated on marijuana, the rate was much lower thanfor alcohol alone.  This finding has been supported by otherresearch using completely different methods.  For example, aneconomic analysis of the effects of decriminalization on marijuanausage found that states that had reduced penalties for marijuanapossession experienced a rise in marijuana use and a decline inalcohol use with the result that fatal highway accidents decreased. This would suggest that, far from causing "carnage", legalmarijuana might actually save lives.7. Marijuana "flattens" human brainwaves     This is an out-and-out lie perpetrated by the Partnership fora Drug-Free America.  A few years ago, they ran a TV ad thatpurported to show, first, a normal human brainwave, and second, aflat brainwave from a 14-year-old "on marijuana".  When researcherscalled up the TV networks to complain about this commercial, thePartnership had to pull it from the air.  It seems that thePartnership faked the flat "marijuana brainwave".  In reality,marijuana has the effect of slightly INCREASING alpha waveactivity.  Alpha waves are associated with meditative and relaxedstates which are, in turn, often associated with human creativity.8. Marijuana is more potent today than in the past     This myth is the result of bad data.  The researchers who madethe claim of increased potency used as their baseline the THCcontent of marijuana seized by police in the early 1970s.  Poorstorage of this marijuana in un-air conditioned evidence roomscaused it to deteriorate and decline in potency before any chemicalassay was performed.  Contemporaneous, independent assays ofunseized "street" marijuana from the early 1970s showed a potencyequivalent to that of modern "street" marijuana.  Actually, themost potent form of this drug that was generally available was soldlegally in the 1920s and 1930s by the pharmaceutical companySmith-Klein under the name, "American Cannabis".9. Marijuana impairs short-term memory     This is true but misleading.  Any impairment of short-termmemory disappears when one is no longer under the influence ofmarijuana.  Often, the short-term memory effect is paired with areference to Dr. Heath's poor rhesus monkeys to imply that thecondition is permanent.10. Marijuana lingers in the body like DDT     This is also true but misleading.  Cannabinoids are fatsoluble as are innumerable nutrients and, yes, some poisons likeDDT.  For example, the essential nutrient, Vitamin A, is fatsoluble but one never hears people who favor marijuana prohibitionmaking this comparison.11. There are over a thousand chemicals in marijuana smoke     Again, true but misleading.  The 31 August 1990 issue of themagazine Science notes that of the over 800 volatile chemicalspresent in roasted COFFEE, only 21 have actually been tested onanimals and 16 of these cause cancer in rodents.  Yet, coffeeremains legal and is generally considered fairly safe.12. No one has ever died of a marijuana overdose     This is true.  It was put in to see if you are payingattention.  Animal tests have revealed that extremely high doses ofcannabinoids are needed to have lethal effect.  This has ledscientists to conclude that the ratio of the amount of cannabinoidsnecessary to get a person intoxicated (i.e., stoned) relative tothe amount necessary to kill them is 1 to 40,000.  In other words,to overdose, you would have to consume 40,000 times as muchmarijuana as you needed to get stoned.  In contrast, the ratio foralcohol varies between 1 to 4 and 1 to 10.  It is easy to see howupwards of 5000 people die from alcohol overdoses every year and noone EVER dies of marijuana overdoses.WHAT IS THE ICLU DRUG TASK FORCE?     The Indiana Civil Liberties Union (ICLU) Drug Task Force isinvolved in education and lobbying efforts directed towardreforming drug policy.  Specifically, we support ACLU PolicyStatement number 210 which calls for the legalization of marijuana. We also support an end to the drug war.  In its place, we favor"harm reduction" strategies which treat drug abuse as what it is --a medical problem -- rather than a criminal justice problem.     The Drug Task Force also works to end urine and hair testingof workers by private industry.  These kinds of tests violateworker privacy to no good purpose because they detect past use ofcertain drugs (mostly marijuana) while ignoring others (e.g., LSD)and cannot detect current impairment.  In situations where publicand worker safety is a legitimate concern, we advocate impairmenttesting devices which reliably detect degradation of performancewithout infringing upon worker privacy.     For more information about the activities of the Drug TaskForce, call the ICLU at (317) 635-4059 or call Paul Hager at (812)333-1384 or e-mail to hagerp@cs.indiana.edu on the InterNet.SOURCES1)   Marijuana and Health, Institute of Medicine, National Academy     of Sciences, 1982.  Note: the Committee on Substance Abuse and     Habitual Behavior of the "Marijuana and Health" study had its     part of the final report suppressed when it reviewed the     evidence and recommended that possession of small amounts of     marijuana should no longer be a crime (TIME magazine, July 19,     1982).  The two JAMA studies are: Co, B.T., Goodwin, D.W.,     Gado, M., Mikhael, M., and Hill, S.Y.: "Absence of cerebral     atrophy in chronic cannabis users", JAMA, 237:1229-1230, 1977;     and, Kuehnle, J., Mendelson, J.H., Davis, K.R., and New,     P.F.J.: "Computed tomographic examination of heavy marijuana     smokers", JAMA, 237:1231-1232, 1977.2)   See Marijuana and Health, ibid., for information on this     research.  See also, Marijuana Reconsidered (1978) by Dr.     Lester Grinspoon.3)   The Dutch experience is written up in "The Economics of     Legalizing Drugs", by Richard J. Dennis, The Atlantic Monthly,     Vol 266, No. 5, Nov 1990, p. 130.  See "A Comparison of     Marijuana Users and Non-users" by Norman Zinberg and Andrew     Weil (1971) for the negative correlation between use of     marijuana and use of alcohol.  The 1993 Rand Corporation study     is "The Effect of Marijuana Decriminalization on Hospital     Emergency Room Episodes: 1975 - 1978" by Karyn E. Model.4)   See a review of studies and their methodology in "Marijuana     and Immunity", Journal of Psychoactive Drugs, Vol 20(1),     Jan-Mar 1988.  Studies showing stimulation of the immune     system: Kaklamani, et al., "Hashish smoking and T-     lymphocytes", 1978; Kalofoutis et al., "The significance of     lymphocyte lipid changes after smoking hashish", 1978.  The     1988 study: Wallace, J.M., Tashkin, D.P., Oishi, J.S.,     Barbers, R.G., "Peripheral Blood Lymphocyte Subpopulations and     Mitogen Responsiveness in Tobacco and Marijuana Smokers",     1988, Journal of Psychoactive Drugs, ibid.5)   The 90% figure comes from Health Consequences of Smoking:     Nicotine Addiction, Surgeon General's Report, 1988.  In Health     magazine in an article entitled, "Hooked, Not Hooked" by     Deborah Franklin (pp. 39-52), compares the addictives of     various drugs and ranks marijuana below coffeine.  For current     information on cannabis drinks see Working Men and Ganja:     Marijuana Use in Rural Jamaica by M. C. Dreher, Institute for     the Study of Human Issues, 1982, ISBN 0-89727-025-8.  For     information on cannabis and actual cancer risk, see Marijuana     and Health, ibid.6)   For a survey of studies relating to cannabis and highway     accidents see "Marijuana, Driving and Accident Safety", by     Dale Gieringer, Journal of Psychoactive Drugs, ibid.  The     effect of decriminalization on highway accidents is analyzed     in "Do Youths Substitute Alcohol and Marijuana?  Some     Econometric Evidence" by Frank J. Chaloupka and Adit     Laixuthai, Nov. 1992, University of Illinois at Chicago.7)   For information about the Partnership ad, see Jack Herer's     book, The Emperor Wears No Clothes, 1990, p. 74.  See also     "Hard Sell in the Drug War", The Nation, March 9, 1992, by     Cynthia Cotts, which reveals that the Partnership receives a     large percentage of its advertizing budget from alcohol,     tobacco, and pharmaceutical companies and is thus disposed     toward exaggerating the risks of marijuana while downplaying     the risks of legal drugs.  For information on memory and the     alpha brainwave enhancement effect, see "Marijuana, Memory,     and Perception", by R. L. Dornbush, M.D., M. Fink, M.D., and     A. M. Freedman, M.D., presented at the 124th annual meeting of     the American Psychiatric Association, May 3-7, 1971.8)   See "Cannabis 1988, Old Drug New Dangers, The Potency     Question" by Tod H Mikuriya, M.D. and Michael Aldrich, Ph.D.,     Journal of Psychoactive Drugs, ibid.9)   See Marijuana and Health, ibid.  Also see "Marijuana, Memory,     and Perception", ibid.10)  The fat solubility of cannabinoids and certain vitamins is     well known.  See Marijuana and Health, ibid.  For some     information on vitamin A, see "The A Team" in Scientific     American, Vol 264, No. 2, February 1991, p. 16.11)  See "Too Many Rodent Carcinogens: Mitogenesis Increases     Mutagenesis", Bruce N. Ames and Lois Swirsky Gold, Science,     Vol 249, 31 August 1990, p. 971.12)  Cannabis and alcohol toxicity is compared in Marijuana     Reconsidered, ibid., p. 227.  Yearly alcohol overdoses was     taken from "Drug Prohibition in the United States: Costs,     Consequences, and Alternatives" by Ethan A. Nadelmann,     Science, Vol 245, 1 September 1989, p. 943. Back to the Index WT02-B15-36IA015-000163-B021-361http://stoned.org:80/hempedu.html 205.163.58.29 19970105184937 text/html 979HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Microsoft-IIS/3.0Date: Sun, 05 Jan 1997 18:51:16 GMTContent-Type: text/htmlAccept-Ranges: bytesLast-Modified: Wed, 14 Aug 1996 00:51:08 GMTContent-Length: 782 Stoned.Org - Hemp Education Sites Not quite yet! Last updated May 4,1996 scottyo@stoned.orgWT02-B15-37IA015-000163-B021-372http://stoned.org:80/joint420.html 205.163.58.29 19970105184946 text/html 1750HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Microsoft-IIS/3.0Date: Sun, 05 Jan 1997 18:51:26 GMTContent-Type: text/htmlAccept-Ranges: bytesLast-Modified: Fri, 03 Jan 1997 11:01:42 GMTContent-Length: 1552 Stoned.Org - Download Joints Joint Animated Cursors These are my first attempts at animated cursors. There are two versions in the zip file(which is all of 4K). I hope that you enjoy them both, although I personally think that 420-11.ani is superior. Anyway, click to download Joint420.ZIP. And if you like them (if enough people do, I'll try to improve them) Please let me know. GIVE ME MORE!!! Last updated Sept. 10, 1996 scottyo@stoned.org WT02-B15-38IA015-000163-B021-383http://stoned.org:80/hemp.html 205.163.58.29 19970105184953 text/html 10152HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Microsoft-IIS/3.0Date: Sun, 05 Jan 1997 18:51:35 GMTContent-Type: text/htmlAccept-Ranges: bytesLast-Modified: Tue, 05 Nov 1996 23:26:59 GMTContent-Length: 9954 Hemp Links Lot's 'o Hemp Links This is list of sites I found with Webcrawler and Lycos searches a longtime ago. Most of them seem to have gone dead. I don't really have the time to do an overhaul on this page, so I suggest that you hop on over to Altavista and do a search there. Search Altavista Search the WebUsenet and Display the Results in Standard Formin Compact Formin Detailed Form Or do your searches from here: Results of a Webcrawler search on the word "hemp." HIGH TIMES Hemp and Related links into the WWW 1994 Hemp Catalog Cyber Hemp Hemp Essentials A Hemp Gopher Menu Hempnet Hemp:General Overview and Properties Cloud 9 Shoppe Hemp KAWUMM Head Shop FAQ on Marijuana Hemp Hemp Rock:Hemp no the Net The Libertarian Connection American Hemp Mercantile InLIne Ohio Hempery The RE-Legalization Page Internet Accessible Drug-Related Resources Murple Web: Anti-Drug Propaganda Hemp B.C.'s Cannabis Canada e-zine Dobbstown Toon's Garden of Dutch Cannabis Drug Culture Cannabis Action Network Drug Page HEMPWORKS Fine Art Limited Edition Print Series Alt.hemp FAQ in hypertext Newsgroups The Digital Coffeeshop Industrial Hemp Archive The Institute for Hemp Home Page California Cannabis Hemp & Health Initiative 1996 Hemp Fashion BULLSHIT UMASS Cannabis Reform Coalition Psychedelic Psyberspace Miscellaneous Marijuana Results of a Lycos search on the word "hemp." Hemp Commercial Directory Hemp.html Sativa:Hemp-Band SKY:n WWW-linkkisivu HempWorld Magazine Hemp as an Industrial and Food Resource Hemp Directory Agriculture Canada:Report on Hemp AZ4NORML Hemp Essetials Hemp Institute for Hemp: FAQ More to come. Maybe.When I get the time. If I get the time... You know, you might as wellforget about any more coming Back to the stoner page scottyo@stoned.org Last updated April 30, 1996WT02-B15-39IA015-000163-B021-420http://stoned.org:80/miamibuds.html 205.163.58.29 19970105185022 text/html 1280HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Microsoft-IIS/3.0Date: Sun, 05 Jan 1997 18:51:56 GMTContent-Type: text/htmlAccept-Ranges: bytesLast-Modified: Wed, 14 Aug 1996 00:53:06 GMTContent-Length: 1082 Miami Buds Some Miami Buds Last updated May 13,1996 scottyo@stoned.org WT02-B15-40IA015-000163-B022-4http://stoned.org:80/miamibud.html 205.163.58.29 19970105185047 text/html 1279HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Microsoft-IIS/3.0Date: Sun, 05 Jan 1997 18:52:26 GMTContent-Type: text/htmlAccept-Ranges: bytesLast-Modified: Wed, 14 Aug 1996 00:52:54 GMTContent-Length: 1081 Miami Buds Some Miami Buds Last updated May 13,1996 scottyo@stoned.org WT02-B15-41IA015-000163-B022-15http://stoned.org:80/miamilegs.html 205.163.58.29 19970105185056 text/html 1280HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Microsoft-IIS/3.0Date: Sun, 05 Jan 1997 18:52:36 GMTContent-Type: text/htmlAccept-Ranges: bytesLast-Modified: Wed, 14 Aug 1996 00:53:20 GMTContent-Length: 1082 Miami Buds Some Miami Buds Last updated May 13,1996 scottyo@stoned.org WT02-B15-42IA015-000163-B021-213http://stoned.org:80/ 205.163.58.29 19970105184718 text/html 10543HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Microsoft-IIS/3.0Date: Sun, 05 Jan 1997 18:49:01 GMTContent-Type: text/htmlAccept-Ranges: bytesLast-Modified: Fri, 03 Jan 1997 18:50:35 GMTContent-Length: 10344 Welcome Here, Stoner. I finally went through the logs and figured that there have been stoned people by this way since 4:20:96. Cast a Vote for Stoned.Org in the Hemp 100 Please show your support for Lawrence Elliott Hirsch and his class action lawsuit against the government. Worthy Cause!!! Legalize | Commercial Hemp | Drug Testing | HempLinks | Non-Weed Links Cool Cursors for Stoners Visit the Glass Pipe Gallery Check out Positronics and the Sinsemilla Fanclub Here's some good info on the Hemp Production Act of 1996 CannaNet The Swiss Hemp-Network Get this cool THC picture Cures Not Wars Online - Cool Stuff Here! Cool cannabis stuff Fitz Hugh Ludlow hypertext library Some Miami Buds The High Times Hemp 100 that I got my daughter mentioned in. The Marijuana and Hemp Online Magazine Big Bong Visit Darral Good's Seattle Hempfest Pictures Information on my favorite intoxicant at World Wide Weed As well as at The Amsterdam HighMarket It's the Emperor This place called HempBC is cool Brush up on your Hemp Facts Here's some High Times Stuff MARIJUANA MYTHS by Paul Hager Read this marijuana law FAQ Visit HempRock Here are some cool things on drugs (I only endorse the weed though) Check out the new Artwork at Hemp Net For more reading material check out the alt.hemp CANNABIS/MARIJUANA FAQ Tom's Legalization Page Hawaiian Indica from the Sensi Seed Bank Best viewed with at a resolution of 800x600 in HiColor Last updated Dec. 5, 1996 scottyo@stoned.org WT02-B15-43IA027-000293-B027-204http://www.bernaproducts.com:80/index.html 206.136.243.10 19970117021640 text/html 384HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Fri, 17 Jan 1997 05:07:44 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.0Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 214Last-modified: Thu, 03 Oct 1996 03:44:22 GMT index.html WT02-B15-44IA027-000293-B027-144http://www.bernaproducts.com:80/02_conshmpg.html 206.136.243.10 19970117021601 text/html 698HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Fri, 17 Jan 1997 05:07:08 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.0Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 528Last-modified: Thu, 05 Sep 1996 21:22:49 GMT 02_conshmpg.html RETURN TO BERNA HOME PAGE Development and Design by:Colossal MultimediaWT02-B15-45IA027-000293-B027-176http://www.bernaproducts.com:80/image2.map 206.136.243.10 19970117021617 text/html 1155HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Fri, 17 Jan 1997 05:07:26 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.0Content-type: text/html Menu for /image2.map Menu for /image2.map           10_medhmpg.html           09_aboutberna.html           08_news.html           07_checklist.html           06_whiletraveling.html           05_vaccination.html           04_areas.html           03_abouttyphoid.html           href=http://www.bernaproducts.com>WT02-B15-46IA027-000293-B027-121http://www.bernaproducts.com:80/ 206.136.243.10 19970117021548 text/html 384HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Fri, 17 Jan 1997 05:06:57 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.0Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 214Last-modified: Thu, 03 Oct 1996 03:44:22 GMT index.html WT02-B15-47IA027-000293-B028-259http://www.bernaproducts.com:80/image3.map 206.136.243.10 19970117022322 text/html 1066HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Fri, 17 Jan 1997 05:14:26 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.0Content-type: text/html Menu for /image3.map Menu for /image3.map           10_medhmpg.html           08_news.html           07_checklist.html           06_whiletraveling.html           05_vaccination.html           04_areas.html           03_abouttyphoid.html           href=http://www.bernaproducts.com>WT02-B15-48IA027-000293-B029-42http://www.bernaproducts.com:80/image4.map 206.136.243.10 19970117022518 text/html 1062HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Fri, 17 Jan 1997 05:16:29 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.0Content-type: text/html Menu for /image4.map Menu for /image4.map           10_medhmpg.html           09_aboutberna.html           08_news.html           07_checklist.html           06_whiletraveling.html           05_vaccination.html           04_areas.html           href=http://www.bernaproducts.com>WT02-B15-49IA027-000293-B028-386http://www.bernaproducts.com:80/image6.map 206.136.243.10 19970117022440 text/html 1064HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Fri, 17 Jan 1997 05:15:40 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.0Content-type: text/html Menu for /image6.map Menu for /image6.map           10_medhmpg.html           09_aboutberna.html           08_news.html           07_checklist.html           06_whiletraveling.html           04_areas.html           03_abouttyphoid.html           href=http://www.bernaproducts.com>WT02-B15-50IA027-000293-B028-322http://www.bernaproducts.com:80/image8.map 206.136.243.10 19970117022352 text/html 1068HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Fri, 17 Jan 1997 05:15:01 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.0Content-type: text/html Menu for /image8.map Menu for /image8.map           10_medhmpg.html           09_aboutberna.html           08_news.html           06_whiletraveling.html           05_vaccination.html           04_areas.html           03_abouttyphoid.html           href=http://www.bernaproducts.com>WT02-B15-51IA027-000293-B028-356http://www.bernaproducts.com:80/image7.map 206.136.243.10 19970117022412 text/html 1046HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Fri, 17 Jan 1997 05:15:18 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.0Content-type: text/html Menu for /image7.map Menu for /image7.map           10_medhmpg.html           09_aboutberna.html           08_news.html           07_checklist.html           05_vaccination.html           04_areas.html           03_abouttyphoid.html           href=http://www.bernaproducts.com>WT02-B15-52IA027-000293-B030-214http://www.bernaproducts.com:80/image16.map 206.136.243.10 19970117023358 text/html 1053HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Fri, 17 Jan 1997 05:25:06 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.0Content-type: text/html Menu for /image16.map Menu for /image16.map           10_medhmpg.html           17_aboutbernamed.html           15_medcheck.html           14_pdr.html           13_questions.html           12_vivotifberna.html           11_oralroute.html           href=http://www.bernaproducts.com>WT02-B15-53IA027-000293-B029-21http://www.bernaproducts.com:80/image20.map 206.136.243.10 19970117022510 text/html 2079HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Fri, 17 Jan 1997 05:16:17 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.0Content-type: text/html Menu for /image20.map Menu for /image20.map           10_medhmpg.html           09_aboutberna.html           08_news.html           07_checklist.html           06_whiletraveling.html           05_vaccination.html           03_abouttyphoid.html           24_africa.html           22_middleeast.html           _URL_NOT_SUPPLIED_           19_soveitun.html           18_pacrimislands.html           18_pacrimislands.html           21_fareast.html           _URL_NOT_SUPPLIED_           20_southamer.html           23_centralamer.html           href=http://www.bernaproducts.com>WT02-B15-54IA027-000293-B029-181http://www.bernaproducts.com:80/14_pdr.html 206.136.243.10 19970117022652 text/html 21449HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Fri, 17 Jan 1997 05:17:51 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.0Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 21277Last-modified: Thu, 03 Oct 1996 05:47:08 GMT 14_pdr.html VlVOTIF BERNA VACCINE Typhoid Vaccine Live Oral Ty21a Description Vivotif Berna (Typhoid Vaccine Live Oral Ty21a) is a liveattenuated vaccine for oral administration. The vaccine contains theattenuated strain Salmonella typhi Ty21a. Vivotif BernaVaccine is manufactured by the Swiss Serum and Vaccine Institute. Thevaccine strain is grown under controlled conditions in mediumcontaining a digest of bovine tissues, an acid digest of casein,dextrose and galactose. The bacteria are collected by centrifugation,mixed with a stabilizer containing lactose and amino acids, andlyophilized. The lyophilized bacteria are filled into gelatincapsules which are coated with an organic solution to render themresistant to dissolution in stomach acid. The enteric-coated capsulesare then packaged in 4-capsule blisters for distribution. Thecontents of each enteric-coated capsule are shown in Table 1. Table I . Contents of one enteric-coated capsule of VivotifBerna Viable S. typhi Ty21a - 2-6 x 10(9) colony-forming units / Non-viable S. typhi Ty21a - 5-50 x 10(9) bacterial cells / Sucrose - 26--130 mg / Ascorbic acid - 1-5 mg / Amino acid mixture - 1.4--7 mg / Lactose - 100-180 mg / Magnesium stearate - 3.6-4.4 mg / Clinical Pharmacology Salmonella typhi is the etiological agent of typhoid fever, anacute, febrile enteric disease. This vaccine will not affordprotection against species of Salmonella other than Salmonellatyphi or other bacteria that cause enteric disease There areapproximately 500 cases of typhoid fever per year diagnosed in theUnited States (1). In 62% of these patients (statistics from1977-1979) the disease was acquired outside of the United Stateswhile in 38% of the patients the disease was acquired within theUnited States (2). Of the disease acquired during foreign travel 50%of the cases were contracted in Mexico, 20% in Asian countries and15% in India. The majority of the remaining cases were acquired inthe Caribbean basin, South and Central America, North Africa, andSouthern Europe (2). Typhoid fever is considered to be endemic inmost areas of Central and South America, North and Central Africa,Southeast Asia and the Indian Subcontinent (3). Of the diseaseacquired in the United States, 23% of the cases were associated withtyphoid carriers, 24% were due to food outbreaks, 23% were associatedwith the ingestion of contaminated food or water, 6% due to householdcontact with an infected person and 4% following exposure to S.typhi in a laboratory setting. The majority of typhoid casesrespond favorably to antibiotic therapy. However, the emergence ofchloramphenicol or ampicillin-resistant strains has greatlycomplicated therapy. Even with appropriate antibiotic therapy therewere 7 deaths among 901 acute typhoid cases reported in the UnitedStates from 1977-1979 2. Approximately 3-5% of acute typhoid casesresult in the development of a chronic carrier state (4). These nonsymptomatic carriers are the natural reservoir for S. typhiand can serve to maintain the disease in its endemic state or todirectly infect individuals (2). Eradication of the carrier state byantibiotic therapy has been unsuccessful.(5) Virulent strains of S. typhi upon ingestion are able topass through the stomach acid barrier, colonize the intestinal tract,penetrate the lumen and enter the lymphatic system and blood stream,thereby causing disease. One possible mechanism by which disease maybe prevented is by evoking a local immune response in the intestinaltract . Such local immunity may be induced by oral ingestion of alive attenuated strain of S. typhi undergoing an abortedinfection. The ability of S. typhi to cause disease and to induce aprotective immune response is dependent upon the bacteria possessinga complete lipopolysaccharide(6),(7). The S. typhi Ty21avaccine strain, by virtue of a reduction in enzymes essential forlipopolysaccharide biosynthesis, is restricted in its ability toproduce complete lipopolysaccharide (8),(9). However, a sufficientquantity of complete lipopolysaccharide is synthesized to evoke aprotective immune response. Despite low levels of lipopolysaccharidesynthesis, the cells lyse before regaining a virulent phenotype dueto the intracellular build-up of intermediates duringlipopolysaccharide synthesis (5),(8),(9). The efficacy of the S. typhi Ty21a strain has beenevaluated in a series of double-blind field trials. The first trialwas performed in Alexandria, Egypt with a study population of 32,388children aged 6 to 7 years. Three doses of vaccine, in the form of afreshly reconstituted suspension administered after ingestion of 1 gof bicarbonate, were given on alternate days. Immunization resultedin a 95% decrease in the incidence of typhoid fever over a 3-yearperiod of surveillance (5),(10). A series of field trials were subsequently performed in Santiago,Chile to evaluate efficacy when the vaccine strain was administeredin the form of an acid resistant enteric-coated capsule. The initialtrial involved 91,954 school-aged children, and compared 1 or 2 dosesof vaccine given one week apart. After 33 months of surveillancevaccine efficacy was 21% for the single dose schedule and 54% for the2-dose schedule.(11) A further field trial was performed in Santiago,Chile involving 109,594 school aged children.(12) Three doses ofenteric-coated capsules were administered either on alternate days(short immunization schedule) or 21 days apart (long immunizationschedule). Following 36 months of surveillance vaccination resultedin a 67% decrease in the incidence of typhoid fever in the shortimmunization schedule group and a 49% reduction in the longimmunization schedule group. After 48 months of surveillance, theshort immunization schedule resulted in a 68% decrease in typhoidfever.(13) An undiminished level of protection was observed duringthe fifth year of surveillance. A field trial was next conducted inSantiago, Chile to determine the relative efficacy of 2,3 and 4 dosesof enteric-coated vaccine administered on alternate days toschool-aged children. Relative vaccine efficacy as determined bycomparison of disease incidence within the three vaccinated groupswas highest for the four dose regimen. An additional trial held todetermine vaccine efficacy was conducted in Plaju, Indonesiainvolving 22,001 individuals approximately 3 to 50 years of age. Dueto logistical considerations three doses of enteric-coated capsuleswere administered at weekly intervals, a schedule known to providesuboptimal protection.(12) After two years of surveillance, vaccineefficacy for all age groups was 41%. It should be noted that vaccineefficacy was 36% for subjects 3 to 14 years of age and 60% for those15 to 44 years of age. At present, the precise mechanism(s) by which Vivotif BernaVaccine confers protection against typhoid fever is unknown. However,it is known that immunization of adult subjects can elicit a humoralanti-S. typhi LPS antibody response. Taking advantage of thisfact, the seroconversion rate was compared between adults living inan endemic area (Chile) and non-endemic areas (United States andSwitzerland) after the ingestion of 3 doses of vaccine. Comparableseroconversion rates were seen between these groups. Other studies inNorth American volunteers have shown that the Ty21a strain is capableof providing significant protection to an experimental challenge ofS. typhi. Because of the very low incidence of typhoid fever in UnitedStates citizens, efficacy studies are not currently feasible in thispopulation. However, the above observations support the expectationthat Vivotif Berna will provide protection to recipients fromnon-typhoid endemic areas such as the United States. Indications and Usage Vivotif Berna Vaccine is indicated for immunization of adults and children greaterthan 6 years of age against disease caused by Salmonellatyphi. Results from clinical studies indicate that adults andchildren greater than 6 years of age may be protected against typhoidfever following the oral ingestion of 4 doses of Vivotif BernaVaccine. Immunization (ingestion of all 4 doses of Vivotif BernaVaccine) should be completed at least 1 week prior to potentialexposure to S. typhi. Routine immunization against typhoid fever is not recommended inthe United States of America. Selective immunization against typhoidfever is recommended under the following circumstances 1) expectedintimate exposure to a house-hold contact with typhoid fever, 2)travelers to areas of the world with a risk of exposure to typhoidfever, and 3) workers in microbiology laboratories with expectedfrequent contact with S. typhi.(14) Not all recipients of Vivotif Berna Vaccine will be fullyprotected against typhoid fever. Travelers should take all necessaryprecautions to avoid contact or ingestion of potentially contaminatedfood or water sources. There is no evidence to support the use oftyphoid vaccine to control common source outbreaks, disease followingnatural disasters or in persons attending rural summer camps. Vivotif Berna Vaccine will not afford protection againstenteric microorganisms other than S. typhi. An optimal boosterdose has not yet been established. However, it is recommended that abooster dose consisting of 4 vaccine capsules taken on alternate daysbe given every 5 years under conditions of repeated or continuedexposure to typhoid fever (see Dosage and Administration section). Typhoid fever continues to be an important disease in many partsof the world. Travelers entering such areas are at risk tocontracting typhoid fever following the ingestion of contaminatedfood or water. Parenterally administered typhoid vaccine has beenshown to be effective at reducing the incidence of disease in suchendemic areas. However, immunization with such vaccines is frequentlyaccompanied by adverse reactions such as pain and/or swelling at theinjection site, fever, malaise, and headache. Contraindications Hypersensitivity to any component of the vaccine or theenteric-coated capsule. Safety of the vaccine has not been demonstrated in personsdeficient in their ability to mount a humoral or cell-mediated immuneresponse, due to either a congenital or acquired immunodeficientstate including treatment with immunosuppressive or antimitoticdrugs. The vaccine should not be administered to these personsregardless of benefits. Warnings Vivotif Berna (Typhoid Vaccine Live Oral Ty21a) is not to betaken during an acute febrile illness or in the face of acutegastrointestinal illness. Postpone taking the vaccine if persistentdiarrhea or vomiting is occurring (see General Precautions). Precautions General: The vaccine should not be administered to personsduring an acute febrile illness or acute gastrointestinal illness.The vaccine should not be administered to individuals receivingsulfonamides and antibiotics since these agents may be active againstthe vaccine strain and prevent a sufficient degree of multiplicationto occur in order to induce a protective immune response. The vaccineshould not be administered to persons with a known hypersensitivityto any vaccine component or medium component (see Description ). Information for Patients: It is essential that all 4 dosesof vaccine be taken at the prescribed alternate day interval toobtain a maximal protective immune response. Vaccine potency isdependent upon storage under refrigeration (between 2C and8C [35.6F - 46.4F]). The vaccine should be storedunder refrigeration at all times. It is essential to replace unusedvaccine in the refrigerator between doses. The vaccine capsule shouldbe swallowed approximately one hour before a meal with a cold orlukewarm (temperature not to exceed body temperature. eg, 37C[98.6F] ) drink. Care should be taken not to chew the vaccinecapsule. The vaccine capsule should be swallowed as soon afterplacing in the mouth as possible. Carcinogenesis, Mutagenesis, Impairment of Fertility:Long-term studies in animals with Vivotif Berna Vaccine havenot been performed to evaluate carcinogenic potential, mutagenicpotential or impairment of fertility. Pregnancy Category C Animal reproduction studies have not been conducted with VivotifBerna Vaccine. It is not known whether Vivotif BernaVaccine can cause fetal harm when administered to pregnant women orcan affect reproduction capacity. Vivotif Berna Vaccine shouldbe given to a pregnant woman only if clearly needed. Nursing Mothers There is no data to warrant the use of this product in nursingmothers. It is not known if Vivotif Berna Vaccine is excreted inhuman milk. Pediatric Use The safety and efficacy of Vivotif Berna Vaccine has not beenestablished in children under 6 years of age. This product istherefore not recommended for use in children under 6 years of age. Adverse Reactions Several lots of Vivotif Berna Vaccine have been evaluated inseveral field trials both in adults and in school-aged children.Objectively monitored side effects, e.g., abdominal pain, diarrhea,vomiting, fever, headache and skin rash, did not occur at astatistically higher frequency in the vaccinated group as compared toa placebo group.(11) Post marketing surveillance outside of theUnited States has found that side effects are infrequent, transient,and resolve of their own accord. Reported adverse reactions includenausea, abdominal cramps, vomiting, skin rash or urticaria on thetrunk and/or extremities. Overdosage Five to 8 doses of Vivotif Berna Vaccine containing between 3-10x 10(12) viable vaccine organisms were administered to 155 healthyadult males. This dosage was, at a minimum, 5-fold higher than thecurrently recommended dose. No significant reactions, e.g., vomiting,acute abdominal distress or fever, were observed. At the recommendeddosage, the S. typhi Ty21a vaccine strain is not excreted inthe feces. However, clinical studies in volunteers have shown thatoverdosing can increase the possibility of shedding the S.typhi Ty21a vaccine strain in the feces.(15) Dosage and Administration The blister containing the vaccine capsules should be inspected toensure that the foil seal and capsules are intact. One capsule is to be swallowed approximately 1 hour before a mealwith a cold or lukewarm (temperature not to exceed body temperature,e.g., 37C [98.6F] ) drink on alternate days, e.g., days1, 3, 5 and 7. The vaccine capsule should not be chewed and should beswallowed as soon after placing in the mouth as possible. A completeimmunization schedule is the ingestion of 4 vaccine capsules asdescribed above. Unless a complete immunization schedule is followed,an optimum immune response may not be achieved. Not all recipients ofVivotif Berna Vaccine will be fully protected against typhoidfever. Travelers should take all necessary precautions to avoidcontact or ingestion of potentially contaminated food or water. Booster Use The optimum booster schedule for Vivotif Berna has not beendetermined. Efficacy has been shown to persist for at least 5 years.Further, there is no experience with Vivotif Berna Vaccine as abooster in persons previously immunized with parenteral typhoidvaccine. Despite these limitations it is recommended that boosterdose consisting of four vaccine capsules taken on alternate days begiven every 5 years under conditions of repeated or continuedexposure to typhoid fever. How Supplied A single foil blister contains 4 doses of vaccine in a singlepackage. Storage Vivotif Berna Vaccine is not stable when exposed to ambienttemperatures, Vivotif Berna Vaccine should therefore be shippedand stored between 2C and 8C (35.6-46.4F). Eachpackage of vaccine shows an expiration date. This expiration date isvalid only if the product has been maintained at 2C 8C(35.6-46.4F). Vivotif Berna Vaccine is manufactured bySwiss Serum and Vaccine Institute, Berne, Switzerland, anddistributed by Berna Products, Corp., Coral Gables, FL 33134. References (1). Centers for Disease Control. Annual summary 1980: reportedmorbidity and mortality in the United States. MMWR.29: 12- 117,1981.(2). Taylor. D. N., R.A. Pollard, P.A. Blake. Typhoid in the UnitedStates and the Risk to the International Traveler J. Infect. Dis.148:599-602,1983. (3). Levine, M. M., R. E. Black, C. Lanata, and theChilean Typhoid Committee. Precise estimation of the numbers ofchronic carriers of Salmonella typhi in Santiago, Chile, anendemic area. J. Infect. Dis.146: 724-726,1982. (4). Ames, WR., M.Robbins. Age and sex as factors in the development of the typhoidcarrier state and a model for estimating carrier prevalence. Am. J.Public Health 33:221-230,1943 (5) . S. Germanier, R, Typhoid FeverIn, Bacterial Vaccines, R. Germanier (ed.) p.137-165,1984.(6).Germanier, R., Immunity in experimental salmonellosis. l. Protectioninduced by rough mutants of Salmonella typhimurium. Infect. Immun.2:309-315,1970. (7). Germanier, R. E. Furer, Immunity in experimentalsalmonellosis. ll. Basis for the avirulence and protective capacityof Gal E mutants of Salmonella typhimurium. Infect.Immun.4:663-673,1971. . Germanier. R. E. Furer Isolation andcharacterization of Gal E mutant Ty21 a of Salmonella typhi: acandidate strain for a live, oral typhoid vaccine. J. Infect.Dis.131: 553-558,1975. (9). Germanier, R. E. Furer Characteristics ofthe attenuated oral vaccine strain S. typhi Ty21 a. Develop.Biol. Standard,43: 3-7,1983. (10). Wahdan, M. H., C. Serie, Y.Cerisier, S. Sallam, R. Germanier A controlled field trial of liveSalmonella typhi strain Ty21a oral vaccine against typhoid:three-year results. J. Infect. Dis.145: 292-296, 1982. Levine, M. M.,R. E. Black, C. Ferreccio, M. L. Clements, C. Lanata, J. Rooney, R.Germanier, A. Schuster, H. Rodriguez, J. M. Borgono, H. Lobos. (11).Prenzel, C. Ristorio, M.E. Pinto. The efficacy of attenuated S.typhi oral vaccine strain Ty21a evaluated in controlled fieldtrials. In, Development of Vaccines and Drugs against Diarrhea .11 thNoble Conference, Stockholm, l985. p. 90-101. J. Holmgren. A.Lindberg and R. Mollby (eds.). Studentlitteratur, Lund, Sweden 1986.(12). Levine. M. M., C. Ferreccio, R.E. Black. R. Germanier, ChileanTyphoid Committee. Large-Scale Field Trial of Ty21 a Live OralTyphoid Vaccine in Enteric-Coated Capsule Formulation. Lancet 1: 10491052,1987. (13). Cryz, S. J., Jr, E. Furer, M. M. Levine. ZurWirksamkeit des oralen, attenulerten Salmonella typhi Ty21aLebendimpfstoffes in Kontrol lierten Feldversuchen. Schweiz. Med.Wschr 118: 467-470,1988. (14). Report of the Committee on InfectiousDiseases. Twenty-first edition, p.373-374. American Academy ofPediatrics,141 Northwest Point Blvd., PO. Box 927, Elk Grove Village,IL 60009-0827,1988. (15). Gilman,R. H.,R.B. Hornick,WE.Woodward,H. L.DuPont,M.J. Snyder, M. M. Levine, J. P Libonati. Evaluation of aUDP-Glucose-4 epimeraseless mutant of Salmonella typhi as alive oral vaccine. J. Infect. Dis. 136: 717-723, 1988. Manufactured by: Swiss Serum and Vaccine Institute, Berne, Switzerland US License No. 21 Distributed by: Berna Products Corp., Coral Gables, FL 33146 WT02-B15-55IA027-000293-B030-277http://www.bernaproducts.com:80/image14.map 206.136.243.10 19970117023441 text/html 1061HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Fri, 17 Jan 1997 05:25:52 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.0Content-type: text/html Menu for /image14.map Menu for /image14.map           10_medhmpg.html           17_aboutbernamed.html           16_mednews.html           15_medcheck.html           13_questions.html           12_vivotifberna.html           11_oralroute.html           href=http://www.bernaproducts.com>WT02-B15-56IA027-000293-B028-193http://www.bernaproducts.com:80/image10.map 206.136.243.10 19970117022213 text/html 1151HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Fri, 17 Jan 1997 05:13:07 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.0Content-type: text/html Menu for /image10.map Menu for /image10.map           02_conshmpg.html           17_aboutbernamed.html           16_mednews.html           15_medcheck.html           14_pdr.html           13_questions.html           12_vivotifberna.html           11_oralroute.html           href=http://www.bernaproducts.com>WT02-B15-57IA027-000293-B029-278http://www.bernaproducts.com:80/image11.map 206.136.243.10 19970117022922 text/html 1049HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Fri, 17 Jan 1997 05:20:25 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.0Content-type: text/html Menu for /image11.map Menu for /image11.map           10_medhmpg.html           17_aboutbernamed.html           16_mednews.html           15_medcheck.html           14_pdr.html           13_questions.html           12_vivotifberna.html           href=http://www.bernaproducts.com>WT02-B15-58IA027-000293-B028-290http://www.bernaproducts.com:80/image12.map 206.136.243.10 19970117022341 text/html 1106HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Fri, 17 Jan 1997 05:14:49 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.0Content-type: text/html Menu for /image12.map Menu for /image12.map           10_medhmpg.html           09_aboutberna.html           07_checklist.html           06_whiletraveling.html           05_vaccination.html.bak           04_areas.html           03_abouttyphoid.html.bak           href=http://www.bernaproducts.com>WT02-B15-59IA027-000293-B030-310http://www.bernaproducts.com:80/image13.map 206.136.243.10 19970117023502 text/html 1049HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Fri, 17 Jan 1997 05:26:03 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.0Content-type: text/html Menu for /image13.map Menu for /image13.map           12_vivotifberna.html           10_medhmpg.html           17_aboutbernamed.html           16_mednews.html           15_medcheck.html           14_pdr.html           11_oralroute.html           href=http://www.bernaproducts.com>WT02-B15-60IA027-000293-B030-246http://www.bernaproducts.com:80/image15.map 206.136.243.10 19970117023431 text/html 1051HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Fri, 17 Jan 1997 05:25:28 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.0Content-type: text/html Menu for /image15.map Menu for /image15.map           10_medhmpg.html           17_aboutbernamed.html           16_mednews.html           14_pdr.html           13_questions.html           12_vivotifberna.html           11_oralroute.html           href=http://www.bernaproducts.com>WT02-B15-61IA027-000293-B030-183http://www.bernaproducts.com:80/image17.map 206.136.243.10 19970117023320 text/html 1041HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Fri, 17 Jan 1997 05:24:24 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.0Content-type: text/html Menu for /image17.map Menu for /image17.map           10_medhmpg.html           16_mednews.html           15_medcheck.html           14_pdr.html           13_questions.html           12_vivotifberna.html           11_oralroute.html           href=http://www.bernaproducts.com>WT02-B15-62IA027-000293-B027-305http://www.bernaproducts.com:80/08_news.html 206.136.243.10 19970117021808 text/html 24301HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Fri, 17 Jan 1997 05:09:15 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.0Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 24129Last-modified: Thu, 03 Oct 1996 06:50:03 GMT 08_news.html Looking to theFuture--What's News It's hard to read an article on medicine today and not findmention of some new discovery in biotechnology. During the lastdecade, the pharmaceutical industry has focused more and moreResearch & Development efforts on the miracles possible throughbiotechnology. However for companies involved in research and development ofvaccines, "biotechnology" is old-hat!BERNA PRODUCTS, CORP.'s parent company,The Swiss Serum & Vaccine Institute Berne has utilizedbiotechnology for years. An excellent example is the research anddevelopment of VIVOTIFBERNA which began in 1969. Developed over a 12 year period, this unique vaccine for typhoidfever resulted from working on the of the Ty21a strain of thebacteria that causes typhoid fever, Salmonella typhi, to makeit so it doesn't cause the disease. This "weakened" bacteria is thenused to produce a vaccine that will stimulate the body to produceantibodies that will protect against the regular, disease-causingbacteria Trends in Typhoid Fever The BERNA product line will continue to benefitfrom this dedication to innovative research. Each year, a substantialamount of the operating revenues are committed to research anddevelopment. As a result, there are some exciting products on thehorizon: Cholera Hepatitis A Hyperimmune Globulin Rabies Tetanus Return to Berna Home Page Oral Cholera Vaccine Another revolutionary BERNA vaccine, is one against cholera.Similar to VIVOTIFBERNA, CVD 103 HgR is the first ORAL cholera vaccine made from"weakened "bacteria. Could it be Cholera? Genetic Engineering Technology Being Applied to Cholera Vaccine Hyperimmune Globulin One of the largest hospital-based clinical trials ever conductedin the U.S. has been done to test another BERNA product, NOSOCUMANBERNA. Together with Walter Reed Army Institute of Research and theVeterans' Administration, 5,000 patients at 10 medical centers havebeen involved in testing this hyperimmune globulin developed to fighthospital-acquired infections, due to 2 bacteria Klebsiella spp andPseudomonas aeruginosa. The fact that hospital-acquired infectionscontribute to approximately 30% of the deaths in hospital intensivecare units underscores the importance of this product to the hospitalphysicians. Back to Berna Product List Hepatitis A Vaccine Rabies Vaccine A new inactivated, human-diploid cell vaccine effective for bothpre-exposure and post-exposure use has been used in clinical trialsin 3 U.S. Veterinary Schools An Epidemic Moving Up and Down the East Coast Back to Berna Product List Tetanus Toxoid Even though effective preventative vaccine has been availablesince the 1940's, cases of tetanus still occur. What Do Travelers, Women & Older Patients Have in Common? Back to Berna Product List In the literature: TRENDS INTYPHOID FEVER Even with the availability of effective vaccines, typhoid fevercontinues to affect U.S. travelers. Dr. Jacques Mathieu from theDivision of Disease Intervention, NY City Department of Health andcolleagues from Field Epidemiology of the CDC felt that New York City"offers a unique opportunity to study trends in typhoid fever." In an article published in the AMA publication, Archives inInternal Medicine,* they document the frequency of typhoid feverover the last decade. Since the early 1970s, importation of typhoid fever has changedthe "appearance" of the disease. Their research indicated thatfrequency of typhoid fever increased 110% in New York City in thethree year period from 1987-1990. Furthermore, this increase wasalmost exclusively due to travel-related cases. Specifically, theyfound: The highest age specific rate of typhoid fever was among 10-19 year olds 30% of those infected were students 91 % of patients with travel-related typhoid fever required hospitalization 27% of households had at least I member other than the patient who tested positive for S. typhi Based on their findings, they concluded: The trends of S.typhiinfection in New York City followed the trends observed inthe United States since 1978, which demonstrates the importance ofinternational travel. Although food and water precessions may be effective forshort-term travelers, selective use of oral antityphoidvaccine for New York City travelers to high-risk endemic countriesshould be encouraged. Archives of Internal Medicine. Vol. 154: ppl 713-1718, August8. 1994 Back to Berna Product List With no history of recenttravel--Could it still be Cholera? As healthcare workers in the Midwest found out, the answer is YES!The severe diarrhea was consistent with cholera, but none of thepatients had traveled outside the country or eaten raw shellfishwithin the last month. Yet, stool cultures confirmed V.cholera The explanation: While they hadn't traveled, the food theyate had. The canned palm fruit brought to them from El Salvador wasthe culprit. This is not the first food-related occurrence. Recently; threeother U.S. outbreaks have been traced to food transported fromcountries where cholera is widespread.-crabmeat from Ecuador andcommercial frozen coconut milk from Thailand. The CDC recommends thatall international travelers be advised not to transport any fooditems from cholera-infected areas-regardless of its form orpreparation! The BIGGER risk-International Travel During 1994, 384,000 cases were officially reported to the WorldHealth Organization. Overall, 94 countries reported cholera casesincluding 13 countries in Central and South America, India, SoutheastAsia, Africa and individual republics of the former Soviet Union. Admittedly, international travel in countries where cholera iswidespread is responsible for most cases of cholera seen in NorthAmerica and Western Europe. In 1995, an unconfirmed number oftravelers from the U.S., Holland, Spain and Switzerland, as well asover 200 Japanese tourists returned home from the Indonesian islandof Bali, infected with cholera. Although vaccines against cholera have been available for years,they have not proven to be effective and are therefore notrecommended by the WHO. In response to this worldwide need, a neworal cholera vaccine has been developed by theSwiss Serum and Vaccine Institute Berne,the parent company of BERNA PRODUCTS, CORP, and the Center forVaccine Development of the University of Maryland School of Medicine. Identified as " V cholerae CVD 103-HgR", it is the firstgenetically engineered, live but weakened vaccine licensed for humanuse. Another benefit is the fact that it is orallyadministered. Switzerland has been the first country to approve CVD 103 HgR in1994. It is also available under a special release procedure from thegovernments in several European markets, including Italy, Austria andthe United Kingdom. Approximately 10,000 doses have been used underthese special procedures. A license application for this vaccine hasbeen submitted to the Canadian Bureau of Biologics and a similarsubmission to the U.S. FDA it planned in the near future. Until widespread availability of the CVD I03-HgR vaccine, the onlydefense against cholera is to avoid exposure. The CDC recommendsthat all international travelers be reminded of the followingprecautions: only drink water that is commercially bottled, boiled or treated avoid ice unless positive it has been made from sanitary water eat only foods that are thoroughly cooked and are still hot eat fruit only if it has been peeled by the person consuming it avoid undercooked or raw fish or shellfish-including cerviche only eat vegetables that have been cooked avoid all salads and leafy vegetables avoid all food and beverages from street vendors Sources: MMWR, Vol 44 No 20, May 26, 1995. Inf Dis News, July1995, pg 15; WHO Weekly Epidemiologica lRecord, Vol 70: 201-208, 14July 1995 Back to Berna Product List Genetic engineering technology beingapplied to Cholera Vaccine On most people's "wish lists might be a boat, a new car, or anexotic vacation. But for physicians involved with travel medicine, aneffective cholera vaccine is near the top of their list. As reportedin a recent article in Infectious Disease News TheSwiss Serum & Vaccine InstituteBerne, the parent company of BERNA PRODUCTS, CORP., is working tofill this wish. An Unwelcome Hitchhiker into the Country Since January 1991, a cholera epidemic has spread throughout theWestern Hemisphere. According to a report in the medical journalMorbidity and Mortality Weekly Report (MMWR 1993; 42 :89-93), in 2short years, 3/4 million cases of cholera had been reported, withover 6000 deaths. Unexpectedly, the United States is one of the 21countries seeing cases of cholera. During 1992, 12 states reported cases of cholera to the CDC, withno apparent regional pattern. Cholera in the U.S. Arizona Maryland California Nevada Connecticut New Jersey Florida New York Hawaii Texas Louisiana Washington In total, 102 cases were reported, more than in any other yearsince the Centers for Disease Control (CDC) in Atlanta begansurveillance 30 years ago in 1961. Interestingly, Vibriocholerae, the bacteria that causes cholera, has taken severaldifferent routes into the country. While airline food is never considered to be very good, in thecase of one international flight it turned out to be the cause of thelargest single outbreak in 1992. On an Aerolineas Argentinas flightbetween Buenos Aires and Los Angeles, food contaminated with thebacteria was catered on-board during a stopover resulting in 75 ofthe reported cases. A most interesting type of "souvenir" was identified as anothercarrier for Vibrio cholerae bacteria. In 1991, almost half ofthe cases reported that year were traced to souvenir crabs found inthe suitcases of travelers to Latin America. (MMWR 1991;40:287-9) But according to CDC reports, traveling is not the only way Americans can get cholera. Since1973, 91 cases of cholera not related to international travelhave been reported. Most of these U.S.-acquired cases were eventuallytraced to raw or undercooked seafood. And not necessarilyimported seafood either. (Infectious Disease News, April 1993) In 1992, routine sampling isolated V. cholerae bacteriafrom oyster beds in Gulf Coast waters. Food and Drug Administration(FDA) investigation uncovered the dangerous "stowaway" aboard cargoships from Latin America. Prior to docking in Gulf Coast ports, theseships had been in countries where Cholera was rampant, resulting incontamination of ballast and holding tanks. As a result, the FDA,Coast Guard and coastal Public Health Departments have beenmonitoring even more closely the "cargo" these ships bring into U.S.ports. (Infectious Disease News, September 1992) One Step Closer to an Effective Vaccine. With the CDC predicting that the spread of cholera outside ofLatin America into the Caribbean region is "probable", the importanceof an effective vaccine continues to grow. An article in the April1993 issue of Infectious Disease News focused attention on the newcholera vaccine, CVD 103-HgR, being developed by The Swiss Serum& Vaccine Institute Berne and the Center for Vaccine Developmentof the University of Maryland School of Medicine. CVD 103-HgR is thefirst genetically engineered "weakened" vaccine. The fact that it isorally administered is considered particularly good by expertssince they consider this the best way to stimulate the body toproduce immunity against disease that affect the gastrointestinaltract. Approval Standards Change as a Result of SS & VIB Vaccine In fact, the results demonstrated by CVD 103-HgR have actuallychanged the policy used toevaluate cholera vaccines. Reviewing thedata for CVD 103 HgR, the FDA's Vaccine and Related BiologicalProducts Advisory Committee concluded that challenge studies ( ie,when volunteers are vaccinated and then exposed to the bacteria tosee if they develop the disease) rather than field trials (ie. Whenvolunteers in a country where the disease is occuring are vaccinatedand then checked to see if they are protected from the disease) couldbe used to show a cholera vaccine works for travelers. As reported in the "Pink Sheet", the FDA's official reportingpublication, "The committee's conclusion that challenge studies wouldbe sufficient was contingent upon the efficacy data from challengestudies for a hypothetical cholera vaccine being at least as good asthe data presented to the committee on the Swiss Serum and VaccineInstitute's CVD 103-HgR vaccine." (FDC Reports, Feb. 1, 1993) Sources: MMWR 1993: 42: 89 93, MMWR 1992 40:562-S, InfectiousDisease News, Sept 1992. Infectious Disease News, April 1993,FDCReports, Feb 1, 1993) Back to Berna Product List Epidemic moving up and down the U.S.East Coast: Clinical trials on new rabies vaccine Clinical trials to judge efficacy were conducted for a new rabiesvaccine developed by the Swiss Serum& Vaccine Institute Berne. Trials of the vaccine, known asLYSSAVAC BERNA HDC, were done at the Veterinary Schools at KansasState University, University of Oklahoma and University of Georgiaunder Investigational New Drug status. Early trials confirming thevaccine's safety and efficacy for prevention (pre-exposure) as wellas treatment (post exposure treatment of individuals bitten by rabidanimals) were conducted in Europe and the Far East. Not So Healthy Neighbors Once approved, the vaccine will be welcomed by Primary Carephysicians and Infectious Disease specialists alike. Since 1990, anepidemic of animal rabies has been spreading up and down the eastcoast of the U.S. "Rabies is becoming a greater public healthconcern because rabid raccoons are moving into more densely populatedareas," explained Iyorlumun Uhaa, DVM, PhD, epidemiologist withthe viral and rickettsial zoonoses branch, Centers for DiseaseControl (CDC). Yes, he did say, "raccoons." While most people associatetransmission of rabies with bats, in fact, raccoons have recentlysurpassed bats as the prime carrier of the disease. And that's theproblem: Unlike bats, raccoons frequently roam through residentialneighborhoods, getting in fights with pet dogs. Exposure to rabies inthe general population is most often the result of people trying tobreak up these fights. While not necessarily bitten, saliva from therabid animal gets on hands or arms at the same time as cutsresulting, in a risk of infection. The significance of this problem is demonstrated by statisticsfrom the state of New York. According to the Infectious Disease Newsreport, prior to the increase in rabid raccoons in the state, lessthan 100 people per year sought treatment as compared to over800 the next year. The Treatment Dilemma Contrary to the common perception, exposure to the rabies virus,even with a puncture wound from a rabid animal, does not necessarilyresult in infection. Thus, the decision to start the multiple shottreatment is a difficult one. Delaying treatment until symptomsappear is not an alternative--because once symptoms appear, it's toolate. The death rate is 100%, even with treatment. Further complicating the decision of whether or not to start thetreatment shots is the fact that when symptoms might appear isunpredictable. Because the rabies virus spreads through nerve rootsrather than the bloodstream, symptoms can appear as quickly as 2weeks after exposure or not for many months afterwards. Who is at Risk? Certain groups, such as veterinarians, wildlife and animalcontrol, and zookeepers are the most obvious risk groups. Spelunkers(people who explore caves as a hobby) are included as well due to therisk of contact with bats or wild animals. The CDC recommendspreventive vaccination for these at-risk individuals. However, somewhat less commonly recognized is the risk to theinternational traveler. While vaccination against rabies is not arequirement for entry into any country of the world, travelers shouldbe aware of those areas where they might be at increased risk forexposure to rabies. The 1992 edition of the CDC's HEALTH INFORMATION FOR INTERNATIONALTRAVEL states "...the risk of rabies is highest in areas of the worldwhere dog rabies remain highly endemic, including (but not limitedto) parts of Mexico, El Salvador, Guatemala, Peru, Colombia,Ecuador, India, Nepal, Philippines, Sri Lanka, Thailand and Viet Nam.The disease is also found in dogs in most of the other countriesof Africa, Asia, Central and South America" with minorexceptions. It recommends that a bite from any animal, not just a dog,needs evaluation. Prompt local cleansing of the wound with safe waterand generous amounts of soap can help reduce risk. Local healthauthorities should be notified, as well as a personal physician orState Department officials. Sources: Infectious Disease News April 1992; CDC HEALTHINFORMATION FOR INTERNATIONAL TRAVEL 1992 Back to Berna Product List What do travelers, women and olderpatients have in common? The answer: Individuals in these groups have been identified asbeing at "higher risk" for contracting tetanus since they are morelikely to lack protective antibodies. At risk for tetanus? As surprising as it may seem since thepreventative vaccine,tetanus toxoid, hasbeen available since the mid 1940's, cases of tetanus continue toappear. 117 cases from 34 states were reported during the period from1989-1990. However, the Centers for Disease Control (CDC) in Atlantabelieves this does not reflect the true extent of the problem. Theirreport* concludes "Because tetanus surveillance findings are basedonly on reported cases, these results are likely to underestimate the'true' tetanus incidence in the United States. Completeness ofreporting for tetanus mortality has been estimated at 40% whilecompleteness of reporting for tetanus morbidity may be even lower." 1 out of 4 Patients Die. Tetanus is not a disease to be taken lightly. While it is bothpreventable and treatable, still 24% of the patients reported to theCDC with tetanus died. Furthermore, the death rate clearly increasedwith age. No deaths were reported in patients under the age of 40 ascompared with 17% of patients 40-49 years old and 50% of those 80years or older. The CDC report also underscored the significant economic impactthis disease can have. Length of hospitalization required ranged from2 131 days. In addition, specialized care in the form of assistedventilation was necessary for almost half of the patients An Ounce of Prevention Or in this case 1 /60th of an ounce of vaccine booster every 10years provides effective protection. However, a sizable portion ofthe U.S. Adult population are not up to-date with boostervaccinations, particularly older adults. In fact, blood test surveyshave shown that between 31-71 % of older adults lack protectivelevels of tetanus antibodies. A 1989 National Health Interview Surveyfound that only 13% of persons over 65 years reported receiving atetanus booster vaccination in the previous 5 years. This compares to50% that would be expected to have received a booster during thattime period for a vaccine that is routinely recommended every 10years. However, routine booster vaccinations for tetanus are frequentlydismissed under the assumption that if and when a patient is injured,the protective vaccines (tetanus toxoid and tetanus immune globulin)will be given. The problem is that tetanus infection often result from wounds,frequently wood splinters, that aren't considered sufficiently severeby the patient to warrant seeking medical attention. As confirmationof this, the CDC points out that 2 out of 3 patients included in theSurveillance Report didn't bother to seek medical attention at thetime of the injury that resulted in tetanus. And this scenariooccurred in the U.S. where medical attention is easily and readilyavailable. If a patient is injured while traveling overseas,particularly in developing countries, adequate medical attentionmight not even be available. A Mid-Decade Reminder Unlike during childhood where vaccinations are a key medicalpriority, the vaccination status of adults is often overlooked. TheCDC report reminds that vaccination status needs to be a routine partof the adult medical profile, particularly for elderly patients.Using mid-decade ages (e.g., 35, 45, 55, 65, etc.) may be an easybench mark to ensure that adult patients are protected. * MMWR Surveillance Report, 41/SS-8. December 11, 1992 Back to Berna Product List Return to Berna HomePageWT02-B15-63IA027-000293-B027-272http://www.bernaproducts.com:80/09_aboutberna.html 206.136.243.10 19970117021752 text/html 8281HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Fri, 17 Jan 1997 05:08:57 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.0Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 8110Last-modified: Thu, 03 Oct 1996 05:46:16 GMT 09_aboutberna.ht About the Company The Swiss Serum and Vaccine Institute Berne, founded in1898, came into being following the amalgation of the 'InstitutVaccinal Suisse', which began manufacturing smallpox vaccine at Lancynear Geneva in 1883, and Haefliger, Vogt & Co., which startedproducing anti-diphtheria serum after its foundation in 1894. Approximately 100 years after the first batch of smallpox vaccinewas produced in Geneva, the World Health Organization (WHO) announcedthe worldwide eradication of the disease. In developing and producingan effective and stable smallpox vaccine, The Swiss Serum and VaccineInstitute (SS & VIB) contributed significantly to this proudachievement of preventative medicine Berna Products, Corp. is the North American subsidiary of The Swiss Serum and VaccineInstitute Berne (SS & VIB). As one of 3 SS & VIB subsidiarieslocated around the world, it was established to provide immediateaccess to SS & VIB vaccines and biologicals for health careprofessionals in the US and Canada. Together with the manufacturingfacilities in Switzerland, Italy and Spain and the world-wide networkof Regional Offices located in Latin America and in the Near, Middleand Far East. The Swiss Serum and Vaccine Institute Berne enjoys a globalreputation as one of the leading European manufacturers ofbiologics Berna Worldwide Regardless of the language spoken, the name BERNA is a familiarone to physicians the world over. BERNA PRODUCTS is the trademark by which the products of theSwiss Serum and Vaccine Institute Berne are known in 120 countriesaround the world. In addition, BERNA vaccines have been supplied tomore than 40 developing countries as a part of the WHO/UNICEFsponsored Expanded Program on Immunization (EPI). The distribution of BERNA vaccines on a worldwide basisnecessitates a level of expertise beyond that required forpharmaceutical products in general. For example, due to the limitedshelf-life of vaccines, it is essential the the "cold chain" of doorto door refrigeration be insured, BERNA PRODUCTS are deliveredthroughout the US and Canada exclusively by Federal Express&reg.Not only does Federal Express quality service maintain thiscold-chain guarantee, but it makes it possible to constantly trackeach shipment until it is delivered to into the hands of the healthprofessional. And other example of the specialized expertise of the BERNAnetwork is the vast language requirements of labeling anddistribution for global distribution. While any pharmaceuticalproduct must obviously be prepared with the proper language labeling,frequently BERNA vaccines are neededunder emergency situations. To meet these needs, an in-house printingdepartment guarantees rapid, high quality packaging and labeling ofits products. The capability exists so that in emergencies, more than500,000 doses of vaccine can be packaged, labeled and shipped within48 hours regardless of whether the labeling must be in Chinese,Arabic or any other language. Berna Products Product Line Swiss Serum and Vaccine Institute specializes in the production ofvaccines and biologic products for both adult and pediatric use. Ourproducts marketed in North America and selected other countriesinclude: Adult & Travel Vaccines Public Health & Pediatric Vaccines Diagnostic & Therapeutic Products Products for Laboratory Use Return To Berna Home Page Adult & Travel Vaccines CVD-103HgR--Oral vaccine for active immunization againstcholera Lyssavac N Berna--vaccine providing protectiveantibody titres for both pre- and post- rabies exposure Te Anatoxal Berna--adsorbedvaccine for active immunization against tetanus Vivotif Berna--Oral vaccine for active immunizationagainst typhoid fever Return to Berna Products ProductLine Public Health & Pediatric Vaccines BCG sec Berna--live vaccine for intracutaneousvaccination against tuberculosis that have reacted negatively to theusual tuberulin tests Biviraten Berna;--live vaccine for activeimmunization against measles (Edmonston Zagreb strain) and mumps(Rubini strain) Buccapol Berna--live vaccine against poliomyelitis,obtained from Sabin stains Di Anatoxal Berna--Adsorbed diphtheria vaccine foractive immunization of children up to the age of 12 DiTe Anatoxal Berna Adults/Children--Adsorbeddiphtheria-tetanus vaccine for active immunization of adults/childrenup to the age of 12 DiTePer Anatoxal Berna--Adsorbeddiphtheria-tetanus-pertussis vaccine for active immunization ofchildren up to 2 years of age DiTePerPol Anatoxal Berna--Adsorbeddiphtheria-tetanus-pertussis-poliomylitis vaccine for activeimmunization of children up to 2 years of age Inflexal Berna--vaccine against influenza Moraten Berna--live vaccine for active immunizationagainst measles (Edmonston Zagreb strain) MoRu-Viraten Berna---live vaccine for active immunizationagainst measles (Edmonstoin Zagreb strain), and rubella (WistarRA27/3 strain) Mumaten Bernat--live vaccine for active immunizationagainst mumps (Rubini strain) Pertussis Vaccine Berna--vaccine for activeimmunization against pertussis of children upto 2 years of age Poliomyelitis Vaccine Berna--vaccine for activeimmunization against poliomyelitis (Salk) Rubeaten Berna--live vaccine for active immunizationagainst rubella (Wistar RA27/3 strain) Triviraten Berna--live vaccine for active immunizationagainst measles (Edmonstoin Zagreb strain), mumps (Rubini strain) andrubella (Wistar RA27/3 strain) Return to Berna Products ProductLine Diagnostic & Therpeutic Products Annexine Berna--vaccine therapy of inflammatorydiseases of the adnex Asthmatic Vaccine Berna--therapy of bceril asthma,asthmatic bronchitis and chroic bronchitis Broncasma Berna--therapy of chronic bronchitis and itscomplications, treatment of bronchial asthma of bacterial origin Buccaline Berna--oral antibacterial prohylaxis ofcolds Staphypan Berna--vaccine for prophylaxis ofstaphylococcal infections especially before surgical operation Return to Berna Products ProductLine Products for Laboratory Use Pertussis toxin Pseudomonas aeruginosa Toxin A Escherichia coli LT Diphtheria toxin Cholera toxin Cholerangeoid Coryebac teruim diphtheriae CRM 197 Return to Berna Products ProductLine Return to Berna HomePageWT02-B15-64IA027-000293-B028-73http://www.bernaproducts.com:80/05_vaccination.html 206.136.243.10 19970117021916 text/html 3539HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Fri, 17 Jan 1997 05:10:11 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.0Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 3368Last-modified: Thu, 03 Oct 1996 06:50:22 GMT 05_vaccination.html Protect Yourself: BEFORE YOU GO VACCINATION Typhoid immunization is advised for international travelers goingto areas where typhoid is prevalent, particularly if you are likelyto be exposed to potentially contaminated food/water, travel in ruralareas or have close contact with local residents. Typhoidimmunization is not a legal requirement for entry into any countryand no certificate of vaccination is necessary. Travelers who are taking H2 Antagonists (such as Tagamet,Zantac, Pepsid, etc.) are also at a higher risk forTyphoid Fever as they have less gastric acid which works to destroybacteria in the stomach. ORAL Typhoid Vaccine Typhoid Vaccine Live Oral Ty21a is the first and only oral vaccinefor typhoid fever protection. Unlike most "vaccines", this vaccinecomes in a capsule rather than a syringe. Known as VIVOTIF BERNA, itranks internationally among the most significant vaccine developmentsin the last 25 years. History & Development It's hard to read about today's medicine and not find some newdiscovery in biotechnology. During the last decade, thepharmaceutical industry has focused more and more research anddevelopment efforts on the miracles possible through biotechnology. However for companies involved in research and development ofVACCINES, "biotechnology" is old hat. BERNA PRODUCTS, CORP.'s parentcompany, The Swiss Serum and Vaccine Institute Berne (SSVIB) hasutilized biotechnology for years! The development of VIVOTIF BERNA,which began in 1969 is just such an example. Developed over a 12 yearperiod, it is a unique oral vaccine. To date, over 150 million dosestaken worldwide. The introduction of VIVOTIF BERNA in the United States in 1990 wasa joint effort between The Swiss Serum and Vaccine Institute Berneand the US Military who helped to fund the field trials necessary forFDA approval. Following its approval, in 1991 the Armed ForcesEpidemiology Board (the Defense Department's medical advisory panel)recommended that all troops going overseas be given the oral vaccine.Since then, over 100 million doses of VIVOTIF BERNA oraltyphoid vaccine have been taken in the United States. "Vaccination" Vaccination" consists of 4 capsules and should be completed 1 weekprior to potential exposure. The schedule is simple, one (1 ) capsule is taken every other dayon an empty stomach (ie. 1 hour before or 2 hours after eating). Manypeople find that it's easiest to take the capsule at bedtime. Protection from typhoid fever lasts 5 years. Capsules shouldalways be stored in the refrigerator. This vaccine should NOT be used by : children under the age of 6 pregnant or breast-feeding women immunocompromised patients patients with a fever anyone taking antibiotics Return to Berna HomePageWT02-B15-65IA027-000293-B028-103http://www.bernaproducts.com:80/04_areas.html 206.136.243.10 19970117022014 text/html 604HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Fri, 17 Jan 1997 05:11:06 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.0Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 434Last-modified: Tue, 01 Oct 1996 06:56:42 GMT 04_areas at risk Where will you be traveling? Click on the country. Return to Berna HomePageWT02-B15-66IA027-000293-B029-376http://www.bernaproducts.com:80/24_africa.html 206.136.243.10 19970117023025 text/html 1073HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Fri, 17 Jan 1997 05:21:35 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.0Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 903Last-modified: Tue, 01 Oct 1996 07:02:41 GMT 24_africa.html Areas at risk for Typhoid Fever in: Africa Algeria Angola Benin Botswana Burundi Cape Verde Islands Cental African Republic Chad Comoros Islands Congo Cte d'Ivoire Equatorial Guinea Gabon Gambia Guinea Guinea-Bissau Guyana Kenya Liberia Lmadagascar Malawi Mali Mauritius Mozambique Namibia Niger Nigeria Rwanda Senegal Somalia South Africa Sudan Swaziland Tanzania Toto Tunisia Uganda Zaire Zambia Zimbabwe Returnto mapWT02-B15-67IA027-000293-B027-236http://www.bernaproducts.com:80/10_medhmpg.html 206.136.243.10 19970117021711 text/html 1645HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Fri, 17 Jan 1997 05:08:12 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.0Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 1474Last-modified: Tue, 01 Oct 1996 06:58:11 GMT 10_medhmpg Photograph depicts the colony morphology of virulent S. typhi Ty2(large yellow colonies) and the attenuated Ty21a vaccine strain (smaller darkercolonies) derived from Ty2. The change in color and morphology of Ty21a is theresult of a genetic mutation linked to the attenuation of the strain. The ability of S. typhi to cause disease and to induce a protective immuneresponse is dependent upon the bacteria possessing a completelipopolysaccharide. The S. typhi Ty21a vaccine strain, by virtue of a reductionin enzymes essential for lipopolysaccharide biosynthesis, is restricted in itsability to produce complete lipopolysaccharide. However, a sufficient quantityof complete lipopolysaccharide is synthesized to evoke a protective immuneresponse. Despite low levels of lipopolysaccharide synthesis, the cells lysebefore regaining a virulent phenotype due to the intracellular build-up ofintermediates during lipopolysaccharide synthesis. (Formore information see Oral Route) Development and Design by:Colossal MultimediaWT02-B15-68IA027-000293-B028-222http://www.bernaproducts.com:80/11_oralroute.html 206.136.243.10 19970117022244 text/html 2522HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Fri, 17 Jan 1997 05:13:53 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.0Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 2351Last-modified: Tue, 01 Oct 1996 06:58:26 GMT 11_oralroute.html The ORAL route to TYPHOID PROTECTION VIVOTIF BERNA (Typhoid Vaccine Live Oral Ty21a) The ability of S. typhi to cause disease and to induce a protective immune response is dependent upon the bacteria possessing a complete lipopolysaccharide(1,2). The S. typhi Ty21a vaccine strain, by virtue of a reduction in enzymes essential for lipopolysaccharide biosynthesis, is restricted in its ability to produce complete lipopolysaccharide(3,4) However,a sufficient quantity of complete lipopolysaccharide is synthesized to evoke a protective immune response. VIVOTIF BERNA oral vaccine is adsorbed in the proximal ileum, providing typhoid protection right where its needed--in the GI tract. This live oral vaccine mimics actual clinical exposure, stimulating local, as well as, systemic immunity.(5-9) To receive a copy of this poster, call BernaProducts Customer Service at 1-(800) 533-5899 1. Germanier, R. Infect. Immun. 2:309-315,1970. 2. Germanier, R.E. Furer, Infect. Immun.4:663-673,1971. 3. Germanier. R. E. Furer J.Infect. Dis.131: 553-558,1975. 4. Germanier, R. E. Furer Develop.Biol. Standard,43: 3-7,1983. 5. Cancellieri, V., Fara, G.M., J. Inf.Dis. (151)3, pp482-484, 1985. 6. Tagiliabue, A., et.al., Clin ExpImmunol 62, pp242-247, 1985. 7. DAmelio, R., et. Al., InfectImmun 56, pp 2731-2735, 1988. 8. Kantele, A., Vaccine 8, pp 321-326,1990. 9. Kantele, A., Mkel, P.H., Vaccine 9, pp423-427, 1991.WT02-B15-69IA027-000293-B030-83http://www.bernaproducts.com:80/21_fareast.html 206.136.243.10 19970117023201 text/html 778HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Fri, 17 Jan 1997 05:23:10 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.0Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 608Last-modified: Tue, 01 Oct 1996 07:01:50 GMT 21_fareast.html Areas at risk for Typhoid Fever in: Far East Cambodia Cameroon China-Taiwan Hong Kong Indonesia Lao People's Dem Republic Korea, Dem. People's Republic (North) Korea, Rebulic of (South Malaysia Myanmar (formerly Burma) Paupa New Guinea Thailand Vietnam Returnto mapWT02-B15-70IA027-000293-B029-106http://www.bernaproducts.com:80/16_mednews.html 206.136.243.10 19970117022553 text/html 26635HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Fri, 17 Jan 1997 05:16:56 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.0Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 26463Last-modified: Thu, 03 Oct 1996 05:47:31 GMT 16_mednews.html Looking to theFuture--What's News It's hard to read an article on medicine today and not findmention of some new discovery in biotechnology. During the lastdecade, the pharmaceutical industry has focused more and moreResearch & Development efforts on the miracles possible throughbiotechnology. However for companies involved in research and development ofvaccines, "biotechnology" is old-hat!BERNA PRODUCTS, CORP.'s parent company,The Swiss Serum & Vaccine Institute Berne has utilizedbiotechnology for years. An excellent example is the research anddevelopment of VIVOTIFBERNA which began in 1969. Developed over a 12 year period, this unique live oral vaccine fortyphoid fever resulted from gene manipulation of the Ty21a strain ofSalmonella typhi. Trends in Typhoid Fever ACIP Typhoid Fever 1995 Guidelines Review The BERNA product line will continue to benefitfrom this dedication to innovative research. Each year, a substantialamount of the operating revenues are committed to research anddevelopment. As a result, there are some exciting products on thehorizon: Cholera Hepatitis A Hyperimmune Globulin Rabies Tetanus Return to Berna Home Page Oral Cholera Vaccine Another revolutionary BERNA vaccine, is one against cholera.Similar to VIVOTIFBERNA, CVD 103 HgR is the first live ORAL attenuated choleravaccine. Could it be Cholera? Genetic Engineering Technology Being Applied to Cholera Vaccine Hyperimmune Globulin One of the largest hospital-based clinical trials ever conductedin the U.S. has been done to test another BERNA product, NOSOCUMANBERNA. Together with Walter Reed Army Institute of Research and theVeterans' Administration, 5,000 patients at 10 medical centers havebeen involved in testing this hyperimmune globulin developed to fightnosocomial infections, due to 2 bacteria: Klebsiella sppand Pseudomonas aeruginosa. The fact that nosocomialinfections contribute to approximately 30% of the deaths in hospitalintensive care units underscores the importance of this product tothe hospital physicians. Back to Berna Product List Hepatitis A Vaccine Rabies Vaccine A new inactivated, human-diploid cell vaccine effective for bothpre-exposure and post-exposure use has been used in clinical trialsin 3 U.S. Veterinary Schools An Epidemic Moving Up and Down the East Coast Back to Berna Product List Tetanus Toxoid Even though effective preventative vaccine has been availablesince the 1940's, cases of tetanus still occur. What Do Travelers, Women & Older Patients Have in Common? Back to Berna Product List In the literature: TRENDS INTYPHOID FEVER Even with the availability of effective vaccines, typhoid fevercontinues to affect U.S. travelers. Dr. Jacques Mathieu from theDivision of Disease Intervention, NY City Department of Health andcolleagues from Field Epidemiology of the CDC felt that New York City"offers a unique opportunity to study trends in typhoid fever." In an article published in the AMA publication, Archives inInternal Medicine,* they document the frequency of typhoid feverover the last decade. Since the early 1970s, importation of typhoid fever has changedthe etiology of the disease. Their research indicated that incidenceof typhoid fever increased 110% in New York City in the three yearperiod from 1987-1990. Furthermore, this increase was almostexclusively due to travel-related cases. Specifically, they found: The highest age specific rate of typhoid fever was among 10-19 year olds 30% of those infected were students 91 % of patients with travel-related typhoid fever required hospitalization 27% of households had at least 1 member other than the patient who tested positive for S. typhi Based on their findings, they concluded: The trends of S.typhi infection in New York City followed the trends observed inthe United States since 1978, which demonstrates the importance ofinternational travel. Although food and water precessions may beeffective for short-term travelers, selective use of oralantityphoid vaccine for New York City travelers to high-riskendemic countries should be encouraged. A copy of this reprint is available through the BPC customerservice department by calling toll-free (800) 533-5899. *Archives of Internal Medicine. Vol. 154: ppl 713-1718, August8. 1994 Back to Berna Product List With no history of recenttravel--Could it still be Cholera? As healthcare workers in the Midwest found out, the answer is YES!The severe diarrhea was consistent with cholera, but none of thepatients had traveled outside the country or eaten raw shellfishwithin the last month. Yet, stool cultures confirmed V.cholera The explanation: While they hadn't traveled, the food theyate had. The canned palm fruit brought to them from El Salvador wasthe culprit. This is not the first food-related occurrence. Recently; threeother U.S. outbreaks have been traced to food transported fromcountries where cholera is widespread.-crabmeat from Ecuador andcommercial frozen coconut milk from Thailand. The CDC recommends thatall international travelers be advised not to transport any fooditems from cholera-infected areas-regardless of its form orpreparation! Likewise, they remind healthcare workers whe a patient presentswith symptoms consistent with cholera: Ask about recent travel as well as about consumption of any foodtransported from another country Culture stool samples on TCBS AGAR, since other media routinelyused for stool cultures may not support the growth of V.cholera Isolates should be sent to state health laboratories forserogrouping Isolates that are serogroup 01 or 0139 should be sent to the CDCfor toxin testing. The BIGGER risk-International Travel During 1994, 384,000 cases were officially reported to the WorldHealth Organization. Overall, 94 countries reported cholera casesincluding 13 countries in Central and South America, India, SoutheastAsia, Africa and individual republics of the former Soviet Union.On apositive note, the 0139 strain identified in India in 1992 has notspread beyond South Asia and is now considered by the WHO "lesslikely to become a global threat." Admittedly, international travel in endemic countries isresponsible for most cases of cholera seen in North America andWestern Europe. In 1995, an unconfirmed number of travelers from theU.S., Holland, Spain and Switzerland, as well as over 200 Japanesetourists returned home from the Indonesian island of Bali, infectedwith cholera. Although vaccines against cholera have been available for years,they have not proven to be effective and are therefore notrecommended by the WHO. In response to this worldwide need, a neworal cholera vaccine has been developed by theSwiss Serum and Vaccine Institute Berne,the parent company of BERNA PRODUCTS, CORP, and the Center forVaccine Development of the University of Maryland School of Medicine. V. cholerae CVD 103-HgR is the first geneticallyengineered, live attenuated vaccine licensed for human use. The factthat it is orally administered is considered particularlyadvantageous by experts since (1) they consider this both the bestroute to stimulate intestinal immunity and (2) essential to providingoptimal protection against enteric diseases. While Switzerland has been the first country to approve CVD 103HgR in 1994, it is available under a named patet status in severalEuropean markets, including Italy, Austria and the United Kingdom.Approximately 10,000 doses have been used under protocol. A licenseapplication for this vaccine has been submitted to the CanadianBureau of Biologics and a similar submission to the U.S. FDA itplanned in the near future. Until widespread availability of the CVD I03-HgR vaccine, the onlydefense against cholera is to avoid exposure. The CDC recommendsthat all international travelers be reminded of the followingprecautions: only drink water that is commercially bottled, boiled or treated avoid ice unless positive it has been made from sanitary water eat only foods that are thoroughly cooked and are still hot eat fruit only if it has been peeled by the person consuming it avoid undercooked or raw fish or shellfish-including cerviche only eat vegetables that have been cooked avoid all salads and leafy vegetables avoid all food and beverages from street vendors Sources: MMWR, Vol 44 No 20, May 26, 1995. Inf Dis News, July1995, pg 15; WHO Weekly Epidemiologica lRecord, Vol 70: 201-208, 14July 1995 Back to Berna Product List Genetic engineering technology beingapplied to Cholera Vaccine On most people's "wish" lists might be a boat, a new car, or anexotic vacation. But for physicians involved with travel medicine, aneffective cholera vaccine is near the top of their list. As reportedin an article in Infectious Disease News TheSwiss Serum & Vaccine InstituteBerne, the parent company of BERNA PRODUCTS, CORP., is working tofill this wish. An Unwelcome Hitchhiker into the Country Since January 1991, a cholera epidemic has spread throughout theWestern Hemisphere. According to a report in Morbidity and MortalityWeekly Report (MMWR 1993; 42 :89-93), in 2 short years, 3/4 millioncases of cholera had been reported, with over 6000 deaths.Unexpectedly, the United States is one of the 21 countries seeingcases of cholera. During 1992, 12 states reported cases of cholera to the CDC, withno apparent regional pattern. Cholera in the U.S. Arizona Maryland California Nevada Connecticut New Jersey Florida New York Hawaii Texas Louisiana Washington In total, 102 cases were reported, more than in any other yearsince the Centers for Disease Control (CDC) in Atlanta begansurveillance 30 years ago in 1961. Interestingly, Vibriocholerae has taken several different routes into the country. While airline food is never considered to be very good, in thecase of one international flight it turned out to be the cause of thelargest single outbreak in 1992. On an Aerolineas Argentinas flightbetween Buenos Aires and Los Angeles, contaminated food was cateredon-board during a stopover resulting in 75 of the reported cases. A most interesting type of "souvenir" was identified as anotherconduit for Vibrio cholerae. In 1991, almost half of the casesreported that year were traced to souvenir crabs found in thesuitcases of travelers to Latin America. (MMWR 1991;40:287-9) But according to CDC reports, traveling is not the only wayAmericans can get cholera. Since 1973, 91 cases of cholera notrelated to international travel have been reported. Most of theseU.S.-acquired cases were eventually traced to raw or undercookedseafood. And not necessarily imported seafood either.(Infectious Disease News, April 1993) In 1992, routine sampling isolated V. cholerae bacteriafrom oyster beds in Gulf Coast waters. FDA investigation uncoveredthe dangerous "stowaway" aboard cargo ships from Latin America. Priorto docking in Gulf Coast ports, these ships had been in endemiccountries, resulting in contamination of ballast and holding tanks.As a result, the FDA, Coast Guard and coastal Public HealthDepartments have been monitoring even more closely the "cargo" theseships bring into U.S. ports. (Infectious Disease News, September1992) One Step Closer to an Effective Vaccine With the CDC predicting that the spread of cholera outside of LatinAmerica into the Caribbean region is "probable", the importance of aneffective vaccine continues to grow. An article in the April 1993issue of Infectious Disease News focused attention on the new choleravaccine, CVD 103-HgR, being developed by The Swiss Serum &Vaccine Institute Berne and the Center for Vaccine Development of theUniversity of Maryland School of Medicine. CVD 103-HgR is the firstgenetically engineered "weakened" vaccine. The fact that it isorally administered is considered particularly good by expertssince they consider this the best way to stimulate the body toproduce immunity against disease that affect the gastrointestinaltract. Approval Standards Change as a Result of SS & VIB Vaccine In fact, the results demonstrated by CVD 103-HgR have actuallychanged the policy used to evaluate cholera vaccines. Reviewing thedata for CVD 103 HgR, the FDA's Vaccine and Related BiologicalProducts Advisory Committee concluded that challenge studies ratherthan field trials could be used to show a cholera vaccine works fortravelers. As reported in the Pink Sheet, "The committee's conclusion thatchallenge studies would be sufficient was contingent upon theefficacy data from challenge studies for a hypothetical choleravaccine being at least as good as the data presented to the committeeon the Swiss Serum and Vaccine Institute's CVD 103-HgR vaccine." (FDCReports, Feb. 1, 1993) According to a report made to the committee byMyron Levin, MD, of the Center for Vaccine Developmt, teh SS &VIB vaccine has been teste i a variety of Phase I & II clinicalstudies in "approximately 3,500 individuals in industrialized anddeveloping countries, (U.S.A., Switzerland, U.K., Austria, Italy,Indonesia, Thailand, Chile, Peru, Costa Rica, Mexico) in adults andchildren as young as 24 months of age." Becasue of the worldwideimpact of cholera, the World Health Organization (WHO) is sponsoringa large scale field trial in Jakarta, Indonesia to evaluate vaccineefficacy in a cholera endemic area. Sources: MMWR 1993: 42: 89 93, MMWR 1992 40:562-S, InfectiousDisease News, Sept 1992. Infectious Disease News, April 1993,FDCReports, Feb 1, 1993) Back to Berna Product List Epidemic moving up and down the U.S.East Coast: Clinical trials on new rabies vaccine Clinical trials to judge efficacy were conducted for a new rabiesvaccine developed by the Swiss Serum& Vaccine Institute Berne. Trials of the vaccine, known asLYSSAVAC BERNA HDC, were done at the Veterinary Schools at KansasState University, University of Oklahoma and University of Georgiaunder Investigational New Drug status. Early trials confirming thevaccine's safety and efficacy for pre-exposure as well as postexposure treatment of individuals bitten by rabid animals wereconducted in Europe and the Far East. Not So Healthy Neighbors Once approved, the vaccine will be welcomed by Primary Carephysicians and Infectious Disease specialists alike. Since 1990, anepidemic of animal rabies has been spreading up and down the eastcoast of the U.S. "Rabies is becoming a greater public healthconcern because rabid raccoons are moving into more densely populatedareas," explained Iyorlumun Uhaa, DVM, PhD, epidemiologist withthe viral and rickettsial zoonoses branch, Centers for DiseaseControl (CDC). Yes, he did say, "raccoons." While most people associatetransmission of rabies with bats, in fact, raccoons have recentlysurpassed bats as the prime carrier of the disease. And that's theproblem: Unlike bats, raccoons frequently roam through residentialneighborhoods, getting in fights with pet dogs. Exposure to rabies inthe general population is most often the result of people trying tobreak up these fights. While not necessarily bitten, saliva from therabid animal gets on hands or arms at the same time as cutsresulting, in a risk of infection. The significance of this problem is demonstrated by statisticsfrom the state of New York. According to the Infectious Disease Newsreport, prior to the increase in rabid raccoons in the state, lessthan 100 people per year sought treatment as compared to over800 the next year. The Treatment Dilemma Contrary to the common perception, exposure to the rabies virus, evenwith a puncture wound from a rabid animal, does not necessarilyresult in infection. Thus, the decision to initiate post-exposuretreatment is a difficult one. Delaying treatment until symptomsappear is not an option. Once symptoms are manifested,the fatalityrate is 100%, even with treatment. Further complicating matters is the fact that the appearance ofsymptoms is unpredictable. Because the rabies virus spreads throughnerve roots rather than the bloodstream, symptoms can appear asquickly as 2 weeks after exposure or not for many months afterwards. Who is at Risk? Certain groups, such as veterinarians, wildlife and animal control,and zookeepers are the most obvious risk groups. Spelunkers areincluded as well due to the risk of contact with bats or carnivores.The CDC recommends preventive vaccination for these at-riskindividuals. However, somewhat less commonly recognized is the risk to theinternational traveler. While vaccination against rabies is not arequirement for entry into any country of the world, travelers shouldbe aware of those areas where they might be at increased risk forexposure to rabies. The 1992 edition of the CDC's HEALTH INFORMATION FOR INTERNATIONALTRAVEL states "...the risk of rabies is highest in areas of the worldwhere dog rabies remain highly endemic, including (but not limitedto) parts of Mexico, El Salvador, Guatemala, Peru, Colombia,Ecuador, India, Nepal, Philippines, Sri Lanka, Thailand and Viet Nam.The disease is also found in dogs in most of the other countriesof Africa, Asia, Central and South America" with minorexceptions. It recommends that a bite from any animal, not just a dog,needs evaluation. Prompt local cleansing of the wound with safe waterand generous amounts of soap can help reduce risk. Local healthauthorities should be notified, as well as a personal physician orState Department officials. Sources: Infectious Disease News April 1992; CDC HEALTHINFORMATION FOR INTERNATIONAL TRAVEL 1992 Back to Berna Product List What do travelers, women and olderpatients have in common? The answer: Individuals in these groups have been identified asbeing at "higher risk" for contracting tetanus since they are morelikely to lack protective antibodies. At risk for tetanus? As surprising as it may seem since thepreventative vaccine,tetanus toxoid, hasbeen available since the mid 1940's, cases of tetanus continue toappear. According to a recent MMWR Surveillance Report (Vol 41/SS 8,December 11, 1992), 117 cases from 34 states were reported during theperiod from 1989-1990. However, the Centers for Disease Control (CDC)in Atlanta believes this does not reflect the true extent of theproblem. Their report concludes "Because tetanus surveillancefindings are based only on reported cases, these results are likelyto underestimate the 'true' tetanus incidence in the United States.Completeness of reporting for tetanus mortality has been estimated at40% while completeness of reporting for tetanus morbidity may be evenlower." 1 out of 4 Patients Die Tetanus is not a disease to be taken lightly. While it is bothpreventable and treatable, still 24% of the patients reported to theCDC with tetanus died. Furthermore, the mortality rate clearlyincreased with age. No deaths were reported in patients under the ageof 40 as compared with 17% of patients 40-49 years old and 50% ofthose 80 years or older. The CDC report also underscored the significant economic impactthis disease can have. Length of hospitalization required ranged from2--131 days. In addition, specialized care in the form of assistedventilation was necessary for almost half of the patients An Ounce of Prevention Or in this case 1 /60th of an ounce (i.e., 0.5 ml) of vaccine boosterevery 10 years provides effective protection. However, a sizableportion of the U.S. Adult population are not up to-date with boostervaccinations, particularly older adults. In fact, serologic surveyshave shown that between 31-71 % of older adults lack protectivelevels of tetanus antibodies. A 1989 National Health Interview Surveywith a statistically reliable sample of U.S. adults found that only13% of persons over 65 years reported receiving a tetanus boostervaccination in the previous 5 years. This compares to 50% that wouldbe expected to have received a booster during that time period for avaccine that is routinely recommended every 10 years. However, routine booster vaccinations for tetanus are frequentlydismissed under the assumption that if and when a patient is injured,the protective vaccines (tetanus toxoid and tetanus immune globulin)will be given. The problem is that tetanus infection often result from wounds,frequently wood splinters, that aren't considered sufficiently severeby the patient to warrant seeking medical attention. As confirmationof this, the CDC points out that 2 out of 3 patients included in theSurveillance Report didn't bother to seek medical attention at thetime of the injury that resulted in tetanus. And this scenariooccurred in the U.S. where medical attention is easily and readilyavailable. If a patient is injured while traveling overseas,particularly in developing countries, adequate medical attentionmight not even be available. A Mid-Decade Reminder Unlike during childhood where vaccinations are a key medicalpriority, the vaccination status of adults is often overlooked. TheCDC report reminds that vaccination status needs to be a routine partof the adult medical profile, particularly for elderly patients.Using mid-decade ages (e.g., 35, 45, 55, 65, etc.) may be an easybench mark to ensure that adult patients are protected. * MMWR Surveillance Report, 41/SS-8. December 11, 1992 NEW ACIP GUIDELINES RECOGNIZE THE ADVANTAGE OFORAL VIVOTIF BERNA With the approval of a second injectable vaccine against typhoidfever, the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices {ACIP)recently reviewed their Guidelines on Typhoid Immunization. Theirlatest guidelines, published in the MMWR*, continue to recognize theadvantageous side effect profile offered by VIVOTIF BERNA(Typhoid Vaccine Live Oral Ty21a). While there is no difference in efficacy, the ACIP stated: "Ty21a produces fewer adverse reactions than either ViCPS or theparenteral inactivated vaccine. During volunteer studies and fieldtrials with oral live attenuated Ty21a vaccine, side effects wererare and consisted of abdominal discomfort, nausea, vomiting, fever,headache and rash car urticaria. In placebo-controlledtrials, monitored adverse reactions occurred with equal frequencyamong groups receiving vaccine and placebo."(emphasisadded) The guidelines also cited that protection with oral Ty21a vaccineextends for 5 years. In situations where an injectable vaccine is used, the ACIP nowrecommends the new ViCPS vaccine over the older heat-phenolinactivated vaccine. As it is a Vi capsular polysaccharide vaccine,it can be used for immunocompromised patients or those requiringantibiotic therapy and has been approved for children over 2 years ofage. The ACIP reports that "Primary vaccination with ViCPS can be accomplished with asingle injection although the manufacturer states that vaccinationshould occur at least 2 weeks prior to potential exposure." Protection with ViCPS vaccine is cited as lasting for 2 years. A copy of these guidelines is available through the BPC customerservice department by calling tollfree (800) 533-5899. * Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, Vol.43/ No. RR-14,December 9, 1994 Back to Berna Product List Return to Berna HomePageWT02-B15-71IA027-000293-B029-146http://www.bernaproducts.com:80/15_medcheck.html 206.136.243.10 19970117022621 text/html 462HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Fri, 17 Jan 1997 05:17:19 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.0Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 292Last-modified: Tue, 01 Oct 1996 06:59:58 GMT 15_medcheck.html WT02-B15-72IA027-000293-B030-40http://www.bernaproducts.com:80/19_soveitun.html 206.136.243.10 19970117023135 text/html 716HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Fri, 17 Jan 1997 05:22:38 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.0Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 546Last-modified: Tue, 01 Oct 1996 07:01:12 GMT 19_sovietun.html Areas at risk for Typhoid Fever in: Soviet Union Afghanistan Albania Armenia Azerbaijan Georgia Kazakhstan Kyrgyzstan Moldava Mongolia Russia Tajikistan Turkmenistan Ukraine Uzbekistan Returnto mapWT02-B15-73IA027-000293-B028-1http://www.bernaproducts.com:80/07_checklist.html 206.136.243.10 19970117021818 text/html 1653HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Fri, 17 Jan 1997 05:09:27 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.0Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 1482Last-modified: Tue, 01 Oct 1996 06:57:32 GMT 07_checklist.html General Travel Tips DON'T LEAVE HOME WITHOUT: Passport/ International Certificate of Vaccination/Yellow Card Additional Photo ID ( in case your passport is lost) Copies of all prescriptions Extra pair of glasses or contact lens Sufficient syringes AND a written doctor's authorization for their use if you require injectable medication First aid kit for minor emergencies Personal hygiene products Making 2 copies of all your important documents - take 1 with you and leave another copy at home REMEMBER: Keep all important documents, medications and glasses WITHYOU in your carry-on luggage. Return to Berna HomePageWT02-B15-74IA027-000293-B029-209http://www.bernaproducts.com:80/13_questions.html 206.136.243.10 19970117022740 text/html 8117HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Fri, 17 Jan 1997 05:18:40 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.0Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 7946Last-modified: Thu, 03 Oct 1996 05:46:43 GMT 13_questions.html Questions & Answers The following recommendations have NOT been approved by the FDAand are provided by Berna Products as a guide to assist physiciansand patients on certain points based upon the most recently availabledata. UNDER ALL CIRCUMSTANCES, THE ATTENDING PHYSICIAN'S JUDGEMENTSHOULD PREVAIL. It should be noted that a revised package insert concerning thesimultaneous use of VIVOTIF BERNA with antimalarials, gammaglobulins and other vaccines is currently being reviewed by the FDA.Until a revised insert is approved the recommendations contained inthe current insert must take precedent. Specific inquiries can be addressed to the FDA's Division ofProduct Compliance, Bethesda, MD. Storageof vaccine outside of refrigeration If the vaccine has been kept OUT of refrigeration at 80F or below, not in a car and not exposed to direct sunlight FOR UP TO 48 HOURS, THEY MAY GO AHEAD AND USE IT. This isprovided that the vaccine is used within a reasonably short period oftime (eg., within 30 days.) If the lot is within 60 days prior toexpiration, please refer to Berna Products Medical Inquiries at1-800-533-5899 As stated in 2 January 1993 Lancet article: "Potency depends upon each capsule containing 2 X 10(9) or moreviable Ty2la and exposure to ambient temperatures decreasesviability, After storage for 7 days at 20-25C (68-78F),all lots evaluated met potency requirements. Three (3) lots stored at37F (98F) for 12 hours also maintained potency." The potency of VIVOTIF BERNA is not affected if it isaccidentally frozen. Interruption in the Vaccine dosing schedule IN GENERAL: Only limited data is available on the effect ofa slight change in schedule. (The data from field trials reflect a40% decrease in protection if vaccine was given at a 21 day versusevery other day schedule [with 3 dose schedule.]) IF 3 DOSES HAVE BEEN TAKEN PROPERLY: a delay of up to 72hours (3 days) in taking the 4th dose should not be expected tomarkedly affect efficacy. IF 2 DOSES HAVE BEEN TAKEN PROPERLY: a delay of 24-48 hoursin taking the 3rd dose should not be expected to markedly affectefficacy as long as the remaining doses are taken at the appropriateintervals, Completion of vaccine dosing schedule: IN ALL CASES, ALL 4 DOSES OF VACCINE SHOULD BE TAKEN IF ONLY 3 DOSES ARE TAKEN, protection will be less than for4 doses--although the absolute degree of decrease protection cannotbe stated with certainty. IF ONLY 1 OR 2 DOSES HAVE BEEN TAKEN,the physician shouldconsider restarting the patient on a new 4-dose vaccine schedulesince 1 or 2 doses of vaccine will provide only modest (15-40%)protection. (This assumes that the vaccine has been well tolerated bythe patient and was not the cause of the patient failing to completethe initial regimen.) When a patient is restarted on the vaccine, the physician shouldinstruct the patient to report any adverse event, as there is noclinical trial data on the safety of 5-6 doses administered in ashort period of time. However, based upon prior experience including: administering larger doses of vaccine (up to 10 times more than is currently in each capsule ) European re-immunization studies where only 1-2 years had elapsed since primary immunization no adverse reactions were noted. DrugInteractions: ANTIBIOTICS: AS A GENERAL RULE, NO ANTIBIOTICS SHOULD BE GIVEN 7 DAYS BEFORE THElst DOSE OR AFTER THE 4th DOSE OF VIVOTIF BERNA ANTIMALARIALS: Chloroquine: Studies in humans have shown that chloroquine, together withpyrimethamine-sulfadoxine, administered 24 HOURS PRIOR TO THE STARTOF THE VACCINATION SCHEDULE DID NOT ADVERSELY AFFECT THE RATE OFSERO-CONVERSION as compared to a control group which took VIVOTIFBERNA alone. In addition,in vitro studies have shown that the addition of up to200 mcg, of chloroquine/ml DID NOT NOTICEABLY AFFECT GROWTH RATE ofVIVOTIF BERNA. DOXYCYCLINE: See comments under Antibiotics MEFLOQUINE (LARIAM): In vitro studies have shown thatMefloquine at a concentration of 10 mcg/ml can inhibit the growth ofVIVOTIF BERNA. Concentrations of 5 mcg/ml had no affect on thegrowth rate. As per the 1994 ACIP Guidelines: "Mefloquine could potentiallyaffect the immune response to oral live attenuated typhoid (Ty21a) ifboth are taken simultaneously To minimize this effect, it may beprudent to administer Ty2la typhoid vaccine at least 24 hours beforeor after a dose of Mefloquine." ADDITIONAL FACTS FOR MEDICAL PERSONNEL: The half-life forthe absorption of Mefloquine into the bloodstream ranges from roughly36 minutes to 2 hours, Therefore, within 24 hours of ingesting thesingle 25O mg weekly dose, essentially all of the Mefloquine wouldreasonably be expected to have been absorbed from the gut. Given therelatively large area of the gut, it may also be reasonably expectedthat the concentration of Mefloquine would be less than 5 mcg/ml andtherefore, not be expected to inhibit the growth of VIVOTIFBERN. However, studies to determine the actual concentration ofMefloquine in the gut 24 hours after ingestion have not been done. If the physician decides Mefloquine and VIVOTIF BERNA are tobe used simultaneously, the following schedule is suggested tominimize the potential for adverse effect on efficacy: Day 1: Administration of Mefloquine Day 2: Administration of VIVOTIF BERNA Day 8: Administration of Mefloquine EARLY IN THE MORNING Administration of VIVOTIF BERNA LATE IN THE EVENING. If it's not possible to start Mefloquine 1 day before VIVOTIFBERNA, instructions for Day 1 should be the same as for Day 8. IMMUNE GLOBULINS: As per the 1994 ACIP Guidelines,concurrent administration of immune globulins and VIVOTIF BERNAis possible without affecting the immune response. ORAL POLIO VACCINE: As per the 1994 ACIP Guidelines, oralpolio vaccine can be administered BEFORE, SIMULTANEOUSLY or AFTERVIVOTIF BERNA. OTHER TRAVEL-RELATED VACCINES:There is no evidence thatsimultaneous administration of tetanus, diphtheria, rabies, measles,cholera, yellow fever or meningococcal vaccines interfere with theefficacy of VIVOTIF BERNA. Administration of Vaccine DO NOT DRINK ALCOHOL WITHIN ( 1 ) HOUR OF TAKING VIVOTIFBERNA. Alcohol will break the enteric coated capsule and,therefore the capsule will dissolve in the stomach and not in the gut(intestinal tract). In addition, testing has confirmed that alcoholwill kill the live bacteria in the vaccine. The capsule should NEVER BE OPENED and the contentsadministered in foods or liquids. For futher information or other question's call Berna ProductsMedical Inquires at 1-(800)-533-5899WT02-B15-75IA027-000293-B030-114http://www.bernaproducts.com:80/20_southamer.html 206.136.243.10 19970117023228 text/html 723HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Fri, 17 Jan 1997 05:23:31 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.0Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 553Last-modified: Tue, 01 Oct 1996 07:01:32 GMT 20_southamer.html Areas at risk for Typhoid Fever in: South America Argentina Boliva Brazil Chile Colombia Ecuador French Guiana Guatemala Paraguay Uruguay So Tom and Principe Venezuela Returnto mapWT02-B15-76IA027-000293-B029-398http://www.bernaproducts.com:80/22_middleeast.html 206.136.243.10 19970117023039 text/html 911HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Fri, 17 Jan 1997 05:21:45 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.0Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 741Last-modified: Tue, 01 Oct 1996 07:02:06 GMT 22_middleeast.html Areas at risk for Typhoid Fever in: Middle East Bahrain Bangladesh Bhutan Brunei Darussalam Burkina Faso Cyprus Djibouti Egypt Eritrea India Iran Iraq Jordan Lebanon Libyan Arab Jamahiriya Maldives Morocco Nepal Oman Pakistan Qatar Saudi Arabia Sri Lanka Syrian Arab Republic United Arab Emirates Yemen Returnto mapWT02-B15-77IA027-000293-B030-147http://www.bernaproducts.com:80/23_centralamer.html 206.136.243.10 19970117023249 text/html 646HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Fri, 17 Jan 1997 05:23:54 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.0Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 476Last-modified: Tue, 01 Oct 1996 07:02:24 GMT 23_centralamer.html Areas at risk for Typhoid Fever in: Central America Belize Costa Rica Dominican Republic El Salvador Haiti Honduras Mexico Nicaragua Panama Peru Returnto mapWT02-B15-78IA027-000293-B028-127http://www.bernaproducts.com:80/03_abouttyphoid.html 206.136.243.10 19970117022033 text/html 2200HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Fri, 17 Jan 1997 05:11:37 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.0Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 2029Last-modified: Tue, 01 Oct 1996 06:56:27 GMT 03_about typhoid WHAT IS TYPHOID FEVER? Typhoid fever is an infection spread to travelers by food orwater contaminated with the bacteria, Salmonella typhi.Due to poor sanitation systems, residents in developing countries areoften infected with this bacteria and unintentionally pass it on totourists. Incubation period is usually 10-14 days, although symptomsof the disease can begin anywhere from 7-21 days after exposure. WHAT ARE THE SYMPTOMS? While typhoid fever is often called a diarrheal disease, not allpatients have diarrhea. (Don't assume that if there is no diarrhea,it's not typhoid fever.) Early symptoms of typhoid fever areflu-like: body aches and pains, weakness, loss of appetite andcontinuous dull headache. Fever can be either continuous or itcan come and go. A rash, with pink spots approximately 1/4 inch, mayappear on the chest and abdomen in some patients. YOU'LL BE AT RlSK IF ...your travels include countries with less developed sanitaryfacilities for sewage disposal and water treatment. The risk oftyphoid fever is greatest in Africa, Asia and Central and SouthAmerica, but is also of concern in various former Soviet Bloccountries in Eastern Europe. Click here for a list of countries whereyou will be at risk for Typhoid Fever or you can call thetoll-free Centers for Disease Control automated travel telephone lineat 1-(404) 332-4565 Before you leave, be sure to confirm your specific itinerary withyour Travel Medicine Physician. Return to Berna HomePageWT02-B15-79IA027-000293-B029-244http://www.bernaproducts.com:80/12_vivotifberna.html 206.136.243.10 19970117022839 text/html 5540HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Fri, 17 Jan 1997 05:19:37 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.0Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 5369Last-modified: Thu, 03 Oct 1996 04:43:15 GMT 12_vivotifberna.html VIVOTIF BERNA (Typhoid Vaccine Live Oral Ty21a) VIVOTIF BERNA is the first and only oral vaccine for typhoidfever protection. According to experts in the field, it ranksinternationally amoung the most significant vaccine developments inthe last 25 years. To date, over 150 millions doses have been takenworldwide. History and Development Begun in 1969, the development of VIVOTIF BERNA by the Swiss Serumand Vaccine Institute Berne (SS & VIB) took 12 years. This uniqueoral vaccine resulted from gene manipulation of the Ty21 strain ofS. typhi. The ability of S. typhi to cause disease and to induce aprotective immune response is dependent upon the bacteria possessinga complete lipopolysaccharide. The S. typhi Ty21a vaccinestrain, by virtue of a reduction in enzymes essential forlipopolysaccharide biosynthesis, is restricted in its ability toproduce complete lipopolysaccharide. However, a sufficient quantityof complete lipopolysaccharide is synthesized to evoke a protectiveimmune response. The introduction of VIVOTIF BERNA in the United States in1990 was a joint effort between SS & VIB and the US Military, whohelped to fund the field trials necessary for FDA approval. Followingit's approval, in 1991 the Armed Forces Epidemiology Board (eg. theDefense Department's medical advisory panel) recommended that alltroops going overseas be given the oral vaccine. Since its introduction, over 100 million doses of VIVOTIFBERNA oral typhoid vaccine have been taken in the UnitedStates. VIVOTIF BERNA Facts at a Glance Type of Vaccine: Live, attenuated bacteria (Ty21a strain) Dosage Form: Enteric coated capsules. Because of the ENTERIC coat: - capsules should be taken on an empty stomach (ie,,1 hour before eating) to avoid delaying passage of capsule through stomach. Many patients find it's easiest to take at bedtime. - do not consume alcohol within 1 hour of swallowing the capsule, as the alcohol will break down the enteric coat. Route of Administration: Oral Ty21a is completely adsorbed in the ileum, with no excretion in the feces. Therefore there is no risk of contaminating other family members. It stimulates local immunity in the gut at the site of potenial typhoid infection Age: 6 years & older Immunization: 4 capsules (1 taken every other day) Ty21a replicates 3-5 times in the GI mucosa and then self-destructs, therefore dosing schedule of 1 capsule every other day. Effectiveness: 50-80% (per CDC; 55-74% per ACIP) Length of Protection: 5 years Vaccination Timing: Complete regimen 1 week before potential exposure Concommitant Medications/Vaccinations: OPV Yellow Fever vaccine Immune Globulin 8 hours after Mefloquine (Lariam) Contraindications: Immunocompromised patients Patient taking antibiotics Patient with fever, vomiting or diarrhea Storage: Store in refrigerator until time to take each dose. Return remaining doses to refrigerator. Click for: Full Prescribing Information Information on ORAL ROUTE ofimmunization Frequently asked QUESTIONS ANDANSWERSWT02-B15-80IA027-000293-B029-72http://www.bernaproducts.com:80/17_aboutbernamed.html 206.136.243.10 19970117022531 text/html 8323HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Fri, 17 Jan 1997 05:16:37 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.0Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 8152Last-modified: Thu, 03 Oct 1996 06:49:38 GMT 17_aboutbernamed.html About the Company The Swiss Serum and Vaccine Institute Berne, founded in1898, came into being following the amalgation of the 'InstitutVaccinal Suisse', which began manufacturing smallpox vaccine at Lancynear Geneva in 1883, and Haefliger, Vogt & Co., which startedproducing anti-diphtheria serum after its foundation in 1894. Approximately 100 years after the first batch of smallpox vaccinewas produced in Geneva, the World Health Organization (WHO) announcedthe worldwide eradication of the disease. In developing and producingan effective and stable smallpox vaccine, The Swiss Serum and VaccineInstitute (SS & VIB) contributed significantly to this proudachievement of preventative medicine. Berna Products, Corp. is the North American subsidiary of The Swiss Serum and VaccineInstitute Berne (SS & VIB). As one of 3 SS & VIB subsidiarieslocated around the world, it was established to provide immediateaccess to SS & VIB vaccines and biologicals for health careprofessionals in the US and Canada. Together with the manufacturingfacilities in Switzerland, Italy and Spain and the world-wide networkof Regional Offices located in Latin America and in the Near, Middleand Far East. The Swiss Serum and Vaccine Institute Berne enjoys a globalreputation as one of the leading European manufacturers ofbiologics. Berna Worldwide Regardless of the language spoken, the name BERNA is a familiarone to physicians the world over. BERNA PRODUCTS is the trademark by which the products of theSwiss Serum and Vaccine Institute Berne are known in 120 countriesaround the world. In addition, BERNA vaccines have been supplied tomore than 40 developing countries as a part of the WHO/UNICEFsponsored Expanded Program on Immunization (EPI). The distribution of BERNA vaccines on a worldwide basisnecessitates a level of expertise beyond that required forpharmaceutical products in general. For example, due to the limitedshelf-life of vaccines, it is essential the the "cold chain" of doorto door refrigeration be insured, BERNA PRODUCTS are deliveredthroughout the US and Canada exclusively by Federal Express&reg.Not only does Federal Express quality service maintain thiscold-chain guarantee, but it makes it possible to constantly trackeach shipment until it is delivered to into the hands of the healthprofessional. And other example of the specialized expertise of the BERNAnetwork is the vast language requirements of labeling anddistribution for global distribution. While any pharmaceuticalproduct must obviously be prepared with the proper language labeling,frequently BERNA vaccines are neededunder emergency situations. To meet these needs, an in-house printingdepartment guarantees rapid, high quality packaging and labeling ofits products. The capability exists so that in emergencies, more than500,000 doses of vaccine can be packaged, labeled and shipped within48 hours regardless of whether the labeling must be in Chinese,Arabic or any other language. Berna Products Product Line Swiss Serum and Vaccine Institute specializes in the production ofvaccines and biologic products for both adult and pediatric use. Ourproducts marketed in North America and selected other countriesinclude: Adult & Travel Vaccines Public Health & Pediatric Vaccines Diagnostic & Therapeutic Products Products for Laboratory Use Return To Berna Home Page Adult & Travel Vaccines CVD-103HgR--Oral vaccine for active immunization againstcholera Lyssavac N Berna--vaccine providing protectiveantibody titres for both pre- and post- rabies exposure Te Anatoxal Berna--adsorbedvaccine for active immunization against tetanus Vivotif Berna--Oral vaccine for active immunizationagainst typhoid fever Return to Berna Products ProductLine Public Health & Pediatric Vaccines BCG sec Berna--live vaccine for intracutaneousvaccination against tuberculosis that have reacted negatively to theusual tuberulin tests Biviraten Berna--live vaccine for activeimmunization against measles (Edmonston Zagreb strain) and mumps(Rubini strain) Buccapol Berna--live vaccine against poliomyelitis,obtained from Sabin stains Di Anatoxal Berna--Adsorbed diphtheria vaccine foractive immunization of children up to the age of 12 DiTe Anatoxal Berna Adults/Children--Adsorbeddiphtheria-tetanus vaccine for active immunization of adults/childrenup to the age of 12 DiTePer Anatoxal Berna--Adsorbeddiphtheria-tetanus-pertussis vaccine for active immunization ofchildren up to 2 years of age DiTePerPol Anatoxal Berna--Adsorbeddiphtheria-tetanus-pertussis-poliomylitis vaccine for activeimmunization of children up to 2 years of age Inflexal Berna--vaccine against influenza Moraten Berna--live vaccine for active immunizationagainst measles (Edmonston Zagreb strain) MoRu-Viraten Berna---live vaccine for active immunizationagainst measles (Edmonstoin Zagreb strain), and rubella (WistarRA27/3 strain) Mumaten Berna;--live vaccine for activeimmunization against mumps (Rubini strain) Pertussis Vaccine Berna--vaccine for activeimmunization against pertussis of children upto 2 years of age Poliomyelitis Vaccine Berna--vaccine for activeimmunization against poliomyelitis (Salk) Rubeaten Berna--live vaccine for active immunizationagainst rubella (Wistar RA27/3 strain) Triviraten Berna--live vaccine for active immunizationagainst measles (Edmonstoin Zagreb strain), mumps (Rubini strain) andrubella (Wistar RA27/3 strain) Return to Berna Products ProductLine Diagnostic & Therpeutic Products Annexine Berna--vaccine therapy of inflammatorydiseases of the adnex Asthmatic Vaccine Berna--therapy of bceril asthma,asthmatic bronchitis and chroic bronchitis Broncasma Berna--therapy of chronic bronchitis and itscomplications, treatment of bronchial asthma of bacterial origin Buccaline Berna--oral antibacterial prohylaxis ofcolds Staphypan Berna--vaccine for prophylaxis ofstaphylococcal infections especially before surgical operation Return to Berna Products ProductLine Products for Laboratory Use Pertussis toxin Pseudomonas aeruginosa Toxin A Escherichia coli LT Diphtheria toxin Cholera toxin Cholerangeoid Coryebac teruim diphtheriae CRM 197 Return to Berna Products ProductLine Return to Berna HomePage WT02-B15-81IA027-000293-B030-59http://www.bernaproducts.com:80/18_pacrimislands.html 206.136.243.10 19970117023145 text/html 777HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Fri, 17 Jan 1997 05:22:56 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.0Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 607Last-modified: Tue, 01 Oct 1996 07:00:39 GMT 18_pacrimislands.html Areas at risk for Typhoid Fever in: Pacific Rim Islands American Samoa Cook Islands Fiji French Polynesia Kiribati Nauru Philippines Samoa (Formerly Western Samoa) Solomon Islands Tonga Tuvalu (formerly Ellice Islands) Vanuatu Returnto map WT02-B15-82IA027-000293-B028-34http://www.bernaproducts.com:80/06_whiletraveling.html 206.136.243.10 19970117021837 text/html 2753HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Fri, 17 Jan 1997 05:09:41 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.0Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 2582Last-modified: Tue, 01 Oct 1996 06:57:16 GMT 06_whiletraveling.html Protect Yourself: WHILE YOUTRAVEL THINK BEFORE YOU EAT! Travelers need to be aware that since no typhoid vaccine is 100%effective, vaccination is not a substitute for careful attention tofood and water. Always think before you putanything in your mouth! DO'S Drink water only if you know it's been boiled or treated. Coffee and tea are safe if made with water that has boiled Drink canned or bottled carbonated water, soft drinks, beer and wine. Remember: The outside of wet containers should be dried BEFORE opening and pouring. Drink directly from the bottle after wiping the container's lip - UNLESS the bottles have been stored in a wet cooler, since contaminated water can seep under the cap. Eat ONLY fruit you can peel yourself. Remember, TOMATOES are classified as fruits and should be peeled. Eat only food that has been cooked AND IS STILL HOT. Eat pasteurized dairy products. DON'Ts Don't eat raw or partially cooked fish or shellfish (including ceviche) . Don't use ice cubes - where water is contaminated, ice will be too. Don't eat leftovers. Don't eat watermelon - water is often injected to increase weight Don't eat salads or leafy greens - they may have been washed with contaminated water. Don't eat food from street vendors Don't use tap water to brush your teeth -use bottled carbonated water. Don't lay your toothbrush down on the sink or countertop - it could be contaminated. Cover the bristles with a plastic cap that snaps on . Return to Berna Home Page WT02-B15-83IA070-000439-B039-313http://reciprocalgroup.com:80/todayswp/current/qa.htm 206.181.79.194 19970120204706 text/html 3912HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Microsoft-IIS/3.0Date: Mon, 20 Jan 1997 20:46:49 GMTContent-Type: text/htmlAccept-Ranges: bytesLast-Modified: Wed, 15 Jan 1997 04:27:12 GMTContent-Length: 3714 Questions and Answers Questions and Answers Q: We've heard that the OSHA TB (tuberculosis standard isn't out yet. Do we need to worry about OSHA citing us? A: Aside from the fact that its always a good idea to be proactive in your safety and health measuresyes, OSHA can cite you under the General Duty Clause  Section 5(a)(1) of the OSHA Act. Specifically, "5(a) Each employer-(1) shall furnish to each of the employees employment and a place of employment which are free from recognized hazards that are causing or are likely to cause death or serious physical harm to his employees." Other citations are possible under existing OSHA standards such as: respiratory protection, record keeping, monitoring and medical records access. Since the outbreak of multidrug-resistant TB in several facilities, transmission of TB to healthcare workers has been in the spotlight again. Patients most likely to spread the disease are those who have unrecognized TB, are not effective anti-TB therapy, or those who have not been placed in TB isolation. OSHA has identified healthcare facilities and long-term care facilities for the elderly to be among the places with heightened TB rates. The guideline document, OSHA instruction CPL 2.106, Feb. 9, 1996, addresses enforcement methods and scheduling for occupational exposure to TB. You should expect to meet close scrutiny of your prevention and detection practices. According to OSHA, violations of these standards will be classified as serious. Compliance officers must inspect for workplace TB exposure in the following cases: in response to employee complaints; when notified of TB-related facilities; or as part of any industrial hygienic inspection conducted in workplaces where the CDC gas identified workers as having a greater incidence of TB infection than the general population. This means you. CDC has developed a protocol for minimizing transmission to healthcare workers. It includes engineering and administrative controls. Examples of engineering controls include: ventilation and air cleaning methods, controlling airflow direction, diluting and removing contaminated air by ventilation, and air cleaning with HEPA filters or ultraviolet light. Administrative controls include: rapid identification and treatment of TB cases, screening for healthcare workers, including administering, tuberculin skin tests, and use of isolation rooms for patients suspected of having TB. Contact your SIS loss control consultant, for a copy of the OSHA Instruction CPL 2.106 or the CDCs latest recommendations. WT02-B15-84IA070-000439-B039-166http://reciprocalgroup.com:80/trnews/current/focus.htm 206.181.79.194 19970120204529 text/html 12792HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Microsoft-IIS/3.0Date: Mon, 20 Jan 1997 20:45:18 GMTContent-Type: text/htmlAccept-Ranges: bytesLast-Modified: Wed, 15 Jan 1997 05:17:34 GMTContent-Length: 12593 Patient Focused Care Patient Focused Care: Some Risk Management Considerations Anne V. Irving, CHE, Senior Risk Management Consultant Background The healthcare delivery system's single constant seems to be change. Drastic changes are being observed in financial reimbursement patterns, process improvement strategies, information systems, and regulations. Nursing care remains an essential focus, and improving patient satisfaction, loyalty, and the level of "repeat business," is becoming increasingly critical to each healthcare organization's mission. Patient-focused care (PFC) is one of the newer approaches to healthcare delivery which has arisen out of the realm of re-engineering. Several of its basic tenets include defining the patient as the center of all activity, and providing care as conveniently as possible for the patient (e.g., at the bedside). As part of PFC, careful examination is conducted of all functional aspects of the care delivery system. This examination is intended to maximize each team member's contributions, and concurrently improve the continuity and quality of care. Standardized "care paths" are also used to assist in workload planning and as clinical treatment guidelines. During the transition from a more traditional delivery system to a PFC model, modification of an organization's administrative structure is often indicated. For instance, by reducing the number of levels of command, more timely decision-making and expanded scope of responsibility at each level is promoted. Within each functional department, specific clinical and non-clinical functions are examined, with a focus on determining the level of staff most appropriate to perform each task. Technical tasks are closely analyzed: "Can an unlicensed person safely perform task X, or is a licensed or professional's skill required?" Basic personal care and other support functions are also reviewed, with the goal of reducing professionals' time spent on basic tasks, to free up time for more complex or high-risk tasks. As administrators and nursing executives study the PFC concept or initiate transition to this care model, it is important to consider and address the potential risks associated with this type of change. Outlined below are several key risk management issues for consideration. Task Analysis Central to PFC is task analysis. As each specific function or task is examined, with the question of which level of employee is appropriate to do this task, these questions should be addressed: What technical skills are required and how does one gain proficiency in those skills? Is on-the-job training sufficient, or is a formal program needed? What level of clinical judgment is required? Based on the potential adverse outcomes of the task, is a high level of clinical judgment needed in order to recognize and/or to respond to such outcomes? For example, feeding a person with dysphagia poses a risk of aspiration; would a patient tech or a nurse be better prepared to handle such a task, or does it depend on the type of patient? Do any applicable local, state, or federal regulations address the subject at hand? Each jurisdiction has various regulations pertaining to the practice of healthcare professionals, such as the Nurse Practice Act. These outline the scope of practice permitted for qualified professionals in each professional category (M.D., P.A., N.P., R.N., LPN, P.T., O.T., CRNA, CNM, etc.). The regulatory boards also respond to specific questions from facilities: inquiries regarding whether a function is restricted to a specific professional category are often addressed by the pertinent regulatory authority(s). What positions do the professional associations hold regarding the issue under review? Many professional organizations are assembling data and/or offering guidance to their affiliate members regarding establishing the respective boundaries for licensed versus unlicensed assistive personnel (example: The Association of Operating Room Nurses has published a book on the role of assistive personnel). Knowledge of and reference to any pertinent position statements is essential. If an aspect of PFC is implemented which is at odds with a specific professional association's stance, this could become a significant focus of attention in the event of a malpractice claim. Standard of Care Identification In a malpractice case, one of the four elements a plaintiff must prove is that the defendant deviated from the recognized professional standard of care. Expert testimony, policies/procedures, and national guidelines are elements which are used to establish the standard of care in a particular case. If a facility allows a technical staff member to do a specific patient task, and a majority of other hospitals requires that function to be performed by an R.N., a dispute could arise as to the recognized standard of care. Staff Training and Competency Assessment After a decision has been made to assign a certain function to a different staff category (example: ABG blood draws, by respiratory therapists) the facility must first design an effective training program. Input and participation in the training should be obtained from the recognized experts. A formal written training program is advised, including an objective competency assessment component (written post-test, with a demonstration of proficiency). Depending on the function, and its potential complications, a preceptorship period may also be warranted. Thorough records must be kept regarding the training program, as well as to affirm individual staff members' progression through the program. Adequate time must be allowed in order to train all affected persons before allowing that function to be performed by the new staff category. As mentioned above, if any national training guidelines or proficiency tests exist which apply to the function at hand, the facility must factor those into its plan. Supervision Assignment Responsibility for supervising the staff who are to perform a new function must be clearly defined. Both the supervisee and the supervisor need to know the degree of supervision which is required, in what circumstances. How direct must the supervision be? If the supervisor is not required to be physically beside the supervisee during the task, how "readily available" must he/she be? What chain of command is to be followed if a special concern arises? Compliance Monitoring and Outcome Evaluation As with any change in care delivery, a system to monitor compliance with the new policies/procedures is essential. Analysis of identified variances and/or adverse outcomes must take place on an on-going basis, through a formalized occurrence monitoring system. A mechanism to initiate corrective actions, including any program design modifications which may be indicated, needs to be in place as well. Summary From a proactive risk prevention point of view, it will be in an organization's best interest to carefully address the above issues during a transition to PFC. Abruptly transitioning a task from one staff category to another simply to reduce salary expenses could result in major malpractice exposure, if not handled effectively. This article has outlined several important issues which warrant consideration when a facility is planning a transition from a traditional model to PFC, a new mode for care delivery which involves task reassignment. The cost advantages of expanding the role of assistive personnel, versus the use of more expensive professional staff, could quite easily be lost if the change results in disgruntled staff and an increase in malpractice claims. WT02-B15-85IA070-000439-B039-95http://reciprocalgroup.com:80/trnews/current/birth.htm 206.181.79.194 19970120204452 text/html 4846HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Microsoft-IIS/3.0Date: Mon, 20 Jan 1997 20:44:36 GMTContent-Type: text/htmlAccept-Ranges: bytesLast-Modified: Sun, 29 Dec 1996 05:58:23 GMTContent-Length: 4648 Birth Plans Birth Plans Present Challenge for Obstetrical Units Lynda Plummer, Senior Risk Management Consultant With more and more patients getting involved in their care, the latest to come along in the obstetrical arena is a birth plan. These may also be known as a contract. The plan usually is a checklist or outline of choices that a woman in labor faces. If not from a checklist form, some patients actually present an outline of their expectations and "requirements" related to birth. Some plans outline choices such as a birthing suite, siblings in attendance at birth, type of anesthesia, etc. Others become expanded to include more clinical aspects such as administration of intravenous fluids, fetal monitoring, and types of delivery position. The plans are intended to be a means to facilitate discussions between expectant parents and care givers. They are not without some risk. These include the ability of the caregiver to comply with all requests (for example, a whirlpool may not be available), complying with the request may cause the facility to violate a written policy or a licensure requirement, and some patients may develop unrealistic expectations about the birth experience. Obstetrical caregivers need to be aware these plans exist. The facility may wish to communicate to physicians, midwives, and nursing staff of such plans by means of letters, memos, and/or educational programs. Do not wait until a patient walks into the unit in active labor and hands the nurse a "contract" to decide what to do! A multi-disciplinary team, including the risk manager, should be developed to recommend ways to deal effectively with patients who present birth plans. When addressing the use of birth plans, coordination among all members of the healthcare team is essential to ensure all items on the plan have been discussed with the expectant parents. It is also essential to document the discussions and communicate elements of the plan with all members of the team. Following are some of the issues that should be given consideration: COMMUNICATION/EDUCATION: Communication is a very important component of risk management. Communicating with the patient about their birth plans is particularly important. Identify who will be primarily responsible for the educational process related to birth plans. For example, physicians will want to discuss some issues such as monitoring, episiotomy, etc. Some other aspects of education may be delegated by the physician to the office nurse. It is also necessary to keep the hospital staff in the loop so they may address hospital procedures and concerns the expectant parents may have. RESOURCES/CAPABILITY: The hospital must accurately portray their resources and capabilities. For example, if there is a limited number of birthing rooms, this needs to be indicated to the patient and that every effort will be made to accommodate their request. OTHER CONSIDERATIONS: How will situations be handled when the patient request violates a known standard of care? Have risks related to refusal of certain treatment/procedures been explained and documented? How will emergency situations be handled? Have situations been addressed with the patient in advance? What alternatives will be considered and offered if the facility/provider cannot honor some requests? WT02-B15-86IA070-000439-B038-449http://reciprocalgroup.com:80/phyfocus/current/emr.htm 206.181.79.194 19970120204336 text/html 11332HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Microsoft-IIS/3.0Date: Mon, 20 Jan 1997 20:43:21 GMTContent-Type: text/htmlAccept-Ranges: bytesLast-Modified: Wed, 15 Jan 1997 05:22:44 GMTContent-Length: 11133 Electronic Medical Records System Published quarterly for Doctors Insurance Reciprocal, a Risk Retention Group. Considering An Electronic Medical Record System? DIR takes Interest in Computerized Records' Risk Management Potential By Mary Anne Clause, Senior Risk Management Consultant If you are not yet comfortable with the concept of electronic medical records (EMR), you're not alone. This article is designed to help those readers who are not already computer buffs become familiar with the basics of this technology. DIR supports the use of EMR systems because of the many features available to streamline, standardize, and safeguard care decisions and recordkeeping. We are pleased to announce that DIR's Board of Directors has approved a 10% premium discount for physicians that use EMR systems with recommended risk management applications. CHALLENGES EMR systems are not without potential problems. Usual fears center around "downtime" or computer "crashes" and loss of data. These fears are not as realistic as they were several years ago. The reliability of both hardware and software is much improved. Another concern is the need to maintain hard files for incoming reports, signed consents, etc. Some offices scan documents into the electronic file and others that are networked to hospitals, labs, pharmacies, etc. have data transmitted directly into the EMR. SECURITY AND CONFIDENTIALITY Electronic records are becoming a necessity as the demand for information grows. Computer networks that allow physicians, hospitals, payors, and other support services to interface, promote rapid access to the patient's record and facilitate close collaboration among caregivers. However, an increased ability to share records creates an increased risk of unauthorized disclosure. Laws formed on a state level that govern the use of medical information, are often considered inconsistent, conflicting, and unclear. Few states have addressed the use of electronic records. To make matters worse, large data networks can transmit information across state lines in a flash. Several attempts have been made to propose federal privacy legislation, including the Fair Health Information Practices Act of 1995, the Medical Records Confidentiality Act, and the Medical Privacy in the Age of New Technologies Act of 1996. None of these have passed through committee. State legislatures are showing interest and concern. In 1994 VA. CODE 54.1-2403.2 was enacted by Virginia's General Assembly giving legal protection to medical records of health care providers that are stored by computerized or other electronic processes or microfilm. This statute requires that the record identify the location of documents or other information that cannot be technologically stored. It also states that if the technological storage process creates an unalterable record, the health care provider shall not be required to maintain paper copies of the records stored electronically. Security safeguards are available in many EMR systems on the market. They include many of the required elements listed in the DIR premium discount program at the conclusion of this article. WHERE DO WE GO FROM HERE? The potential for EMR systems is limitless. The wave of the future is here for some systems linked by network where: prenatal documentation flow sheets and obstetric records are accessed from delivery and labor rooms; lab work and x-rays are ordered by computer and results directly down-loaded into the physician's system; admission information is transmitted from office to hospital; physicians access current medical literature or practice guidelines on their own systems; and physicians' computer screens are flagged when a patient fails to pick up an ordered drug or report for a scheduled test. Networks built to acceptable standards will facilitate the flow of information necessary to generate reliable outcomes. Hospitals, managed care organizations, and networked systems with an interest in outcomes research may eventually require the use of EMR systems. Insurers will evaluate a practice's quality of care by efficiency and outcomes data, and patient satisfaction survey results. TIPS WHEN CHOOSING A SYSTEM Set goals and objectives before searching for an EMR system. Develop a list of vendors who have longevity in the business and maintain good reputations for service and updates. Send a request for all product information, a demonstration disk (usually free), and information on any special needs. Develop questions for selected vendors that reflect your needs. Request a proposal, including costs. Set a deadline. Compare responses and arrange for an in-office demonstration with on-hands practice. Encourage physician involvement. Establish compatibility of hardware and software with other software, to allow for flexibility and eventual expansion. Ensure that your final choice is a system that is easy to use, has excellent vendor training, support and maintenance, and meets the goals and objectives of your particular practice. Ensure that your final choice is a system that is easy to use, has excellent vendor support and maintenance, and is technologically capable of meeting the required risk management elements in DIR's premium discount program. DIR'S PREMIUM DISCOUNT PROGRAM FOR EMRs The EMR premium discount program provides an in-office assessment of the utilization of established risk management strategies by EMR users. Practices that have not entered medical records into their system retroactively are eligible for this review one year after installation. Others with conversion of all active files may call Risk Management for a consultation visit at any time. Eligibility for the premium discount will be determined by a scoring of required and recommended risk management elements. Required elements for a consultation visit are as follows: Users are assigned individual passwords which are periodically changed; Security levels restricting users to relevant job category sections are in place; An efficient backup system is scheduled regularly with at least partial storage off site; A lock-in feature renders stored data unalterable; Anti-tampering programming automatically locks out inappropriate attempts to access records; An office policy supports discipline and training regarding the confidential nature of passwords and other identifiers; All practice physicians document in the electronic medical record in a consistent manner; Patient medication allergies are listed in a prominent location and are updated on a regular basis; A system is in place to document patients who no-show or cancel and any potential follow-up actions; All entries and changes made in the medical record system are dated and listed chronologically; Phone call documentation is integrated chronologically into the medical record; The communication of diagnostic results to patients is documented in the medical record consistently by all caregivers; and A method is in place to store all hard copy components of the medical record, as necessary. Call Risk Management at the Richmond office, 747-8600 or 1(800)284-8847, or the Roanoke office, 772-7400 or 1(800)765-8847 to schedule an appointment for an EMR consultation review. ITS UP TO YOU Whether you feel electronic medical records are worth the trouble and expense or not, in the long run they appear to be inevitable. Cost efficiency research is in its infancy, but initial results are promising. Technology in this field is changing rapidly. This article reviews only a minimum of basic issues surrounding EMR systems, so individual investigation is highly recommended. This is not an easy decision. Certainly, there are risks associated with moving forward as well as waiting too long. However, most sources point to a competitive advantage, through market differentiation as well as experience gained in using this technology, for those who choose EMR. WT02-B15-87IA070-000439-B039-146http://reciprocalgroup.com:80/trnews/current/medpay.htm 206.181.79.194 19970120204520 text/html 3998HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Microsoft-IIS/3.0Date: Mon, 20 Jan 1997 20:45:07 GMTContent-Type: text/htmlAccept-Ranges: bytesLast-Modified: Sun, 29 Dec 1996 05:58:21 GMTContent-Length: 3800 What is Medical Payments Coverage? What is Medical Payments Coverage? William Wilson, Underwriter Medical Payments coverage is an additional coverage provided under the Commercial General Liability policy with a sublimit of $5,000 for any one person. This coverage is often referred to as "first aid coverage" as it affords automatic payment of limited medical expenses. Medical Payments coverage is designed to pay reasonable medical expenses for bodily injury caused by the insured's operations, or by an accident on the insured's premises, including areas next to premises the insured owns or leases. It is important to note, payment is limited to those expenses which are incurred and reported within one year of the date of the accident, and the injured person must submit to an examination, at our expense, by physicians of our choice as we reasonably require. This additional coverage basically intends to pay for bodily injury sustained by persons of the general public while on the insured's premises or while being exposed to the insured's operations. The important aspect of this coverage is that payment is made without regard to the legal liability of the insured. It is believed that in providing this coverage, we will assist in decreasing both frequency and severity of bodily injury suits. This is based on the assumption that the inclination of the injured party to sue is reduced if they receive conciliatory care at the time of the accident. This coverage is designed to be somewhat limited in scope, and there are a number of exclusions. These exclusions include bodily injury to any insured, any person hired to do work for or on behalf of an insured, any person injured on the insured's premises that the person normally occupies, any person for which workers compensation benefits are payable, any person injured while taking part in athletics, and bodily injury due to war, whether or not declared, or any act or condition incidental to war. If the general liability has a deductible, there will be no Medical Payments coverage. However, there will be coverage for expenses incurred by the insured for first aid administered to others at the time of an accident. Similar to the terms of the Medical Payments coverage, the accident must arise from bodily injury caused by the insured's operations, or by an accident on the insured's premises. Although this is no-fault coverage, all medical payments paid by TVIR on behalf of an insured will be reflected as an incurred loss under the Commercial General Liability policy. Consequently, these payments may have a direct impact on your General Liability premium calculation through the experience rating program. Should you need any additional information regarding this coverage, contact your Agent or TVIR Account Manager. WT02-B15-88IA070-000439-B039-239http://reciprocalgroup.com:80/todayswp/current/sick.htm 206.181.79.194 19970120204609 text/html 3766HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Microsoft-IIS/3.0Date: Mon, 20 Jan 1997 20:45:55 GMTContent-Type: text/htmlAccept-Ranges: bytesLast-Modified: Sun, 29 Dec 1996 03:11:00 GMTContent-Length: 3568 Sick Building Syndrome Diagnosis?  Sick Building Syndrome Treatment?  Early Claims Intervention By Mark Hyland, Assistant Vice President Everyone has heard of the phenomenon of "sick buildingsyndrome." Usually we associate this problem with modernoffice buildings. Healthcare facilities, of all sorts, are notimmune to this modern risk. Well documented case studies of"sick-hospital syndrome" are available in the medicaljournals. Our experience shows that it is most often the olderfacility which is undergoing construction or has recently beenrefurbished that experiences this kind of employee complaint andsubsequent workers; compensation claim. The best treatment is Early Response-to a workers firstcomplaint of "something is making me sick" as well asto an employees compensation claim for an occupationalrespiratory ailment. "Indoor air pollution" signs and symptoms usuallyfall into two categories-those impacting the general environmentand those which have begun to affect employee health. Workers mayreport unusual smells or dust in their areas. They may even havean idea of the origin of the nuisance (for example, the exhaustfrom the delivery truck which is going into the buildingsair intake vent.) Other times employees only begin to suspectthat their health problems are related to a workplace exposureafter they gave received treatment. Symptoms of upper-respiratoryirritation and lower respiratory distress, as well as burningeyes, dry skin and dermatitis, headache, fatigue and dizzinessmay be caused by poor air quality. A quick response to early reports of environmental problemsmay give you the chance to fix the problem before employees beginto go to their doctors or the employee health nurse. Bring inyour maintenance manager or the facilitys industrialhygienist and do physical surveys of the site in question. Try toidentify if anything has changed in that location recently.Inspect the air handling equipment-with an emphasis on looking atthe total system from air intake to exhaust. Further detectivework might involve air monitoring, wipe samples and possiblyphysical exams for exposed employees. If an employee files a workers compensation claim, aquick response is also the best management practice. Your SISclaims consultant should be notified. All medical records must beobtained. Expert medical opinions may be appropriate. Theemployees work site needs to be surveyed and statementsobtained from the claimant as well as fellow workers. Anydocumentation of earlier employee complaints should be reviewed.Other experts may need to be brought in to conduct furtherinvestigations. A prompt management response is also appropriate when a finaldecision is made concerning a claim. Ignoring early reports ordelaying decisions on claims will only raise employee concernsfurther. In the case of sick building syndrome " a sniff intime saves nine!"WT02-B15-89IA070-000439-B039-259http://reciprocalgroup.com:80/todayswp/current/osha.htm 206.181.79.194 19970120204624 text/html 3285HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Microsoft-IIS/3.0Date: Mon, 20 Jan 1997 20:46:13 GMTContent-Type: text/htmlAccept-Ranges: bytesLast-Modified: Sun, 29 Dec 1996 03:34:00 GMTContent-Length: 3087 OSHA Compliance "OSHA COMPLIANCE AND SIS SUPPORT: PART 4 OF4" ITS A GIVEN!No matter what the technical safety or health issues-from fireand emergency training required at 29 CFR 191038 and .157 to theproposed standard for TB-OSHA expects the employer to provide abasic level of safety education and training to exposedemployees. This expectation is reflected in the last fourelements that make up OSHAs 1989 voluntary Guidelinesfor Safety and Health Program Management, which we have beenreviewing the past editions of Todays Workplace. At the minimum, employees must understand the hazards to whichthey may be exposed and how to prevent harm to themselves andothers. This understanding helps employees accept and follow yourestablished protections for specific hazards. For example, it ishard for employees first entering the healthcare professions tounderstand the need for all of the personal protectiveequipment-masks, goggles, gloves & gowns-which are standardprotocol. Education concerning the vectors of diseasetransmission between patient and caregiver provides thefoundation for training on exactly when and how to use suchequipment. While all employees need hazard awareness education andtraining, supervisors and managers require added information.Supervisors should be given special training to help them intheir leadership roles. They need to be taught to look for hiddenhazards, to insist upon the safe maintenance of their work areas,and to reinforce employee hazard training through performancefeedback and, when necessary, fair and consistent enforcement oforganizational rules. Managers must understand their own responsibilities for safetyand health. They may not need to attend classroom training onhazards. However, organizations should provide their managerswith multiple sources of information that will raise safety andhealth awareness. Seminars, workshops, information bulletins,newsletters and vides are suitable. Is your plan for safety and health education and trainingup-to-date? Is it responsive to each employees exposures,duties and position within your facility? Your SIS loss controlconsultant can help you evaluate and design appropriate trainingstrategies. In addition, SIS can schedule specially designedworkshops for your management and supervisory staff. Call yourSIS loss control consultant and ask for the "On-SiteEducational Programs" information.WT02-B15-90IA070-000439-B039-181http://reciprocalgroup.com:80/trnews/current/claims.htm 206.181.79.194 19970120204537 text/html 3074HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Microsoft-IIS/3.0Date: Mon, 20 Jan 1997 20:45:27 GMTContent-Type: text/htmlAccept-Ranges: bytesLast-Modified: Wed, 15 Jan 1997 05:17:59 GMTContent-Length: 2876 Claim Frequency and Severity in 1995 Hospital Professional Liability Claim Frequency and Severity in 1995 Robert Jones, Vice President of Claims TVIRs Hospital Professional Liability business has experienced three consecutive years of declining claim frequency. A reliable gauge of claim frequency is a comparison of the number of arising cases to an exposure base such as bed equivalency. These are numeric values given a hospitals potential exposure areas such as acute care beds, clinic visits, bassinets, etc. TVIRs ratio of arising claims per 100 bed equivalencies has been on the decline since 1992, and in 1995 we experienced 1.84 claims per 100 bed equivalencies. This nearly equals the five-year low from 1991 of 1.78 claims per 100 bed equivalencies. Indemnity reserves on TVIRs open HPL claims have also experienced a decline in the past five years. Over the five-year period, the indemnity reserves have decreased 7% while expenses have increased 94%. Indemnity reserves represent the dollars set aside to pay settlements and verdicts, while the expense reserves pay defense lawyers, medical experts, private investigators, etc. While the declining indemnity reserve is a favorable trend, the expenses are growing significantly. Part of this rapid growth in the expense line is due to TVIRs efforts to litigate more cases. For example, in 1995 TVIR litigated 49 medical malpractice cases to verdict, wining 35, or 71%, of these contests. In 1995 TVIRs average indemnity payment was $23,288 while an additional $11,156 was spent in average expense payments on a per case basis. Over the past five years the indemnity payments on cases closed during that period increased 53%, approximately 10% a year. Expenses, on the other hand, have increased 88% over the past 5 years, nearly 18% per year. WT02-B15-91IA070-000439-B039-281http://reciprocalgroup.com:80/todayswp/current/group.htm 206.181.79.194 19970120204642 text/html 2956HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Microsoft-IIS/3.0Date: Mon, 20 Jan 1997 20:46:27 GMTContent-Type: text/htmlAccept-Ranges: bytesLast-Modified: Sun, 29 Dec 1996 03:49:13 GMTContent-Length: 2758 Group Self-Insurance Group Self-Insurance For Workers Compensation: What arethe Benefits? By Dan Lewis, Manager, Account Services When commercial insurance carriers began leaving theworkers compensation marketplace in the mid to late1980s, group self-insurance became a viable workerscompensation solution for many healthcare organizations. In fact,these market conditions brought about the creation of the fiveworkers compensation groups that Specialty InsuranceServices, Inc. manages today: Healthcare Providers group MHA Private Workers Compensation Group MHA Public Workers Compensation Group SunHealth Group Self-Insurance Association of North Carolina THA-Workers Compensation Group These groups continue to provide their members many advantagesthat cannot be obtained in the commercial marketplace. Inaddition to providing a long-term, stable workerscompensation market, groups provide the following advantages: Cost reduction-Since groupseliminate many expenses that would be incurred with insurancecompanies, such as insurance company profits and assigned riskcharges, members generally see reduced costs. Investment incomeearned by the group also reduces overall costs. Specialized services-loss controland claims services are tailored to meet the specific needs ofthe groups members. This can result in improved lossexperience, which further reduces the members cost. Self-governance-a group isgoverned by an elected board, which makes decisions on behalf ofthe members of the group. This allows the members to makedecisions concerning the direction and operation of the group. Ownership-members of the groupshare in the equity (profit) of generated by the operation of thegroup. This is contrasted with a commercial carrier, where theprofits stay with the insurance company.WT02-B15-92IA070-000439-B039-333http://reciprocalgroup.com:80/todayswp/current/award.htm 206.181.79.194 19970120204717 text/html 5664HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Microsoft-IIS/3.0Date: Mon, 20 Jan 1997 20:47:05 GMTContent-Type: text/htmlAccept-Ranges: bytesLast-Modified: Mon, 13 Jan 1997 14:02:02 GMTContent-Length: 5466 Award Winners Awarding Partnership in Controlling Costs and Building forthe Future Congratulations to our award winners. These SIS clients haveproven that they are actively controlling workerscompensation losses, saving money and building better futures.The Award of Excellence goes to facilities that have achieved thelowest experience modification factor. The Chairmans Awardis based on overall performance, significant recent improvementand commitment to partnership. *** AWARD WINNERS *** Chairmans Award Award of Excellence Healthcare Providers Group Healthcare Providers Group Martha Jefferson Health Services Alexandria Health Services Corporation Virginia Health Services Martha Jefferson Health Services Orange Co. Nursing Home Commission MHA Private Workers Compensation Group Richmond Eye & Ear Hospital Mississippi Baptist Medical Center MHA Private Workers Compensation Group MHA Public Workers Compensation Group Jeff Anderson Regional Medical Center Oktibbeha County Hospital Magee General Hospital SunHealth Workers Compensation Group MHA Public Workers Compensation Group Wilson Memorial Holding Company Greenwood Leflore Hospital Tallahatchie General Hospital THA-Workers Compensation Group Sumner Regional Medical Center SunHealth Workers Compensation Group Stanly Memorial Hospital THA-Workers Compensation Group Hawkins County Memorial Hospital Williamson Medical Center WT02-B15-93IA070-000439-B039-47http://reciprocalgroup.com:80/phyfocus/current/about.htm 206.181.79.194 19970120204415 text/html 793HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Microsoft-IIS/3.0Date: Mon, 20 Jan 1997 20:43:50 GMTContent-Type: text/htmlAccept-Ranges: bytesLast-Modified: Thu, 26 Sep 1996 15:23:16 GMTContent-Length: 596 About Physicians Focus Published quarterly for Doctors Insurance Reciprocal, a Risk Retention Group. Published By: Doctors Insurance Reciprocal P.O. Box 4880 Glen Allen, Virginia 23058-4880 Physicians Focus welcomes comments and questions, 1-800-876-8847 Anne D. McDougall, EditorWT02-B15-94IA070-000439-B038-365http://reciprocalgroup.com:80/todaylaw/current/redem.htm 206.181.79.194 19970120204302 text/html 2708HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Microsoft-IIS/3.0Date: Mon, 20 Jan 1997 20:42:48 GMTContent-Type: text/htmlAccept-Ranges: bytesLast-Modified: Wed, 20 Nov 1996 19:30:33 GMTContent-Length: 2510 Beware of the IRS's Right of Redemption Beware of the IRS's Right of Redemption Whenever you represent a lienholder in bidding on encumbered property at foreclosure or a judicial sale, and in so doing you will be extinguishing a junior federal tax lien, beware of how the IRS's statutory right of redemption (as set forth at 28 U.S.C. Section 2410, of the Internal Revenue Code, and 26 U.S.C. Section 7425(d)) applies in your state. If the IRS is made a party to a suit to quiet title, foreclose a mortgage or other lien or any other action, the IRS has the right (within 120 days of sale) to pay "the actual amount paid by the purchaser at such sale which, in the case of a purchaser who is the holder of the lien being foreclosed, shall include the amount of the obligation secured by such lien to the extent satisfied by reason of such sale . . . ." 28 U.S.C. Section 2410(c). Malpractice claims have arisen where the attorney is unfamiliar with the IRS right of redemption, and successfully bids the property in for his lienholder at less than the full amount of the lien (e.g., to save Commissioner's fees). Thereafter, the IRS notifies the lien holder/purchaser of its intent to exercise its right of redemption by tendering to the lien holder/purchaser the actual amount he paid for the property. This forces the lien holder/purchaser to either negotiate with the IRS to pay off the outstanding tax liens or to accept less than the full amount of his security interest in satisfaction of the debt. Where the value of the property equals or exceeds the lien holder's payment, the IRS's exercise of its redemption rights can result in actual damages to the lien holder and could form the basis for a legal malpractice claim. Being aware of this right and its application in your jurisdiction will allow you to properly counsel the lienholder in determining the bid range or amount. About the author: This tip was provided by Wendy Inge, Senior Claims Consultant and Director of Risk Management at ANLIR. She is a licensed attorney and has been with ANLIR for over 5 years. She welcomes any questions or comments regarding this section and can be reached at 800-284-8847. NOTE: It is not possible in the limited amount of space available to provide an exhaustive legal discussion on the matter of law raised in the Malpractice Prevention Tip section.WT02-B15-95IA070-000439-B039-75http://reciprocalgroup.com:80/trnews/current/tvirnew.htm 206.181.79.194 19970120204436 text/html 4698HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Microsoft-IIS/3.0Date: Mon, 20 Jan 1997 20:44:23 GMTContent-Type: text/htmlAccept-Ranges: bytesLast-Modified: Sun, 29 Dec 1996 05:58:21 GMTContent-Length: 4500 A Message To Subscribers A Message To Subscribers A Message to Subscribers from Kenneth B. Swenson, Chairman of The Virginia Insurance Reciprocal Board of Directors, and William F. Jacobs, President of The Virginia Insurance Reciprocal. The changes in the healthcare field now are well documented. How the Virginia Insurance Reciprocal (TVIR) responds to the changes will determine its future. If 1995 is an indicator, TVIR will continue to be a successful organization. In spite of the dramatic changes, TVIR enjoyed an outstanding year. Customer satisfaction is high, with 93 percent of customers renewing their policies in 1995. Net income increased to more than $10 million, the 10th consecutive year of profits. Policyholders' surplus has grown to $78.7 million. Approximately $6 million in equity was returned to hospitals in Virginia, Tennessee and Mississippi last year. Since 1980, the total equity returned to subscribers exceeds $50 million. TVIR moved out in front of change in 1995 through bold new initiatives: We encouraged the formation of The Reciprocal Alliance, a new insurance company that will meet the needs of healthcare systems in the managed care era. A system was developed to designate Preferred Agents in selected markets, to expand marketing efforts in areas not served directly by our marketing staff. Internally senior management initiated a strategic thinking process, enabling us to conduct business based on a continuous evaluation of current information about customers and markets. The staff was involved in surveys, task forces and more focused communication to become a more customer-driven, well-trained organization. The results demonstrate the work. Three prestigious healthcare systems became new subscribers, and AHA Services, an affiliate of the Arkansas Hospital Associate, gave its exclusive endorsement to TVIR. Management is confident that the forward momentum of TVIR will continue in 1996 with favorable results from a full year of the Preferred Agents system, the Arkansas endorsement and the impact of the Alliance. As a customer-owned organization, TVIR is focused on customers and driven by them. TVIR is innovative and flexible, and meeting the needs of the healthcare field. Our success is due to how well the people affiliated with TVIR work together. The advice and counsel of our governing organizations offer enormous benefits, helping us to stay a step ahead of changes in the industry. At the same time, senior management provides outstanding leadership, initiating marketing strategies that reflect the vision of TVIR. Carrying out these initiatives are the officers and staff of VPUI professionals who have committed themselves to fulfilling our customer-focused mission. Together, the TVIR team is prepared for the future, and we are excited about helping our customers meet the needs of the people and communities they serve. Kenneth B. Swenson, Chairman The Virginia Insurance Reciprocal William F. Jacobs, Jr., President The Virginia Insurance Reciprocal WT02-B15-96IA070-000439-B039-198http://reciprocalgroup.com:80/trnews/current/edboard.htm 206.181.79.194 19970120204545 text/html 954HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Microsoft-IIS/3.0Date: Mon, 20 Jan 1997 20:45:34 GMTContent-Type: text/htmlAccept-Ranges: bytesLast-Modified: Sun, 29 Dec 1996 05:58:21 GMTContent-Length: 757 Editorial Board Editorial Board Robert Hinman, Chair Thomas K. Smith Chip Marohn Rich Stocks Colleen Lynch William Wilson Kathleen Harris Georgianna Engiles Graphic Designer 4200 Innslake Drive Glen Allen, VA 23060 (800)284-8847 WT02-B15-97IA070-000439-B039-219http://reciprocalgroup.com:80/todayswp/current/doers.htm 206.181.79.194 19970120204554 text/html 10222HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Microsoft-IIS/3.0Date: Mon, 20 Jan 1997 20:45:41 GMTContent-Type: text/htmlAccept-Ranges: bytesLast-Modified: Wed, 15 Jan 1997 04:29:52 GMTContent-Length: 10023 Do-ers Helping Safety & Health Committee Members Become"Do-ers" "It must be considered thatthere is nothing more difficult to carry out, nor more doubtful of success, nor more dangerous to handle than to initiate a new order of things." -Machiavelli You've been sitting on your organization's safety and healthcommittee for awhile now. Maybe it's the way Theresa is readingher nursing charts until it's her turn to report, maybe it's theway Ralph simply takes everyone's written suggestions, holepunches them and stashes them in his committee binder (didn't hewipe dust off of it when he sat down?), or how Julian is going onad nauseam about the broken electrical outlet at thenurse's station. There's a nagging little voice at the back ofyour mind saying "we're not doing anything to solve the bigproblems." Does this sound familiar to you? Safety & Health Committees are required by JointCommission and recommended by OSHA guidelines, but that doesn'tguarantee good committees. Another law to pay attention to whenforming safety committees is the National Labor Relations Act andits restrictions on "employee dominated" committees. This stereotype of a S & H committee is a bunch of boringpeople sitting around a table listening to reports on recentincidents. Yet, there's real gold to be mined if you can turn thecommittee into Do-ers, not just passive attendees. Your successis influenced by the way management sets up and empowerscommittee members to reach beyond the confines of problem givingto become problem solvers. Depending on your approach, the safety committee can be avaluable two-way communication tool with significant powers foraction, or nothing more than a waste of everyone's time. One ofthe keys is good planning. Some organizations operateinterrelated S & H committee responsible for differentfunctions (i.e., a policy committee, an employee safety &health committee, a committee for facilities & maintenance).Groups work on their own issues, identifying the "big"problems through data analysis, incidents and other reportingmechanisms. They also report to each other, coming together towork on common problems such as implementing the new OSHApersonal protective equipment standard. If your organizationisn't large enough to warrant several committees, a single one,which is well organized and operated, can be just as effective.The number and arrangement of committees is not as important asunderstanding what makes a S & H committee"successful." Organizing the Committee Who should be asked to participate?Picking the right Chair is very important. While the safety andhealth manager may seem the obvious choice, we'd encourage you tochoose someone else for the role. That way the power can bedistributed more evenly and the voices of all members encouraged.Look for a good meeting "conductor" that everyonerespects and likes. Five to seven members are the idealcommittee size but can vary depending on the organization. Whenpicking your members, include a person from the department withthe poorest mishap record (these people already have a problem).Invite someone with a demonstrated interest in safety and healthissues, and someone from a department with an outstanding safetyand health record (these people will be invested in gettingthings done and have experience from which others can learn).Include someone to represent employee's interest as well assupervisors of major departments. It may sometimes be helpful tocall in experts as needed to solve specific problems. These donot need to be permanent members to be effective. Preparing for the Meeting Committees are great for presenting ideas, encourageunderstanding and cooperation, and building consensus. However,everyone recognizes how quickly a poorly run committee can drainenergy and initiative. Most of the energy zappers can be managedif you set up a structure in advance. Schedule the meetings for the same time each month (i.e. thethird Thursday at 9 a.m.). If possible, set up tables and chairsin a circular format. Remember to encourage eye contact-it'simportant for successful communications. If there are not enoughagenda items to warrant a meeting, cancel it! Nothing destroys agood committee faster than the thought that members are wastingtheir time. The meeting facilitator should collect agenda items andcirculate a meeting schedule at least a week in advance. Someoneshould be prepared to keep minutes (including who comes and whois assigned action items). Serve good coffee and healthy snacksto express how important the committee's work is. Conducting the Meeting Use the first part of the meeting as a "show andtell" where members share new safety equipment, videos,brochures or other resources that are available. This sets apositive, energetic tone. Don't spend too much time reviewingminutes and standing committee reports. The bulk of thecommittee's time should be spent analyzing data, looking for anddiscussing big problems, matching existing resources with needs,and setting up new policy, procedures, and training. (Julian'sbroken electrical outlet should never have made it to the S &H Committee, that's what the maintenance department's work ordersystem should cover.) To avoid the "Talkers not Do-ers" problem, trykeeping a log with all pending big problems listed. A problemdoesn't get dropped from the committee's agenda and log until ithas been resolved. If one problem seems to be malingering andrequires resources beyond the committee, it's time to call in anexpert or the attention of upper management. However, if it's anindividual who seems to be malingering by taking too much of thecommittee's time or constantly interrupting and talking overeveryone else, consider creative ways to facilitate groupdiscussions. Remember the wooden gavel presidents of community clubs arepresented upon the inauguration? The gavel is the Europeanversion of the Native American "talking stick"-whoeverholds the gavel or talking stick holds the attention of thegroup. Try introducing a symbolic object as the committee's"talking stick." Whenever Ralph is holding the brightred stethoscope, everyone is to be attentive and quiet. When he'sthrough making his point, it goes back in the middle of the tablefor the next person to claim. It may seem weird but it works! Assign Action Items Once the committee settles on a course of action, write downthe action points on separate index cards. Lay them in the middleof the table and ask members to pick up the cards with the tasksthey'll undertake. This may include continuing research orleading a subcommittee to search for more detail. Any left-overs(the stuff nobody wants to do) then can be equitably distributed.Members will claim the types of tasks they enjoy doing and youcan increase the successful use of individual talents. Be surethere is agreement on when tasks will be completed and how theywill be reported back to the committee. Members should beencouraged to vocalize their thanks to each other for taking onand performing tasks. Create an environment of positive feedback. Dissemination of Information to Others Report, report, report. But, remember to protect corporate andindividual confidentiality when reporting. Joint Commission andOSHA are not the only audiences for your committee reports. Bywriting everything down, you're making sure that each committeemember knows what they've committed to do. By keeping employeesand management informed, you're helping lay the groundwork fortheir future participation and support when the committee asksfor it. Good communication is vital to effective group work. Astrong paper trail not only shows where you've been, it pointsthe way to where you're going. Where are the bran muffins, the index cards, and that sillystethoscope? We've got some work to do!WT02-B15-98IA070-000439-B038-328http://reciprocalgroup.com:80/todaylaw/current/newbrd.htm 206.181.79.194 19970120204249 text/html 2550HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Microsoft-IIS/3.0Date: Mon, 20 Jan 1997 20:42:17 GMTContent-Type: text/htmlAccept-Ranges: bytesLast-Modified: Wed, 15 Jan 1997 05:20:22 GMTContent-Length: 2352 New Board Members New Members Added To ANLIR Board Andrew D. Dunn is a partner with the law firm of Devine, Millimet & Branch, P.A. in Manchester, NH. Andy graduated from Columbia University and received his J.D. from Duke University School of Law. Andy has been in private practice since 1974. In addition, he is a member of the ABA; New Hampshire and Manchester Bar Associations. He serves as the chairman of the New Hampshire Bar Association Insurance Committee, "Professional Liability Subcommittee", a special subcommittee that investigated professional liability insurance endorsement opportunities and was instrumental in bringing about the endorsement relationship between the bar and ANLIR. Andy is a frequent lecturer in insurance law matters. Robert V. Redding is a principal with the law firm of Waldrop and Hall, P.A., in Jackson, TN. He is engaged in civil litigation, with emphasis on medical malpractice, governmental entity and civil rights law; commercial litigation and insurance law. Bob graduated from Rhodes College and received his J.D. from Duke University School of Law. Bob has been in private practice since 1974. In addition, he is a member of the ABA, Tennessee Bar Association, Southwest Tennessee Bar Association, Tennessee Council of School Board Attorneys, and Tennessee Defense Lawyers Association. Previously Bob was on the Board of Professional Responsibility (Regional Committee) and the Board of Directors, West Tennessee Legal Services. WT02-B15-99IA070-000439-B039-118http://reciprocalgroup.com:80/trnews/current/relation.htm 206.181.79.194 19970120204506 text/html 4153HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Microsoft-IIS/3.0Date: Mon, 20 Jan 1997 20:44:53 GMTContent-Type: text/htmlAccept-Ranges: bytesLast-Modified: Sun, 29 Dec 1996 05:58:23 GMTContent-Length: 3955 Physician/Patient Relationship Guidelines Physician/Patient Relationship Guidelines The following article has been reprinted courtesy of The Virginia Board of Medicine. The Drug Control Act requires a physician to have a bonafide physician/patient relationship with a person before writing a prescription for a controlled substance. In addition to the problem of drug abuse/diversion, the Board continues to see cases where a physician prescribes for a person with whom he does not have a true physician/patient relationship. Therefore, the Board has determined to reprint the following guidelines. Physician/Patient Relationship Guidelines The Board of Medicine respects the professional integrity of physicians and recognizes that most physicians in Virginia comply with the law. However, drug abuse/diversion continues to be a very serious problem with has caused the Board concern and occupies considerable investigatory time. After a lengthy study, the Board, on November 23, 1985, adopted the following guidelines to define a valid physician/patient relationship to assist Board investigators in drug abuse-diversion cases. The Board believes it is important to remind physicians of these guidelines, so we are reprinting them. These guidelines do not carry the force of law or regulation, but are intended as guidelines only. A valid physician/patient relationship is documented by the presence of medical records and should contain the following as outlined: An appropriate history and physical or mental examination for the patient's chief complaint as appropriate to the specialty; Diagnostic tests when indicated; A working diagnosis; Treatment; and Documentation by date of all prescriptions written for drugs, with name of medication, strength, dosage, quantity and number of refills. In addition, "Guidelines for treatment of immediate family members of a physician," were adopted. They are as follows: Treatment of the immediate family members should be reserved for minor illnesses, temporary or emergency situations; Appropriate consultation should be obtained for the management of major or extended periods of illness; No Schedule II, III, or IV controlled substances should be given or prescribed except in emergency situations; and Records should be maintained of written prescriptions or administration of any Schedule II, III, or IV controlled substances. Source:Board Briefs, The Virginia Board of Medicine, Richmond, Virginia. Reprinted with permission. WT02-B15-100IA070-000439-B038-413http://reciprocalgroup.com:80/phyfocus/current/legal96.htm 206.181.79.194 19970120204324 text/html 4993HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Microsoft-IIS/3.0Date: Mon, 20 Jan 1997 20:43:09 GMTContent-Type: text/htmlAccept-Ranges: bytesLast-Modified: Wed, 15 Jan 1997 05:23:23 GMTContent-Length: 4795 1996 Legislative Highlights Published quarterly for Doctors Insurance Reciprocal, a Risk Retention Group. 1996 Legislative Highlights by W. Scott Johnson, Esquire The 1996 session of the Virginia General Assembly marked success for Virginia physicians in that legislation was not introduced which would repeal or increase the one million dollar medical malpractice cap on damages. Likewise, in past sessions legislation has been introduced to amend the statutes of limitation extending the time in which a patient has to file a medical malpractice action. There were no such legislative attempts this session. The primary focus of the 1996 session was directed on managed care issues. Armed with constituent letters and complaints, legislators launched a frontal attack on the insurance carriers and HMO companies in an attempt to level the playing field which many have perceived to be tilted in favor of the carriers and companies, not the consumers. The first attack centered on the length of stay for inpatient moms. Four legislative bills were introduced to mandate by statute the length of stay depending on whether mom delivers by Cesarean section or vaginally. The compromise legislation that was enacted will have the length of stay determined by the attending obstetrician though the use of "Standards for Obstetric-Gynecologic Services" as prepared by ACOG. With regards to neonates, the attending pediatricians will rely on the "Guidelines for Prenatal Care" as prepared by the American Academy of Pediatrics. The next attack focused on the right of female patients to have direct access to their OB-GYNs. Legislation was enacted to require carriers and HMO companies to permit female patients over the age of 13 to have direct access to a participating OB-GYN for an annual visit. Annual visits will not require a referral from a primary care provider. However, an OB-GYN cannot refer a patient for additional services (another specialist) without consultation or examination by the primary care provider. The most significant managed care focus centered on physician provider panels. Legislation was enacted to allow enrollees to continue to receive care from a primary care provider for up to 60 days after the primary care physician has been terminated from the provider panel, provided that termination was not for cause. Primary care providers must be given notice when specialty providers are terminated from a provider panel. With regards to physician contracts, carriers are prohibited from: 1) requiring physicians to indemnify the negligence of the carrier, 2) requiring the physician to waive his right to seek legal redress against the carrier, and 3) prohibiting, impeding, or interfering with provider-patient discussions of treatment options. Carriers must permit and require providers to discuss treatment options with patients. The final managed care focus resulted in the enactment of legislation to require carriers to disclose to enrollees or purchasers of insurance, all types of payment arrangements that the carrier uses to compensate participating physicians including but not limited to "withholds, bonus payments, capitation and fee-for-service discounts." In conclusion, the managed care focus of the 1996 session precluded significant legislation in the medical malpractice arena. It is difficult to predict what will await physicians in the 1997 session but a focus on medical malpractice reforms is a strong possibility. WT02-B15-101IA070-000439-B039-23http://reciprocalgroup.com:80/phyfocus/current/announce.htm 206.181.79.194 19970120204349 text/html 2387HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Microsoft-IIS/3.0Date: Mon, 20 Jan 1997 20:43:38 GMTContent-Type: text/htmlAccept-Ranges: bytesLast-Modified: Wed, 15 Jan 1997 05:23:44 GMTContent-Length: 2189 Announcement-New Premium Discounts Published quarterly for Doctors Insurance Reciprocal, a Risk Retention Group. ANNOUNCEMENT!!! DIR is pleased to announce that new premium discounts are available to DIR insureds! Effective this summer, the following pricing initiatives are being implemented: Additional premium discounts based on individual risk characteristics such as Continuing Education, Practice Management, Patient Advocacy Programs, Liability Management Experience, etc.; Free 60 day installment plan; Quarterly installments for larger accounts; 10% Risk Management Discount to be applied automatically at policy inception, with the expectation that each physician will fulfill the requirements prior to policy expiration; 5% discount for those physicians who opt out of future equity returns; 5% credit for those physicians who elect to pay their premium in full at the inception of their policy; Guaranteed rate initiative; 5% rate decrease for all specialties. These changes are a result of your requests and demonstrate DIR's commitment to provide superior cost-effective products and services that meet the needs of physicians. WT02-B15-102IA070-000439-B038-384http://reciprocalgroup.com:80/todaylaw/current/aboutlaw.htm 206.181.79.194 19970120204311 text/html 861HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Microsoft-IIS/3.0Date: Mon, 20 Jan 1997 20:42:59 GMTContent-Type: text/htmlAccept-Ranges: bytesLast-Modified: Thu, 26 Dec 1996 20:01:13 GMTContent-Length: 664 About Today's Lawyer Today's Lawyer is published by American National Lawyers Insurance Reciprocal (Risk Retention Group). It is published solely as an informational service to members. For comments, suggestions, or additional information, contact: American National Lawyers Insurance Reciprocal (Risk Retention Group) 4510 Cox Road Rowe Plaza, Suite 400 Glen Allen, VA 23060 (804) 279-5800 (800) 876-8847 Editor: Anne D. McDougallWT02-B15-103IA059-000319-B006-275http://www.eren.doe.gov:80/ 205.168.79.27 19970114192859 text/html 7072HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 19:29:06 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Mon, 13 Jan 1997 19:15:40 GMTContent-length: 6898 The Department of Energy's Energy Efficiency and RenewableEnergyNetwork U.S. Department of Energy Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy Network Welcome to EREN -- the Office of EnergyEfficiencyand Renewable Energy's (EE) premier resource for information about renewableenergy andenergy efficiency technologies. Check out What'sNew onEREN, and join the EREN Users Group. ERENvaluescustomer contribution to its continueddevelopment. EE at a Glance Budget,Organization Chart, Overview, Mission, Success Stories EE Offices Building Technology, State, and CommunityPrograms, Industrial Technologies,Transportation Technologies,Utility Technologies, Federal Energy Management Program, and more... Partnering with EE Commercialization Ventures Program,Energy Partnerships,Inventions andInnovations, SBA, and more... News and Events American Energy Month,Calendar,Disaster Recovery,Newsletters and Magazines,and more... International GREENTIE, InternationalInstituteforEnergy Conservation, Summit of theAmericas, and more... Education and Training EnergyQuest, EREC BBS Web Site,Geothermal Education Office, and more... Energy Efficiency Technologies Agriculture, Buildings, Industrial, Transportation, Utilities Renewable Energy Technologies Fuels and Chemicals,Geothermal, Hydrogen, Hydropower, Ocean, Solar, Wind Energy and Environment CitiesandCounties,Clean Cities,EnergyPartnerships,Small Business Tips,JI Online,and more... Type of Organization Commercial, Educational, Government, International, Not-for-Profit Resources Discussion Groups, Products and Services, Software,Visuals Alphabetical Listing A, B, C,D,E,F, G,H,I,J,K,L,M,N,O,P,Q,R,S,T,U,V,W,X,Y,Z [DOE Home Page]  [White House Home Page] Disclaimer Please send comments to: webmaster.eren@nrel.gov This site last modified: WT02-B15-104IA059-000319-B006-297http://www.eren.doe.gov:80/cgi-bin/imagemap.cgi/picts/erenlog2.map 205.168.79.27 19970114192917 text/html 264HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 19:29:24 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/html Mapping Server Error Mapping Server Error This server encountered an error: Wrong number of arguments, client may not support ISMAP.WT02-B15-105IA059-000319-B006-321http://www.eren.doe.gov:80/overview/welcome.html 205.168.79.27 19970114192930 text/html 2118HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 19:29:33 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Mon, 17 Jun 1996 21:46:04 GMTContent-length: 1944 DOE EREN - Welcome to EREN Welcome to EREN Christine A. Ervin Welcome to EREN -- the Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy Network! Please explore this electronic "information highway" and use it as a toolbox for building America's sustainable energy future. EREN contains consumer-friendly information on the latest energy efficiency and renewable energy technologies -- energy practices and systems that will save you and your customers money, while creating new jobs, improving the nation's energy security, and helping prevent pollution and other environmental problems. Think of EREN as a tool for helping you research, develop, market and use energy efficient and renewable energy technologies. You are important contributors, customers and partners in EREN. Its continued growth and usefulness will depend on how well the system serves your needs. Please send us your feedback and your ideas for how to make EREN better by emailing webmaster.eren@nrel.gov or utilizing the User Feedback Survey on the home page. Best regards, Christine A. Ervin Assistant Secretary Office of Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy U.S. Department of Energy Return to EREN Home Page Please send comments to: webmaster.eren@nrel.gov WT02-B15-106IA059-000319-B007-2http://www.eren.doe.gov:80/new/whats-new.html 205.168.79.27 19970114193000 text/html 45687HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 19:29:49 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Wed, 08 Jan 1997 21:47:50 GMTContent-length: 45512 DOE EREN - What's New on EREN What's New on EREN Below is a list of recent additions to EREN. January 7, 1997 Ohio Office of Energy Efficiency The Ohio Office of Energy Efficiency (OEE) is responsible for developing policies that promote the efficient use of energy and renewable energy resources and increase cooperation in the deployment of energy efficiency initiatives among all levels of the state's government. Information about OEE's commercial and industrial, education and public awareness, and residential services are posted here. Some of the content available on this site includes descriptions of OEE's Home Energy Ratings of Ohio Foundation, Weatherization Assistance Program, and Ohio Weatherization Training Center. Enertia Building Systems The features of an Enertia Building Systems' prefabricated "kit" home (solid wood walls with no insulation, air channels within the walls, and geothermal and passive solar heating) allow it to function as "natural heat pump." According to the company's Web site, the result is a customized home that is environmentally friendly, comfortable in most climates, and a net energy producer. Come to the Enertia Building Systems "Home" page to visit their Gallery of Homes as well as to learn about design and construction options, business opportunities available with the company, and the economic advantages of this system of construction. Echo Systeme Echo Systeme provides design, installation, and consultation services for applying solar water and space heating systems, renewable energy generation systems (photovoltaic, wind, hydroelectric), solar cookers, and other alternative energy technologies. The content for the Echo Systeme Web site is presented entirely in French and includes educational information and detailed schematics for many of the systems the company services. Klimaschutzaktion Nordlicht Social psychologists at Kiel University use leaflets and other mechanisms in their attempt to influence the transportation and residential energy consumption behavior of Klimaschutzaktion Nordlicht campaign participants and thereby reduce greenhouse gas emissions. The Nordlicht (Northern Lights) team encourages citizens, communities, organizations, businesses and institutions throughout Germany and in surrounding countries to print leaflets with their organizational logos included and distribute them. Come to the Klimaschutzaktion Nordlicht Web site to review interim results of the campaign, read one the campaign leaflets distributed, and gather additional material about this unique environmental effort. Quantum Consulting, Inc. With a staff of professionals situated in five satellite offices across the U.S., Quantum Consulting, Inc. performs end-use energy metering (EUM) data collection for customers in the residential and commercial/industrial sectors. Browse the Quantum server to acquire more information about its software tools developed for utility customer research and its field, market assessment, engineering modeling and analysis, and Internet information services. January 3, 1997 Solar Institute Juelich The Fachhochschule Aachen Polytechnic's Solar Institute - Juelich conducts research and development on decentralized electric, hybrid, and thermal energy systems. While browsing the Institute's Web site, be sure to read about the Jeulich Department's plans for constructing a new solar campus, its demonstration projects of solar thermal (heating water, cooking, sterilization, and desalination of sea water), photovoltaic, and hybrid photovoltaic/wind energy system applications, the renewable energy training and coursework it offers, and the joint research and demonstrations its students and faculty perform with other schools and government agencies in foreign countries. El Paso Solar Energy Association The El Paso Solar Energy Association seeks to hasten the application of solar technologies in northern and southern New Mexico and western Texas. Posted on the Association's Web server are common sense tips for saving energy; articles describing the features of sun-tempered, passive solar, adobe, and straw bale homes; introductory information for constructing solar stills, solar cookers, and "batch" solar water heaters; background information about the Public Service Company of New Mexico's Student Energy Education Development (SEED) project; and details for ordering EPSEA information products. Photocomm, Inc. According to its home page, Photocomm is "...the nation's largest publicly-owned manufacturer and marketer of wireless solar electric power systems." Information about the company, its products and services, and a list of its applications/products for stand-alone photovoltaic systems are presented. Phoenix Chapter Electric Auto Association A wealth of resources for would-be electric vehicle (EV) devotees is available on the Web site for the Phoenix Chapter of the Electric Auto Association (EAA). Information about the EAA, membership guidelines, and facts about U.S. dependence on foreign oil imports, electric vehicle history, and the recycling of lead-acid batteries are posted here. The site also affords access to a repository of frequently asked questions, general guidelines for building an EV, alphabetical and categorized links to related sites, a calendar of national EV events, articles and papers from recent issues of Electromotive Technology News, and photos of converted EVs and of a vehicle conversion in progress. Discussion groups, links to electric and alternative-fueled vehicle businesses, and bibliographies of EV publications are among the other features of this site. Eole Located in Quebec, Canada, Eole is an initiative of French-speaking countries to promote wind energy technologies. The Eole Web site is presented entirely in French and offers historical information on and images of windmills and wind energy conversion systems; discussions of the attributes of large- and medium-scale turbines, the issues relating to wind energy as a "green" power source, and how the technology works; a summary of the applications of wind turbines worldwide; details about the largest vertical access turbine installation in the world located in Quebec; an online atlas with links to wind speed data for Canada, the U.S., France, and other locations; economic information about the technology; and a global list of equipment manufacturers. December 24, 1996 Northeast Energy Efficiency Council The Northeast Energy Efficiency Council (NEEC) is an association of New England's energy efficiency businesses. NEEC's Web site enables visitors to acquire contact information for providers of energy efficiency products and services in the region through its Directory of Companies. Read the background details provided on the Rebuild Boston energy initiative, access the most recent issues of NEEC's Member Bulletin newsletter, peruse documents containing utility industry restructuring comments filed with regional public utility commissions, and apply for membership electronically while on this server. Florida Heat Pump Florida Heat Pump Energy Systems has specialized in the manufacture of water source geothermal heat pumps for more than 25 years. Introductory information about how geothermal heat pumps work, descriptions of the company's products and services, and an e-mail link for contacting FHP are provided here. Solar Plus Introductions to the company's services and the energy-efficient home design principles that make residential solar electric systems economically viable are posted on the Solar Plus Web site. A brief history of the company and a form for ordering the "Solar Electric Products and Planning Guide" catalog can be obtained while browsing the Solar Plus server. University of Oregon Energy Studies in Buildings Laboratory Research conducted at the Energy Studies in Buildings Laboratory (ESBL) concentrates on understanding the relationship between buildings and energy and resource consumption; delves into improving the performance of building materials, components, structures, and communities; and aims at developing design tools. Software and documents produced at the ESBL can be ordered from the Publications Order page. Howard Associates Information and assistance available from Howard Associates helps builders, realtors, developers, architects, city planners, community agencies and others take advantage of resource-efficient construction. While viewing portions of this server, examine the overview presented on resource- efficient buildings, order publications prepared by the company's founder and building environmental scientist, Bion Howard, and become familiar with Howard Associates' consulting and Web site development services. December 17, 1996 Department of Energy Golden Field Office The Department of Energy's Golden Field Office (Golden) Web site offers Internet users a look at conducting business with Golden and the six Regional Support Offices, including contracting and grant opportunitiesavailable and the solicitation process. The site also provides a sample ofthe major cost-shared projects Golden manages across the nation and includes current news releases and information on conferences and events. Rainbow Power Company Ltd. According to its profile, Rainbow Power Company is not only the largest combined sales, manufacturing, and service organization of its kind in Australia, but it operates in a passive solar building powered by a utility grid-connected, hybrid wind/solar/steam power system. A look at Rainbow Power's Web site provides details on its project design, training, and consultation services and the independent energy generation and peripheral equipment it produces and supplies. North American Insulation Manufacturers Association NAIMA is a trade association of North American manufacturers of fiber glass, rock wool, and slag wool insulation products. The Association seeks to promote energy efficiency and environmental preservation through the use of insulation products while encouraging their safe production and use. Come to the NAIMA home page and learn about its membership, mission and goals, and organizational activities. Links to member company servers; access to online copies of NAIMA articles, conference proceedings, and press releases; bibliographies of NAIMA documents; and a printable publication order form are posted at this site. Prairie Wind & Sun Product information for packaged solar electric modules and systems, wind turbines, and balance-of-system components (charge controllers, meters, inverters, "power centers," and safety devices) are presented on the Prairie Wind & Sun Web site. E-mail access to the company's headquarters in Montana and links to manufacturers' Web sites for detailed information on the components that Prairie Wind & Sun distributes are also available. December 11, 1996 Fuel Economy Guide This is the site for the online version of the U.S. Department of Energy's 1997 Fuel Economy Guide. Search this database by vehicle mileage, make and model, or type. Using the calculator feature, input specific variables for your current vehicle (miles driven, city and highway mileage, percentage of city and highway driving, and gasoline price) to estimate its yearly fuel costs. Sunlight Homes Panelized construction combined with personalized designs and component packages make homes built the Sunlight way comfortable, affordable, and energy efficient. Browse the Sunlight Homes' Web site and gather specific information about the company's component packages, floor plans, package costs, recommended construction techniques and financing options, and other client services. Minnesota Department of PublicService Energy Information Center The Energy Division of the Minnesota Department of Public Service operates the Energy Information Center to answer general questions and provide specific advice for improving the energy efficiency of homes and businesses. From the Information Center's server, numerous publications on energy efficiency measures can be downloaded. Also available are selections from the Star Tribune newspaper column, "Dear Fixit," containing the Department's answers to consumers' energy questions, the Department's HouseWarming Guides for improving the energy efficiency and safety of homes, a document containing the Minnesota Energy Code for home builders, and MNcheck software for assisting the state's designers and builders in determining energy code compliance. Affordable Comfort Housing PerformanceAssociation Members of the Affordable Comfort Housing Performance Association (ACHPA) "...provide services which increase the comfort, health and safety, efficiency and durability of housing through the treatment of the house as a whole system." Sponsored by ACHPA member North Fork Retrofit, this web site offers descriptions of the company's and other ACHPA members' testing process and treatment services, a database of ACHPA members in the U.S., as well as links to the North Fork Retrofit home page, a sample energy audit "report" with client recommendations, and the ACHPA Member Service page. December 3, 1996 Volt VIEWtech Volt Information, Energy, and Water Technologies (VIEWtech) implements energyefficiency programs for utilities and is the energy industry's firstFannieMae-authorized loan provider. While on the VIEWtech Web site, read about thiscorporation's Home Energy Savings Loan Program for Pacific Gas and Electric Company,or request an account number from the webmaster to sample the HomeVIEW residentialenergy bill analysis software provided. Maryland Energy Administration The Maryland Energy Administration provides the citizens and agencies of this stateinformation on energy management, alternative energy sources, and financing programsfor applying energy efficiency measures. Salient features of the MEA Website includeuseful energy facts and tips, a directory of waste wood producers/consumers inMaryland, and descriptions of the Administration's programs in alternative fueledvehicles, community and state agency loans, community technology demonstrations,performance contracting, federal grants for industrial efficiency, and photovoltaicpowered schools. Energy Currents This is the online repository of the Maryland Energy Administration's quarterlynewsletter, Energy Currents. The most recent four issues of the newsletter are postedhere and can be accessed from the MEA home page. November 26, 1996 National Center for Photovoltaics The National Center for Photovoltaics (NCPV) functions as the U.S. Department ofEnergy's initial point of contact for those parties interested in all aspects of PVtechnology and applications. The information, data, and expertise available throughthe NCPV improves the American PV industry's products and services. Briefdescriptions of the Center's goals, identification of key players, and discussions ofcurrent activities (material and device development, module and system development,measurement and characterization, performance reliability testing, manufacturing anddeployment, market research and outreach, and solar data gathering andcharacterization) are provided on this Web site. IEA Wind Newsletter Travel to the International Energy Agency's (IEA) Wind Energy Newsletter home pageand read about the planned research activities of IEA member countries. An editorialfrom the Executive Committee Chairman outlining IEA's role in the rapid deployment ofwind energy technology worldwide, lists of member countries and Executive Committeemembers, task reports for a number of collaborative R&D projects undertaken throughcorresponding "annexes" to IEA's Wind Energy R&D Agreement, and a calendar ofcommittee meetings are among the features of this electronic newsletter. International Energy Agency WindTurbine Systems This is the Web site of the International Energy Agency's (IEA) "ImplementingAgreement for Cooperation in the Research and Development of Wind Turbine Systems"(also know as the "R&D Wind Programme"). Background information about the IEA and itsR&D Wind Programme are presented here. A section of the site, Status and Prospects ofWind Energy, offers statistics showing the global installed wind power capacity ofIEA member countries and the amounts of oxide emissions avoided because of theinstallation of wind energy systems. Descriptions of ongoing Programme tasks andrelated documents can be downloaded from this server. November 20, 1996 Goshen Timber Frames Energy efficiency is one of several advantages of a timber framed home when stress skin panels are used to "wrap the frame." The Goshen Timber Frames Web site highlights the characteristics of stress skin panels as part of its introduction to this form of construction. Information describing the products, services, and training available from this company as well as design and construction information and links to the Web sites of select businesses offering related products and services are available on this server. CaliforniaEnergy Commission Appliance Efficiency Database The brand names, model numbers, performance specifications, and annual energy costs of several household appliances (furnaces, refrigerators, freezers, heat pumps, air conditioners, and wine chillers) that meet or exceed California and national efficiency standards are cited in the California Energy Commission's Appliance Efficiency Database. Visitors to this site can view product entries in the database, submit e-mail inquires about appliance efficiency, and download the database in its entirety. European CommissionDirectorate General XVII (Energy) Making the European Community's internal energy market a reality, guaranteeing the security of energy supplies at reasonable costs, and encouraging the efficient use of energy and the application of renewable energy technologies through programs such as ALTENER, THERMIE, and SAVE are among the objectives of the European Commission's Directorate-General for Energy (DG XVII). Browse this Web site to gather information about these objectives and programs and to learn how the European Community intervenes through the DG XVII to support energy network development. Richard Stockton College of NewJersey Geothermal Project This home page is the gateway to background information and performance data for the Richard Stockton College of New Jersey Geothermal Project -- a study of a large closed-loop, earth-coupled heat pump system installation. Monitored system parameters include electrical demand and usage, climatic data, comparison of the performance of original and new systems, chemical analysis and temperature changes of the geothermal well field, and computer modeling. A directory of project staff, an archive of photos, proceedings from some sessions offered during the 1995 Geothermal Heat Pump Conference, and links to related resources are also offered on this Web site. November 13, 1996 U.S.Department ofEnergy Building Energy Tools Directory Information about more than 60 software tools (databases, spreadsheets, component and systems analyses, and simulation programs) for improving energy efficiency is provided in DOE's expanded Building Energy Software Directory. Links to 14 computer programs and updated information about 19 software packages have been added to this second generation Web site.Links to the software developers' Web pages are now included here. Alternative Energy Systems,Inc. Alternative Energy Systems (AES) designs and installs renewable energyand hybrid generating systems, conducts energy conservation assessments, specifies and applies measures for saving energy, manages projects during implementation, and installs advanced control and monitoring systems. The AES Web site offers a profile containing descriptions of its services,some of its major projects and clients, and professional biographies of the company's cofounders. Introductions to and specifications for the solar water heating and solar electric (photovoltaic or PV) equipment that AES installs and services are also presented. CleanEnergy An international electronic directory of renewable energy companies, products, and events is being developed and posted on the CleanEnergy Web site. Free registration of company data for eventual entry in thedirectory is offered. Placement of business home pages and leased advertising cyberspace are among the other service provided by CleanEnergy. INFORSE: International Network forSustainableEnergy Formed at the Global Forum in Rio de Janeiro in 1992, INFORSE is anetwork of more than 150 non-governmental organizations that support community- based sustainable energy strategies. The INFORSE Web site identifies and provides e-mail links to member organizations, regional Network coordinators, and the INFORSE Secretariat in Denmark; allows access tothe most recent issues of its quarterly newsletter (Sustainable Energy News); and offers background information on its involvement in the UnitedNations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) World Solar Summit Process. SustainableEnergyNews This Web site contains the most recent issues of the Sustainable Energy News -- the International Network for Sustainable Energy (INFORSE) quarterly newsletter. A link to the INFORSE home page and e-mail links to contacts at INFORSE and the newsletter's editorial office in Denmark are provided here as well. U.S. EnvironmentalProtection AgencyLandfill Methane Outreach Program According to U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) estimates, over700 landfills across America could profit from the installation of methane recovery systems, but only 115 such systems are currently applied. Visit EPA's Landfill Methane Outreach Program home page to learn about: the economic and environmental benefits of methane recovery, how the Outreach Program works, who the Program's utility and industry allies are, whatthe barriers are preventing the application of this technology, and how these barriers can be overcome. Program success stories, an e-mail link to the program manager, and an electronic copies of EPA's Ally Memorandums of Understanding (MOU) for participating states and utilities can also be viewed while at this site. Programa Andino deIntegracin Energtica The Andean Program of Energy Integration (Programa Andino deIntegracin Energtica) is a cooperative effort of the European Commission anda group of South American Countries involved in the Cartagena Accord to improvethe shared use of energy resources and promote the development and use of sustainable energy technologies in the region. In addition to general information about the program and its working group activities, access to online publications, and e-mail links to PAIE staff, an online directoryof institutions, research organizations, manufacturers, and suppliers of renewable energy technologies in member countries is a available on this Web site (in Spanish only). November 6, 1996 Energy ManagementAssociation of NewZealand A technical group of the Institution of Professional Engineers NewZealand (IPENZ), the Energy Management Association " ...is dedicated to the promotion of efficient and sustainable energy use." Noteworthy aspects of this site include: recent issues of the Association's newsletter; electronic copies of research reports, articles, and conference papers; lists of EMA members and a searchable membership data base; and links to energy-related Web sites. Also, review the EMA Code of Practice document posted here to learn about the high performance standards thisorganization sets for its members in New Zealand's energy services industry. Geothermal ResourcesCouncil With members in approximately 25 countries, the Geothermal Resources Council is a nonprofit, educational association that provides information to stimulate the development of geothermal resources around the globe.On the GRC Web site, search the entries for more than 18,000 articles,papers, and publications cited in the GRC Catalog Database; browse the calendarof upcoming related conferences, industry meetings, and international symposia; and learn more about this organization's staff, membership requirements, and functions. InternationalAssociation forEnergy-Efficient Lighting On its home page, the International Association for Energy-Efficient Lighting (IAEEL) describes itself as "...a global contact network and an information resource for high-quality, energy-efficient lighting."Journey to the IAEEL server and learn how to acquire proceedings from the 3rd European Conference on Energy-Efficient Lighting, subscribe to receive free, paper versions of the IAEEL quarterly newsletter (or peruse current and back issues electronically), and try some of the links established to nearly 100 other energy-efficient lighting resource Web sites identifiedin the Lighting Crossroads index. Solectria Corporation Solectria designs and manufactures advanced electric vehicles and related components. A trip to this Web site yields: information about thecompany; images, descriptions, specifications, and prices of its vehicles;component specifications; access to recent corporate press releases; andinstructions for applying for current job openings at Solectria. October 29, 1996 International EnergyAgencyBioenergy International Energy Agency (IEA) Bioenergy is a global collaborative established for information sharing and cooperation between nationalresearch, development, and demonstration programs. Electronic copies of task andactivity reports, publications, newsletters, a directory of task participants, andlinks to task-specific and unaffiliated sites provided here substantiate the collaborative's claim that, "...bioenergy offers cost-effective andsustainable opportunities that have the potential to meet up to 50 percent of theworld's energy demands during the next century." Geo-Heat Center The Oregon Institute of Technology's Geo-Heat Center Web site affordsaccess to information about geothermal energy and how it is used, the servicesoffered by the Geo-Heat Center, and a listing of Center's publications (includingthe "Geothermal Direct Use Engineering and Design Guidebook"). A copy of the Center's most recent "Quarterly Bulletin," a directory of industryconsultants and equipment manufacturers, a map of geothermal resources in the U.S.,and links to other Web sites offering geothermal information are alsoavailable. CALSTART CALSTART is a non-profit consortium dedicated to creating an advanced transportation technologies industry in California. The CALSTART Web site offers information about the organization and its functions, staff, and services. An index of participating entities, searchable data bases ofvehicle images and products, a glossary of industry terms, a user forum, a"Yellow Pages" of consortium participants and related organizations, newsupdates, and back issues of the CALSTART "Connection" newsletter can be accessed onthis server. BuschCogenerationFacility Typically, cogeneration entails the capture of excess thermal energy fromthe exhaust of large gas turbines to produce electricity and hot water orsteam. Take a virtual tour of the Busch Cogeneration Facility Web site and learnhow the Utilities Department at Rutgers State University retrofitted theircentral heating plant with three dual-fuel turbines to create a modern facilitythat generates more than 90 percent of the electricity required by the campusand provides 150 million Btu's per hour of hot water each day. COBRA: The Association ofCogeneration, Boiler, and Refrigeration Professionals COBRA is the newsletter and association of New Jersey Cogeneration,Boiler and Refrigeration Professionals. A trip to this Web site will yieldinformation about the association and the benefits of membership in it, detailsregarding available technical coursework in cogeneration facility operation offeredby "The Training Center," and links to other Web sites containinginformation on facility engineering, operations, and industry news. October 22, 1996 Photovoltaics Program -- U.S. Department ofEnergy This latest site addition to EREN offers a wealth of information aboutsolar electric (photovoltaic or PV) technology. Illustrations, photographs, andtext are used to present case studies of terrestrial applications of PVsystems, information about the history of the technology, descriptions of the photovoltaic effect and the solar resource, and discussions of cell,array, and system configurations. New Zealand EnergyEfficiencyandConservation Authority The Energy Efficiency and Conservation Authority (EECA) provides policyadvice to the New Zealand Government, contributes to the creation of energyefficiency legislation, gathers statistics, runs seminars, and initiates publiceducation projects and programs. Come to this Web site to learn more about EECA'sprojectsand capabilities and to send e-mail to EECA staff members. Energy-Wise News The New Zealand EECA's Energy-Wise News "...showcases energy-saving initiatives, updates developments in energy efficiency and renewableenergy... and provides contacts for people who want to save energy." Current andback issues of this electronic newsletter and links to other related sites are posted here. NationalSolar Thermal Test Facility Research performed for the U.S. Department of Energy at Sandia National Laboratories' National Solar Thermal Test Facility (NSTTF) continues tohasten the development and maturation of concentrating technologies forgenerating electricity, destroying hazardous wastes, processing materials and avariety of other industrial applications. A trip to the NSTTF home page providesaccess to photos of and information about the "facilities within the Facility"(central receiver, distributed receiver, engine test, designated user) and enablese-mailcommunication with specific program contacts. Fraunhofer Institute for SolarEnergySystems The Fraunhofer Institute for Solar Energy Systems is a member of theSolar Energy Research Association (Forschungsverbund Sonnenenergie) and theEuropean Renewable Energy Centres (EUREC) Agency. Go to the Institute's Web siteto learnabout its research, development, and demonstration project activities and facilities. Solar ElectricSpecialtiesCo. Solar Electric Specialties manufactures photovoltaic (PV) systemcomponents and distributes integrated power systems. Visit this site and read about SES products and packaged systems, use the glossary provided to look upindustry terms, learn more about the many aspects of the technology in SES'sFrequently Asked Questions section, and download online versions of the company's newsletter. October 15, 1996 CompactFluorescent LightsCutResidential Energy Use Visit the American Energy Month section on EREN and select "CompactFluorescentLights Cut Residential Energy Use" to reach a press release for DOE'sreport, "Residential Lighting: Use and Potential Savings." The data presented inthis online report were collected using a one-time addition to the EnergyInformationAdministration's (EIA) "1993 Residential Energy Consumption Survey"entitled the"Lighting Supplement Questionnaire." Sunelco From the town of Hamilton, Montana, Sunelco distributes and supportsturnkey solar electric (photovoltaic or "PV") systems and balance-of-systemequipment for a variety of independent power needs. From this Web site, study thedesigns,components, and specifications of PV systems and learn about theapplications and conditions under which they make economic sense. International Energy Agency EnergyConservationinBuildings and Community Systems Programme The International Energy Agency (IEA) promotes the exchange ofinformation amongmember countries, reviews national energy efficiency programs, andfacilitates international cooperation on specific policy issues. The IEA's Energy Conservation in Buildings and Community Systems (ECBCS) Programme seeksto initiate research and support the application of energy-savingtechnologies internationally. Shared research project summaries for ECBCS Programme"annexes"are posted on this Web site under such major categories as: energymanagement systems and controls, design tool development and evaluation, energy retrofitting measures, ventilation and indoor air quality, communityplanning, and advanced building materials and systems. CADDET RenewableEnergyNewsletter The IEA's Centre for the Analysis and Dissemination of DemonstratedEnergy Technologies (CADDET) assists U.S. companies by promoting their renewableenergyand energy efficiency technologies to potential markets worldwide, makes information on energy technology demonstration projects in othercountries available to decision makers, and contributes to an international effortto reduce the adverse environmental impacts of fossil fuel consumption.Travel to this site to acquire the most recent issues of CADDET's quarterlyRenewable Energy Newsletter, access the CADDET Renewable Energy home page, andidentify international member country contacts. Belform InsulationLtd. Belform Insulation manufactures urethane and styrene pipe insulationproducts. This company's home page offers links to background information aboutBelform, its insulation products, and their performance specifications andprices. October 8, 1996 EASY: The WholeHouseEnergyAudit A demonstration version of the Windows-based EASY energy auditingsoftware package can be downloaded from this home page. Among its many features,EASY audit software allows standardization of weatherization audit procedures,can beused in the field by professional auditors while they physically examinedwellings, and generates prioritized savings-to-investment ratios thatrank the cost-effectiveness of the measures prescribed. Thermomax USA Evacuated tube (heat pipe) solar collectors have been commerciallyavailable forfifteen years and perform well in climatic conditions that are less thanideal. Browse the Thermomax Web site to learn about this company's line of solar products and services, how their evacuated heat pipe collectors areconstructed and perform, and how to incorporate these collectors in a variety ofsolar waterheating system applications. Grass Roots Support For CleanEnergy The mission of Grass Roots Support For Clean Energy is "bringing people together to promote renewable energy from biomass, wind, solar, and geothermal." Selections on the Grass Roots server include: statisticalfacts on current renewable energy generation capability, information about key legislation affecting the use of renewables as environmental mitigation technologies, project development computer models, and a list of links to contacts in the renewable energy industry. Climate Alliance ofEuropeanCities The Climate Alliance of European Cities with Indigenous Rain ForestPeoples aimsto protect the earth's atmosphere by halving CO2 emissions, stopping the production and use of CFCs, and curbing the use of timber harvested from tropical rain forests. The Alliance is a partnership of local authoritiesin Europe and rain forest inhabitants and support groups. Available here is information about the organization and its members, lists of itspublications, summaries of municipal climate protection strategies reports, and brief descriptions of some of the activities undertaken by the Alliance's 500+member cities (e.g., urban planning for pedestrian access, constructing energy-efficient office buildings, installing solar water heating systemsfor municipal swimming pools). RegionalBiomassEnergyProgram Increasing the production and use of biomass energy resources is the goalof theU.S. Department of Energy's Regional Biomass Energy Program (RBEP).Through thisRBEP introductory Web page, access is provided to a related site on theBiofuelsInformation Network containing the RBEP Strategic Plan, a list ofregional and state RBEP contacts, a bibliography of biomass resource assessmentreports, RBEPresource assessment maps, a link to the Great Lakes Regional BiomassEnergy Program (GLRBEP) home page, and a recent (1994) report from the RBEPState Grants Program. October 2, 1996 American Energy Month October is American Energy Month, and the Department of Energy hasprepared thisspecial site on EREN to inform you about the economic, environmental, and societal benefits of energy efficiency and renewable energy technologies.Learn more about DOE's efforts targeted at urban centers and municipalities,its partnering activities with states, and its industrial, utility, building,and transportation programs. See what the Energy Tip of the Day is, and testyour knowledge about energy production and consumption while browsing theAmerican Energy Month site. SmallBusinessTips An electronic version of the publication, "Energy-Saving Tips for Small Businesses: Hands-on Solutions to Improve Your Profits and Productivity,"can bedownloaded from this home page. A list of 20 ways to save energy andmoney in small commercial buildings (and elsewhere) and an online form forordering a hard copy of this publication from DOE's Energy Efficiency and RenewableEnergy Clearinghouse (EREC) are available here. U.S. Department of Energy BioPower Demonstration project summaries, industry photos, technical papers, factsheets,introductory literature, and publications describing federal activitiesare all available from the DOE BioPower Program Web server. The depth ofinformation available from the Biopower site put it well on its way to fulfilling its mission of becoming "...one of the best overviews of this developingtechnology available anywhere in the world." Green Power Network Billed as "... a clearinghouse of information on electric power industrygreen marketing efforts," the Greenpower Network offers general informationon the concept, summaries of marketing activities among 23 utilitycompanies, access to a library of literature on the topic, links to other related information sources, market research data, descriptions of international efforts, and a green marketing discussion group. Energy-WaterConnection The California Energy Commission's Energy-Water Connection Web siteprovides information and resources to assist professionals in the water andwastewater treatment fields reduce their pumping and processing energy costs. Usethis siteto locate publications on energy-related subjects for the water industry, identify potential project financing sources, learn about the latestfacility operating methods and technologies, and obtain success stories fromaward- winning facilities. Energy Outlet The Energy Outlet's mission is, "... to help you make wise electricenergy choices by promoting energy efficiency, serving as a communityinformation center, providing energy efficiency education, and by promotingenergy-efficientproducts and services." A cooperative effort of four electric utilitiesin Lane County, Oregon, and the Bonneville Power Administration, the EnergyOutlet server provides product specifications and installation guidelines,questions toask when selecting major appliances, links to related sites, and ane-mail "Ask an Expert" feature. Return to EREN Home Page Please send comments to: webmaster.eren@nrel.gov WT02-B15-107IA059-000319-B007-31http://www.eren.doe.gov:80/menus/register.html 205.168.79.27 19970114193013 text/html 3362HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 19:30:19 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Thu, 18 Jul 1996 15:50:45 GMTContent-length: 3188 DOE EREN - Registration Form Registration Form This is a form for registering for the EREN Users Group mailing list. UsersGroup members are sent e-mail messages about new resources on EREN on a weeklybasis. To register here, your Web browser must support forms. If it does not, pleasesend an e-mail message to webmaster.eren@nrel.gov to register. Please includeyour complete e-mail address so that we may e-mail messages to you. The information you provide will help us develop EREN to better serve yourneeds, and is only for use by developers of EREN. NAME: COMPLETE E-MAIL ADDRESS: AFFILIATION: TYPE OF AFFILIATION/ORGANIZATION Academia Commercial Consumer/Private Citizen FederalGovernment State/Local Government Utility Other AREAS OF INTEREST (You may select as many as apply) Agriculture Biomass Buildings Hydropower Industrial Ocean Energy Photovoltaics Solar Transportation Wind All Energy EfficiencySectors All Renewable EnergyTechnologies Return to EREN Home Page Please send comments to: webmaster.eren@nrel.gov WT02-B15-108IA059-000319-B007-65http://www.eren.doe.gov:80/menus/survey.html 205.168.79.27 19970114193037 text/html 1621HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 19:30:34 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Mon, 17 Jun 1996 21:45:36 GMTContent-length: 1447 DOE EREN - User Feedback Survey User Feedback Survey Please help us to improve the Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy Network by giving us your comments and suggestions. Personal Information Name: E-mail: Institution: Suggestion Area: Best Features: Features you would like to see added: Additional information or data sources you could suggest Data Usefulness, General Comments/Suggestions:                 Return to EREN Home Page Please send comments to: webmaster.eren@nrel.gov WT02-B15-109IA059-000319-B007-99http://www.eren.doe.gov:80/overview/ 205.168.79.27 19970114193121 text/html 1397HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 19:31:15 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Tue, 17 Sep 1996 19:45:38 GMTContent-length: 1223 EREN - EE at a Glance EE at a Glance Welcome from Christine Ervin Budget in Brief EE Organization Chart EE Overview Mission Statement Winning Technologies: Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy Success Stories Return to EREN Home Page Disclaimer Please send comments to: webmaster.eren@nrel.gov Last Updated: WT02-B15-110IA059-000319-B007-136http://www.eren.doe.gov:80/overview/budget/ 205.168.79.27 19970114193149 text/html 1598HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 19:31:48 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Mon, 17 Jun 1996 21:46:05 GMTContent-length: 1424 DOE EREN - Budget in Brief Budget in Brief Foreword Introduction New Realities, NewEnergy Clean Power for A SustainableEconomy Innovative Technologies for EnergyIntensive Industries Improving America's BuiltEnvironment Cleaner Fuels, Cleaner Vehicles forAmerica Making Government More Efficient andLess Costly What Our Customers are Saying... Blueprint for the Future Budget in Brief in an AdobeAcrobat Portable Document Format (.pdf) file Return to EREN Home Page Please send comments to: webmaster.eren@nrel.gov WT02-B15-111IA059-000319-B007-155http://www.eren.doe.gov:80/overview/org-chart.html 205.168.79.27 19970114193157 text/html 861HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 19:32:04 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Mon, 26 Aug 1996 17:02:35 GMTContent-length: 688 DOE EREN - EE Organization Chart EE Organization Chart Return to EREN Home Page Please send comments to: webmaster.eren@nrel.gov WT02-B15-112IA059-000319-B007-191http://www.eren.doe.gov:80/overview/oview.html 205.168.79.27 19970114193215 text/html 8539HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 19:32:14 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Mon, 17 Jun 1996 21:46:04 GMTContent-length: 8365 DOE EREN - The Office of Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy The Office of Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy U.S. Department of Energy Technologies are available today to cut energy use, reduce costs, andprotect theenvironment. U.S. industry is increasingly involved in developing and usingthesetechnologies, thanks to the efforts of this office. Overview The goal of the Office of Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy (EE) is todevelopcost-effective energy efficiency and renewable energy technologies that protecttheenvironment and support the nation's economic competitiveness. EE achievesthisgoal through a strong and balanced program of research, development, and marketdeployment through private sector partnerships. EE is organized around thefour mainenergy users -- utilities, industry, transportation, and buildings -- as wellas an outreacharm of technical and financial assistance. This orientation toward end usershas helpedthe technology development programs focus on addressing the needs of themarketplace. Department of Energy (DOE) projections of energy use indicatethat by2030, renewables could supply as much as 28% of the nation's energy. The Office of Utility Technologies Electricity now accounts for 36% of the nation's energy consumption, and itsuse isexpected to grow 15% by the end of the century. Increased energy efficiencyandrenewable energy could play a significant role in meeting that increasedelectricaldemand. To than end, the Office of Utility Technologies (OUT) is working withindustry to improve the cost and performance of renewable energy technologies,including photovoltaics, solar thermal power, biomass power, wind power,hydroelectric power, and geothermal energy. OUT encourages utility energyefficiency by managing research in advanced transmission and distributiontechnologies, high-temperature superconductivity, and energy storage, and bysupporting programs that promote integrated resource planning. OUT is alsoconducting research to evaluate the potential health effects of exposure tolow-frequency electric and magnetic fields. The Office of Industrial Technologies Industry accounts for 37% of the energy we consume as a nation. Virtuallyeverymanufacturing process uses more energy than necessary. The Office ofIndustrialTechnologies (OIT) collaborates with industry to improve the energy efficiencyandproductivity of industrial processes. OIT manages programs to reduce energyusethrough new technologies in heat recovery, energy utilization, and industrialandmunicipal waste management. Other programs develop process improvements andinnovations for specific energy-intensive industries such as pulp and paper,steel, andchemicals. In addition, applied research in combustion, biotechnology,advancedmaterials, and heat transfer will provide the foundation for future advances intechnology. An active technology transfer program provides an effective linkbetweenthe research and development programs and the community of potential users. The Office of Transportation Technologies Transportation consumes more than 60% of the oil used in this country, andalmosthalf of that oil is imported. To reduce our nation's dependence on foreign oilandreduce the air pollution caused by gasoline-powered vehicles, the Office ofTransportation Technologies (OTT) supports research in electric and hybridvehicles;fuel cells and other advanced power sources; alternative fuels made formbiomass andother renewable energy sources; and advanced materials, such ashigh-temperatureceramics for gas-turbine and diesel engines. OTT is a partner in the U.S.AdvancedBattery Consortium -- composed of the three major U.S. automakers, leadingelectricutilities, and battery companies -- working to develop improved batteries forelectricvehicles. OTT is also establishing a database on the performance ofalternative-fueledvehicles and is spearheading the purchase of such vehicles for the federalfleet. Office of Building Technology, State, and Community Programs Residential and commercial buildings account for more than one-third of thenation'stotal energy use and consume about two-thirds of the nation's electricity. TheOfficeof Building Technologies (OBT) supports private sector efforts in the buildingindustry to improve energy efficiency and increase the use of renewable energy. OBTsupports basic and applied research on building systems and materials,primarilyfocusing the building envelope and the indoor environment and how they interactindetermining energy performance. Other OBT research activities focus on theequipment that provides heating, cooling, ventilation, lighting, hot water, andotherservices necessary for safe, efficient building operation. OBT also fulfillslegislativerequirements for DOE to set energy efficiency standards for buildings andhouseholdappliances. Federal Energy Management Program As the central point of contact within the 100+ Federal agencies, the FederalEnergy Management Program (FEMP) leads an interagency and public/privatepartnership to provide private sector financing mechanisms, training, auditsand technology demonstrations to help Federal agencies find their bestinvestments for saving energy, using renewable energy, and conserving water.The cornerstone of its efforts is FEMP's development of partnerships betweengovernment agencies and private companies. The cost of Federal energyefficiency projects is increasingly being offset with utility incentives andfinancing from private energy service companies, which use "energy savingperformance contracts" to pay the up-front costs of efficiency improvements. The energy service companies are repaid for the cost of the project with ashare of the resulting energy savings. A fully implemented FEMP program willcut Federal energy bills by $1 billion during the next ten years. R&D 100 Awardees -- DOE/EE Support Office Directors DOE/EE Regional Support Office Directors Charlie Baxter Chicago Regional Support Office U.S. Department of Energy 1 South Wacker Drive, Suite 2380 Chicago, Illinois 60606 (312) 886-8590 Fax: (312) 886-8561 Bill Becker Denver Regional Support Office U.S. Department of Energy 1617 Cole Boulevard Golden, Colorado 80401 (303) 275-4801 Fax: (303) 275-4839 Tony Pontello Philadelphia Regional Support Office U.S. Department of Energy 1880 J.F.K. Boulevard, Suite 501 Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19102 (215) 656-6955 Fax: (215) 656-6981 Jim Powell Atlanta Regional Support Office U.S. Department of Energy 730 Peachtree Street, NE, Suite 876 Atlanta, Georgia 30308-1212 (404) 347-2837 Fax: (404) 347-3098 Hugh Saussy Boston Regional Support Office U.S. Department of Energy One Congress Street, Suite 1101 Boston, Massachusetts 02114-1035 (617) 565-9710 Fax: (617) 565-9723 Kathy Vega Seattle Regional support Office U.S. Department of Energy 800 Fifth Avenue, Suite 3950 Seattle, Washington 98104 (206) 553-1132 Fax: (206) 553-2200 For general information call: 1-800-523-2929 This document was produced for the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) by theNational Renewable Energy Laboratory, a DOE national laboratory. The documentwas produced by the Technical Information Program, under the DOE Office ofEnergyEfficiency and Renewable Energy. Return to EREN Home Page Please send comments to: webmaster.eren@nrel.gov WT02-B15-113IA059-000319-B007-208http://www.eren.doe.gov:80/overview/mission.html 205.168.79.27 19970114193226 text/html 1069HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 19:32:33 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Mon, 17 Jun 1996 21:46:04 GMTContent-length: 896 DOE EREN - EE Mission Statement EE Mission Statement The mission of the Office of Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy is to lead the Nation to a stronger economy, a cleaner environment and a more secure future through development and deployment of sustainable energy technologies. Return to EREN Home Page Please send comments to: webmaster.eren@nrel.gov