WT02-B20-1IA001-000011-B021-30http://www.cec.sped.org:80/pp/17th.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101073414 text/html 7654HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 07:34:22 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 27-Jun-96 14:38:00 GMTContent-length: 7461Content-type: text/html CEC--Policy and Legislation--Legislative Updates-- Summary of 17th Annual Report to Congress Summary of 17th Annual Report to Congress Inclusive Placements on the Increase; Most Students Are Served in the Regular Classroom States saw the largest increase in the number of students with disabilities they served under IDEA during the 1993-1994 school year, while reporting that there continued to be a great shortage of teachers and teacher aides. A greater number of these students are being served in the regular classroom. This and other data are reported in the recently published U.S. Department of Education's 17th Annual Report to Congress on the Implementation of the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA), which reflects the state of education for the 1993-94 school year. Selected highlights from this year's report include: Students Served, Placement and Exiting Patterns, and Personnel Shortages The number of individuals from birth through 21 receiving special education or early intervention services in the 1993-94 school year increased by 4.2% -- the largest yearly increase since the inception of IDEA in 1976. The distribution of specific disabilities for children age 6-21 is: ï Specific learning disabilities -- 51.1% ï Speech/language impairments -- 21.1% ï Mental retardation -- 11.6% ï Serious emotional disturbance -- 8.7% Although students with traumatic brain injuries (TBI), other health impairments, and autism still account for less than 3% of all students with disabilities, these are the most rapidly growing categories. The size of the increase in the number of students with TBI and autism is probably related to the fact that these reporting categories were only recently established. The increase in the number of students with other health impairments appears to be the result of growth in the service population. Specifically, the number of students identified as having attention deficit disorders (ADD) appears to be increasing. Part H. The number of eligible infants and toddlers receiving early intervention services on December 1, 1993 rose to 154,065, or 1.3% of the entire birth through 2 population. This is an increase of 7.4% over the previous year. FY 1993 was the first year all States and jurisdictions were required to assure full implementation of the Part H program in order to receive funding. The program was appropriated $213.2 million, up 23% from the previous year. Among all eligible infants and toddlers, the home remains the most frequent service site, followed by outpatient services and early intervention classroom settings. The 1991-92 data shows that 1) family training, counseling, and home visits; 2) special instruction; and 3) speech and language pathology were the services most often provided. Section 619 Preschool Grants Program. In FY 1994, $339 million was appropriated for this program, 4% more than the previous year. However, during the 1993-94 school year, almost 500,000 preschoolers with disabilities received services, 8.3% more than in 1992-93. Services Provided in Integrated Settings. During the last five years, regular classroom placements for students age 6 through 21 have increased by almost 10%. The use of resource rooms has decreased, and all other placement settings have remained stable. In part, these changes may be attributed to improved data collection and reported methods in several states. In 1992-93, 95% of students with disabilities were served in regular school buildings. Students age 6 through 11 are most likely to be served in regular classroom settings. This continues the trend of placing more children in inclusive settings. Graduation Data. The graduation rate for students with disabilities as a whole has been essentially unchanged over the past five years. Rates for students with mental retardation are slightly higher than those for students with learning disabilities or serious emotional disturbance. Thirty percent of students with disabilities who had been enrolled in 9th through 12th grades left school by dropping out. An additional 8% left school before 9th grade. Almost all youth with disabilities had access to some form of vocational education in secondary school. Data indicated that vocational training contributed significantly to the probability of competitive employment. Freshmen with disabilities entering college made up a much larger portion of all freshmen with disabilities, tripling between 1978 and 1991 from 2.2% to 8.8%. Demand for Special Educators. The number of teachers employed to serve children and youth with disabilities age 6 through 21 from 1991-92 and 1992-93 increased 0.7%. The largest special education teacher category in school year 1992-93 was the specific learning disabilities category. Teacher aides accounted for over half (55.7%) of all staff other than special education teachers employed to serve students with disabilities age 3 through 21. However, states also reported that the area of greatest need was teacher aides, reporting a need of an additional 5,000 full-time equivalent teacher aides to fill vacancies and to replace personnel who were not fully certified or licensed. Funding. During FY 1994, $2.149 billion was distributed to states for the provision of special education to children with disabilities through IDEA, Part B. The average per-child allocation has remained relatively stable over the past three years, and was $413 in FY 1994 -- an increase of only $2 over the previous year. Serving Students with Disabilities in Rural Areas. Rural districts serve a greater percentage of students with disabilities in regular classrooms than do non-rural districts. In rural areas, only 14.6% of students with disabilities were in full-time special education programs, while in non-rural areas 25.3% were in these types of programs. The data also indicates that both rural and non-rural districts serve 5.5% of students with disabilities outside of their home districts. Rural districts serve a larger percentage of children living in poverty (22.9%) than non-rural populations (20.6%).The geographic isolation common to rural districts can impede every aspect of the special education process, including identification and assessment, service delivery, and availability of adequate personnel. Recruiting and retaining staff qualified to serve students with disabilities is particularly difficult in rural areas. Many professionals feel socially, culturally, and professionally isolated. To order a copy of the 17th Annual Report to Congress on the Implementation of the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act, contact the U.S. Department of Education's Office of Special Education Programs, Division of Innovation and Development, 202/205-9864.WT02-B20-2IA001-000011-B021-74http://www.cec.sped.org:80/pp/10comm.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101073453 text/html 2112HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 07:35:02 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 27-Jun-96 14:38:00 GMTContent-length: 1919Content-type: text/html THE TEN COMMANDMENTS OF JOINING THE GAME I. Thou shalt talk to thy lawmaker -- especially before the session when plans get made. II. Thou shalt have thy lawmaker and legislative aides draft a good bill and introduce it early in the session. III. Thou shalt keep tabs on which committee is debating the bill and visit undecided committee members, write letters, or call them on the phone to offer thy thoughts. IV. Thou shalt volunteer to testify at a hearing -- real-life stories deeply impress lawmakers -- and thou shalt be prepared to outlast long delays. V. Thou shalt not expect thy meagerly paid lawmaker to buy lunch -- try the cafeteria for healthy food below capital city prices. VI. Thou shalt not believe that public marches around the Capitol sway votes, but do ask sympathizers to write letters and visit lawmakers. VII. Thou shalt not bother lawmakers while they are in committee or on the chamber floor and thou shalt be polite -- angry threats and shouting matches never help. VIII. When watching legislative action from the public galleries, thou shalt not break rules against taking photographs, eating food, or reading newspapers. IX. When thy bill passes and goes to thy governor, thou shalt visit, write, and call him or her with concrete reasons to sign it into law. X. Upon success, thou shalt send thank-you cards to lawmakers, lobbyists, and others who helped. CEC thanks CASE Executive Director Jo Thomason for this information.WT02-B20-3IA001-000011-B021-89http://www.cec.sped.org:80/pp/canfac.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101073501 text/html 4827HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 07:35:10 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 27-Jun-96 14:39:00 GMTContent-length: 4634Content-type: text/html THE CEC CHILDREN AND YOUTH ACTION NETWORK (CAN) What is the Purpose of CAN? The purpose of the Network is: 1) to effect the necessary governmental changes at the local, state/province, and federal levels which will make possible the implementation of CEC policies related to the education of exceptional children; and 2) to further vitalize CEC units (federations, divisions, branches, and chapters) by providing meaningful vehicles for membership involvement and CEC public visibility. What is the Structure of the Network? CAN is a communication network that is composed of a cadre of individuals capable and willing to effect necessary governmental change. The Network is composed of political action network coordinators selected by their respective federations, branches, or divisions. Each federation CAN coordinator is responsible for developing and maintaining a system of regional coordinators within his/her state. Depending on the particular federation, regional coordinators may wish to develop a system of local coordinators. Each division CAN coordinator is responsible for developing and maintaining a system of coordinators from each subdivision throughout the country. What are Some of the Factors that Need to be Considered When Selecting a CAN Coordinator? 1. A commitment to the policies of CEC. 2. A willingness to devote the necessary time (approximately 10-15 hours per month) to carry out all responsibilities related to this position. 3. A freedom to speak for and represent CEC to policy makers and the public. 4. An access to telephone, FAX machine, mail, duplication, and other communication devices. 5. A willingness to serve a minimum of two years in this capacity. What are Some of the Responsibilities of CAN Coordinators? 1. Each CAN coordinator is responsible for developing a system of regional coordinators within his/her federation. The number and location of these coordinators will be dependent upon the demographic, economic, and social factors of the state/province, as well as CEC organizational considerations. -------------------------- * While the purpose of the CEC CAN may be the same, the operation of the network in the U.S. and Canada differs. This Fact Sheet is specific to U.S. federation and division CAN coordinators. (over) 2. Develop and operate an effective children and youth action network in each state and whenever necessary trigger the network to achieve political action objectives at all levels of government. 3. Provide information to the CEC Department of Public Policy (DPP) on significant activities within a state/province that may require assistance from Headquarters, constitute significant policy advances or retreats, or be of interest to other federations or divisions. 4. Advise CEC DPP of any issue or crisis which may have national implications. 5. Provide CEC DPP with significant public statements and media articles. 6. Report to CEC DPP contacts with federal officials (e.g., members of the U.S. Congress and Executive Branch officials) on significant policy issues. 7. Inform CEC DPP of the federation's or division's public policy priorities. 8. Inform CEC DPP of invitations extended to members of the federal legislative or executive branches of government to participate in federation/division meetings or activities. What are Some of the Responsibilities of CEC DPP? 1. Provide CAN with relevant information from federal and state/provincial levels of government. 2. Apprise CAN of all major relevant actions by the federal government. 3. Alert the Network or any segment of CAN to situations requiring political action. 4. Maintain regular communication to all coordinators. 5. Make training available to CAN coordinators. 6. Give priority to the Network in terms of problem-solving and assistance with Network activities. 7. Provide technical assistance at the request of a CAN coordinator. 8. Coordinate with CAN coordinators requests from other groups for CEC's participation in government-related activities in their state/province. 9. Monitor and improve the operation of the Network.WT02-B20-4IA001-000011-B021-109http://www.cec.sped.org:80/pp/communic.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101073511 text/html 17621HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 07:35:18 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 27-Jun-96 14:39:00 GMTContent-length: 17427Content-type: text/html BASIC WAYS TO COMMUNICATE WITH POLICY MAKERS There are a number of ways to communicate with policy makers--be they legislators who enact policy or agency staff who implement policy. Regardless of the communication vehicle being used, following are some general principles for good communication to keep in mind. * Keep jargon at a minimum. * Be concise and to the point. * Reinforce good decision making. * Communicate before decisions are made. * Continue communication to meet changing needs. * Be dependable and honest. * Use the talents of other good communicators. * Remember you represent others. * Remember what you communicate may be shared. * The message is more important than the medium. Letter Writing Officials and their staffs pay careful attention to their mail since it forms the major body of public and voter sentiment on pending legislative activity. Many persons find it difficult to know how to communicate with their legislator. Often, form letters with identical wording and petitions are used. Most legislators, however, place little weight on such an approach. The type of letter that is most appreciated and helpful is one that is carefully thought out and represents an individual's point of view concerning the bill or legislative matter that is being considered. It should explain how the measure will benefit the writer or the community, or how the measure can be improved. This is particularly important in letters from a constituent. Since everyone does not have the same base of information or experience, letters should have clarity and simplicity, and at the same time reflect respect for the intelligence of the legislator and his staff. A policy or bill should be specifically referred to by its title and number. An outline to follow when writing a letter: 1. Introductory paragraph a. The reason for your letter--including the policy or bill title and number. b. Describe yourself. c. What action you are seeking. 2. The body of the letter a. Communicate the reason for the action being sought by using: -historical facts -data -credible opinion -impact data -viable alternatives -personal experience -weaknesses of opposing points of view -logic b. Describe what impact the action will have on the community. 3. Letter closing a. Restate action sought. b. Express appreciation for consideration of views. c. Indicate willingness to help. d. State what response you are seeking. Other points to keep in mind when writing letters: * Be careful of grammar, spelling, and punctuation. * Don't threaten or question integrity. * Be concise. * Be legible. * Avoid jargon. * Check for clarity. * A postcard saying, "I hope you will be able to support S.B. 405" is better than no correspondence at all. * To avoid antagonizing, give reasons for disagreeing and refrain from outright or veiled hints that the position on legislation may cost a vote. * Officials are accustomed to receiving letters criticizing them for action they take. However, one of the greatest rewards legislators can receive -- and one that is perhaps most cherished -- is a simple letter thanking them for their performance. How to Address Letters State Senator Dear Senator Doe The Honorable John Doe State Senate State House Springfield, Illinois 62706 State Representative Dear Mr. Doe or House of Representatives Dear Representative Doe State House Springfield, Illinois 62706 Governor Dear Governor Doe The Honorable John Doe State House Springfield, Illinois 62706 United States Senator Dear Senator Doe The Honorable John Doe United States Senate U.S. Senate Washington, DC 20510 Member of Congress Dear Representative Doe The Honorable John Doe Member of Congress U.S. House of Representatives Washington, DC 20515 Telephoning 1. Prepare in advance the major points you want to convey. 2. Identify yourself, affiliation, and purpose of call. 3. If the policy maker is not available, talk to staff responsible for education issues. 4. If call is to be returned--give telephone number and when you will be available. 5. Be courteous and succinct. 6. Be prepared to answer questions or provide related information. -------------------------------- Telephone Procedure 1. Call (202) 224-3121 (Capitol switchboard) and ask for Senator's (NAME) office. 2. Tell whoever answers the telelphone your name and where you are from. Ask to speak to the Senator about a matter concerning funding for education of individuals with disabilities. 3. If the Senator is not available, ask to speak to an aide who handles this matter for the Senator. Be sure to keep the name of the aide for future calls. 4. Tell the Senator or aide that Senator (NAME), of (STATE), plans to offer an amendment in the (NAME OF COMMITTEE) (of which Senator (NAME) is a member) to (EXPLAIN WHAT THE AMENDMENT WILL DO). You support the amendments for (CITE SOME REASONS). (If you are speaking for others, or represent an organization, be sure to mention that at this point.) Ask if the Senator will support the amendment. Yes, no, or undecided? If yes, ask if the Senator will be there to vote? If no, will he give his proxy to Senator (NAME OF PERSON OFFERING AMENDMENT)? If the Senator is opposed to the amendment, ask why. Give your arguments to the contrary, then get others to call. If the answer is undecided, ask when a decision will be made. Let them know you will call back at that time. In the meantime, get others to call. 5. Thank the person you spoke with. Be courteous; you will probably need to talk to them again. Visiting A personal visit with a member of Congress is an effective way to emphasize your interest in an issue or bill. A visit with your U.S. Congressman can occur either in Washington, D.C., or at his or her State offices. Some tips for planning a meeting with an elected official: 1. Make an appointment. Explain the reason for the meeting, the time needed (usually no more than 30 minutes), and identify any other individuals who will be in attendance. 2. If others are going, decide who will present the information and how it will be presented. One possible format is to present the issue, the impact of the issue, and then possible solutions. 3. Prepare and/or collect any supporting materials to accompany your presentation. (It is helpful to have materials that you can leave with the legislator.) 4. Learn the facts regarding your issue, both legislative and any others related to your position. 5. Practice your presentation. 6. Learn about the legislator. Try to find out positions taken on similar issues. 7. Get to know the staff...they are key people to develop a rapport with. Some tips for conducting a meeting with a policy maker: 1. Be on time. Don't be disturbed if you have to wait since there may have been unavoidable delays or changes in the schedule. 2. When you arrive, introduce yourself to the secretary. If you have a calling or business card, give one to the secretary. 3. When you meet the legislator (or staff person), introduce yourself and identify the group you are representing. If you are a constituent, share that as well. 4. State the reason for your visit concisely and accurately. Limit the number of issues you discuss and refer to bills by name and number. 5. Give the legislator essential information, review the critical points, describe the impact of the legislation and share your recommendation. 6. If your legislator has already publicly supported your position, express your thanks and tell him or her how much his or her efforts are appreciated. If your legislator has not yet committed to your position, clearly state reasons for supporting your position, and let him or her know you would appreciate his or her support. If your legislator is not supportive of your position, give him or her the information and politely ask him or her to reconsider the issue. 7. Be prepared to answer questions. 8. If possible, leave fact sheets or supporting materials with the legislator. (It may be helpful to include a contact name and number with the materials in case other questions arise.) 9. Have a picture taken with the official if possible. Use the picture in local newspapers to provide publicity for the official and your organization. 10. Thank the legislator for his or her time and leave promptly. Some suggestions for following up on a meeting with a policy maker: 1. Immediately after the meeting, record what occurred--who you met with, issues discussed, responses received, and any follow-up needed. 2. Write a thank-you letter to the official. Summarize points made and include any follow-up information requested. Wiring Western Union provides two special services for persons wishing to register their positions with elected representatives: 1. Personal Opinion Telegram--allows a person to send a message of 20 words to elected Representatives, Senators, or even the President, for $9.95 (just text). 2. Mailgram Message--for longer messages, up to 50 words (including sender's and receiver's name and address, salutation, and close) for $17.95. For more information on these and other services write to The Western Union Telegraph Company, 1 Lake Street, Upper Saddle River, NJ 07458, or call your local Western Union office. Toll-free numbers are listed in local telephone directories. Testifying Legislative committees often hold hearings to gather information on a particular issue or piece of legislation. Being selected to testify before a legislative committee provides you with a valuable opportunity for advocating for improved educational opportunities for individuals with disabilities or for individuals who are gifted. Some suggestions to keep in mind if you are invited to testify: 1. Do your homework. Gather as much information as possible about the issue. Talk to key people in your organization and the field. 2. Learn what "the opposition" says and prepare responses to their concerns in case a committee member asks questions. 3. Determine the best person to serve as the witness who presents testimony. The testimony should be delivered by a knowledgeable, articulate person who is familiar (or has been thoroughly briefed) on the issue(s). 4. Prepare a draft of the testimony and get feedback from several persons in the field and in the federation or division. 5. The beginning of the testimony should include: * the name and occupation of the witness. * the name of the group on whose behalf the testimony is being given. * a brief statement on why you support or oppose the bill. 6. Include in your testimony evidence to support your position, real-life examples of the impact of the legislation, and alternatives for those areas of the legislation that you oppose. Remember that examples of your own personal or professional experience provide the best supporting evidence when intertwined with other factual information. Related Activities for Building Rapport with Policy Makers In addition to the basic forms of communication previously presented, several activities also may be used to build a strong rapport with policy makers. Some activities to consider: 1. Invite the policy makers to learn more about the education of individuals with disabilities or those who are gifted. * Arrange for your official to visit special education classrooms or facilities in his or her district or state. * Sponsor a special day to conduct a tour of several special education programs. * Host a luncheon or dinner for the official to meet key special education leaders and/or professionals. 2. Prepare an annual report to legislators explaining the status of services to children with exceptionalities in their districts. Such reports should include statistics of the number of children served and not served, a description of programs offered, size of the community involved, and additional services needed. Legislators are always interested in receiving such reports and will often publish them in the records of the legislature. 3. Invite the legislator to speak or attend an organizational meeting or banquet. 4. Recognize legislators who have acted in the best interests of children with exceptionalities by presenting legislative statesmanship awards to them or by dedicating educational facilities in their names. When attempting to involve a policy maker in local activities, consider the following: 1. A legislator's time is at a premium. Make arrangements through his or her local business office well in advance. Follow through on a regular basis to confirm attendance. Leave the schedule flexible enough to accommodate minor changes. 2. Government officials greatly depend on publicity. The best payment is to provide extensive press coverage. Assistance is usually available from their offices. 3. Cooperate with legislators' staffs well enough in advance so they are prepared for their audience. 4. Be sure that any information presented to the legislator is accurate. 5. Legislators will be more interested in participating in local improvement of services to children with exceptionalities if they can identify community interest. Therefore, involve as many community groups as possible. Determining the Proper Timing and Amount of Energy to Expend on Communication For effective political action, it is essential for you to know when to use the techniques of communication, who the appropriate targets of communication are, and how much communication to direct at selected targets to accomplish an objective, yet not exhaust future resources. Keep in mind the following tips: 1. Many bills arouse very little public comment. Eight to ten letters to a legislator from scattered parts of the state are ordinarily something the legislator will notice. 2. Usually only a small amount of effort is needed to attract legislators' attention. But where there is opposition, a stronger effort is needed. All-out support is essential at critical points on major issues. 3. Determine which level of effort is needed on an issue: (1) some response may require a few letters or telegrams to be sent; (2) a strong response may require at least one letter or telegram to be sent from each local chapter; and (3) an all-out effort may require numerous responses to be sent from each local chapter. 4. Assuming that most members of your network will help sometimes, but very few can always be relied upon, fit the amount of effort to the target. The more important the target, the greater the effort should be. 5. Some effort, or even a strong effort, needs to be made from time to time to check the responsiveness of the communication network and to be sure members understand their role. 6. Chart the progress of bills and be ready to act quickly. 7. Ask someone in the legislator's office to notify you about times and places for hearings early enough to allow you time to communicate with legislators. 8. Evaluate your efforts in terms of progress made over a period of time. Remember that some legislators' proposals are reintroduced and lost repeatedly until enough policy makers are convinced of their constructive value.WT02-B20-5IA001-000011-B021-126http://www.cec.sped.org:80/pp/dos-dont.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101073521 text/html 4397HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 07:35:28 GMTLast-modified: Wednesday, 21-Aug-96 19:26:00 GMTContent-length: 4203Content-type: text/html  Do's and Don'ts DO'S AND DON'TS WHEN DEALING WITHELECTED OFFICIALS Beconfrontational. (Don't threaten or berate theofficial.) Make an appointment. Arriveunexpected with the idea of seeing the official. By letter or phone. Confirm theappointment. Appointments with legislativeaides are also available. (Ask for the aide responsible for the issue(s) you wish todiscuss.) Be on time for the visit. Belate for thevisit. Be positive and friendly. State the reason for your visit. Try to discuss several different issues. Be concise and specific. Introduce yourselfand identify the group you are representing. Briefly describe the issue(s). Refer to bills by name and number (e.g., budgetreform, "Budget Process Reform Act," H.R. 3732). Limit the number of issues tobe discussed. State your position and recommendation on the issue(s). Provide reliable data/facts to support yourposition. Give incorrect information. Personalize the issue(s). Tell howthe bill oraction will affect you, your relatives, friends, or neighbors. Leave a written summary of yourposition. Leave issue papers or other lobbying documents. Factsheets on issuescan be left. Also leave your name,address, and phone number. Have a picture taken with official, ifpossible. Make a funny face or obscene gesture while your picture isbeing taken with your Member of Congress. Use the picture in local newspapers to providepublicity for the official, yourorganization, and the issues discussed. (If picture is not taken and meeting is a goodone, ask for a photo of the official and some background material.) Write a thank-you letter. Forget towritea thank-you letter. Thank the officialfor the visit. Summarize the visit. Identify follow-up steps committed by theofficial and you. Ask for the official's commitment. Request a reply. Send a photo print (if taken) identifying persons in photo and date. (Enlargements havea better chance of appearing on office wall/desk.) Arrange for your official to visit students withexceptionalities in various classrooms in his/her state or district. Ignore themember for the rest of the year. Have others write letters. Write about one issueonly. If writing about a bill, refer to the title and number. Be brief. (One or two pages, ifpossible.) Be specific. (Tell your position on the issue and why you hold thatposition.) Share personal experiences. Ask for the official's commitment. Request a reply. Top of PageBack to MenuBack Home copyright © 1996 The Council for Exceptional Children Last updated: August 16, 1996 URL: http://www.cec.sped.org WT02-B20-6IA001-000011-B021-138http://www.cec.sped.org:80/pp/dppflyer.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101073528 text/html 3001HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 07:35:38 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 27-Jun-96 14:39:00 GMTContent-length: 2808Content-type: text/html CEC--Advocacy-- CEC's Department of Public Policy (DPP) CEC's Department of Public Policy (DPP) CEC's Department of Public Policy (DPP) works to improve policies affecting exceptional children and youth and the professionals who work with them at all levels of government as well as the private sector in the U.S. and Canada. The primary objectives of DPP are to: 1) examine policy issues and develop appropriate responses; 2) influence local, state, provincial, and federal legislation; regulations; and funding; and 3) maintain a network with CEC federations and divisions for influencing policy. ACTIVITIES Advocating growth in special education funding and programs for both children with disabilities and gifted and talented children. Fostering improvements in the federal role in special education. Some recent areas of focus include the reauthorization of the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act, the Elementary and Secondary Education Act, promotion of federal support for professional preparation, nationwide educational reform activities, early intervention, protection and development of programs for gifted children, promotion of postsecondary opportunities for exceptional youth, and technology development and utilization, as well as creating and improving special educational opportunities for populations such as children with emotional disturbances, migrant children, delinquent youth, and children from diverse cultural and linguistic backgrounds. Strengthening CEC's Children and Youth Action Network (CAN) through information and training. Providing advice and support as requested with respect to the development and promotion of Canadian CEC's public policy agenda. Providing input/support to federal agencies, including the Office of Special Education Programs (OSEP) and other Department of Education staff on issues relevant to CEC, such as the development and monitoring of federal regulations. Providing leadership in coalitions with other organizations concerned with improving opportunities for exceptional persons, such as the Committee for Education Funding, the Consortium for Citizens with Disabilities, and the President's Committee on Employment of People with Disabilities. Providing support of public policy issues to CEC federations, divisions, chapters, committees, and task forces. 10/95WT02-B20-7IA001-000011-B021-154http://www.cec.sped.org:80/pp/dppguide.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101073539 text/html 4536HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 07:35:49 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 27-Jun-96 14:39:00 GMTContent-length: 4343Content-type: text/html CEC--Advocacy-- What Makes Politicians Tick What Makes Politicians Tick Politicians have some common characteristics that make the outcome of advocacy efforts more predictable. Knowing these characteristics, and knowing how to take advantage of them, can improve your chances for success. Politicians hold public office to help others. Politicians like to be asked. Politicians are good learners. Politicians do not know everything. Politicians have many demands on their time. Politicians do not have sufficient resources to meet the demands made on them. Politicians are always running for office. Politicians respond to crises. Politicians behave differently when they know they're being watched. Politicians like to be thanked. Politicians love good press! ---------------------------- Rules For Effective Advocacy Most of what a good advocate does is intuitive and grows out of a few basic principles. Following is the core set of principles on which most advocates agree. Try to remember these principles when you become discouraged, entangled in detail, or simply confused. They may help clear your head, renew, and redirect your energies. 1.) Ask for what you want. 2.) Be specific in your request. 3.) Be ready to work hard. 4.) Find a legislative champion. 5.) Organize, coordinate, orchestrate. 6.) Touch all the bases. 7.) Stay flexible, be opportunistic. 8.) Keep it simple. 9.) Assume the perspective of others. 10.) Build and preserve your credibility. 11.) Anticipate and deal with your opposition. 12.) Be prepared to compromise. 13.) Never burn your bridges. 14.) Target your efforts. 15.) Honor the staff. 16.) Track your progress. 17.) Be persistent. 18.) Follow up. What's CEC Newsworthy? The CEC Special Education Advocacy Handbook provides general tips on how to access and use the media to your best advantage. But how do you know what issues the press will really respond to and want to give coverage to? And what should your main goals be in your interactions with the media? Here are some guidelines: Your Four CEC PR Goals To serve the goal of improving educational outcomes for students with exceptionalities. To heighten the visibility, understanding, and appreciation of special educators. To increase CEC membership. To increase the recruitment of persons into the special education profession. Is it News? One of these three elements can be found in stories that get press coverage: Increasing public awareness -- By increasing public awareness of the truth, you provide a balanced view of the issues at stake. Stories can expose the peril of the alternatives or provide solutions. Solutions to a problem -- When your product or service (e.g., membership/conference) provides a solution to a problem or meets the needs of an audience, publicity can be generated. Responding as an expert -- Press will seek you out when you are perceived as being a credible expert in a field. Your story ideas can relate to the following as well: current events, recognized achievement, area of influence, large interest base, human interest, milestones, controversy, personal significance, or neighborhood factors. "You Are Already An Accomplished Advocate!!" WT02-B20-8IA001-000011-B021-165http://www.cec.sped.org:80/pp/how.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101073547 text/html 7590HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 07:35:56 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 27-Jun-96 14:39:00 GMTContent-length: 7397Content-type: text/html CEC--Advocacy-- Understanding How the U.S. Congress Works Understanding How the U.S. Congress Works I. How a Bill Becomes Law: Steps in the U.S. Federal Legislative Process 1. Most bills can be introduced in either house. The procedure by which a bill becomes a law is much the same regardless of where the bill originates. In this example, the bill is first introduced in the Senate, given a number, and referred to the proper committee. If a bill overlaps the jurisdictions of two or more committees, it may be referred simultaneously or sequentially to them so that each may deal with the sections of the bill appropriate to its jurisdiction, or it may be referred to one committee for purposes of legislative strategy. 2. The Senate committee refers the bill to an appropriate subcommittee where the members will explore various sides of a subject through oral and written testimony given during public hearings on the bill. Since the entire legislative body does not attend, all legislators who eventually vote on the bill lean heavily on the written, publicly available proceedings and the recommendations of the committee or subcommittee. Congressional committees are increasingly exerting "legislative oversight" to monitor the implementation and evaluate the effectiveness of enactments through the use of hearings and written testimony. 3. The full committee meets in executive session (i.e., only members attend), sometimes closed, to consider the facts. It may "kill" the bill, approve it with or without amendments, or draft a new bill. Such sessions are known as "executive markups." 4. If the committee recommends the bill for passage, it is then listed on the calendar (i.e., an agenda or list of pending business). When the committee recommends placing a bill on the calendar, it is said that "the committee has reported favorably." 5. The committee prepares a report which includes the purposes and scope of the bill, an explanation of committee amendments, proposed changes in existing law (along with existing law as is), a section-by-section analysis of the bill expressing views of department and agency heads whose views are solicited, minority views, and long range cost estimates. 6. The bill comes up for debate (in the Senate). Depending on the degree of controversy, debate may last from a few hours to several weeks. Amendments may be added. The bill is then voted on. 7. If the bill passes, it goes to the other body, in this case the House of Representatives, and is referred to the proper committee. However, similar bills on the same subject may move through both house chambers concurrently. 8. Hearings may be held by the committee(s) to which the bill was referred. 9. The committee may reject the bill, prepare a new one, or accept the bill with or without amendments. 10. If the committee recommends the bill for passage, it is listed on the calendar and is sent on to the Rules Committee. (Note: Only the House of Representatives has a Rules Committee.) 11. The Rules Committee is one of the most powerful committees in the House of Representatives. After a bill has been recommended for passage by the committee to which it was referred, the Rules Committee can block it or clear it for debate before the entire House. (If a bill is blocked, a discharge petition, signed by 218 members of the House, can clear the bill for House consideration. The procedure of obtaining a discharge petition seldom succeeds.) 12. The bill goes before the entire body, is debated, and is voted on. 13. If the bill is passed by the second body but contains major differences from the first body's version, either house may request a conference committee. Representing both parties, the conferees meet and try to reconcile the differences between the two bills. 14. Generally, they reach an agreement and report back to their respective houses where the agreement is either accepted or rejected. The compromise version is generally referred to in common parlance as the "conference report." 15. If the report is accepted by both houses, the bill is signed by the Speaker of the House and the President of the Senate and is sent to the President of the United States. 16. The President may sign or veto the bill within 10 days. If he does not sign within 10 days and Congress is still in session, the bill automatically becomes law. If Congress has adjourned before the 10 days have elapsed and the President has not signed the bill, it does not become law. This is known as a "pocket veto." If the President returns the bill with a veto message, it may still become law if passed by a two-thirds majority in each house. This is called an "override." Failure to override is referred to as "sustaining a Presidential veto." If one house sustains, the other house need not vote at all. Note: Any bill that is not acted upon before a Congressional session terminates must be reintroduced in one of the houses when the new session begins. II. Authorizing Legislation and Appropriating Funds In the Congress of the United States, it is most important to be aware of two quite distinct legislative processes, appropriations and authorizations. These processes involve separate committees as well as separate legislative bills. Authorizing committees create programs, set general directions, and alter existing federal programs. In fact, they do everything but actually provide the dollars. There are numerous authorizing committees in both houses of the Congress. The primary one in the Senate that is concerned with programs for children with exceptionalities is the Labor and Human Resources Committee. The primary one in the House that is concerned with programs for children with exceptionalities is the Education and Labor Committee. It is the function of the Senate and House Appropriations Committees to determine how many dollars shall be allocated. There is only one Appropriations Committee in each of the houses. All appropriations bills must initiate in the House. Budget Committees exist in both houses with a charge to set overall budget priorities for each fiscal year, which begins on October 1. It is vital that the dual system of the U.S. Congress be kept in mind. A battle may be won with the authorizing committees by creating or changing a program, but if that program is to have meaningful financial support, energies must be shifted to the appropriations committees. When a fiscal year begins and Congress has not yet enacted all the regular appropriations bills for that year, Congress passes a joint resolution, "continuing appropriations" for government agencies at rates generally based on their previous year's appropriations. WT02-B20-9IA001-000011-B021-175http://www.cec.sped.org:80/pp/making.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101073554 text/html 3137HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 07:36:04 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 27-Jun-96 14:39:00 GMTContent-length: 2944Content-type: text/html CEC--Advocacy-- Making the Most of Meeting with Legislators Making the Most of Meeting with Legislators 1. Remember to get aide's and secretary's names before you call. Use their names and make notes for later contact. 2. Call for an appointment. Do this from your home district for your local delegation even if you will be meeting in your State Capitol. Let the legislator know you will be in the Capitol even if you are not sure when you can meet with him/her. Ask when might be a good time to stop by. 3. Have a fact sheet for each topic you need to discuss. 4. If you are to discuss a bill, know the names of all sponsors and co-sponsors. 5. Before the meeting, custom highlight your fact sheet and staple one of your cards or a note with your name and address to the corner of the sheet. Leave this with the legislator. 6. If possible, add a note to the fact or attach information illustrating direct benefit to that legislator's district. 7. Rehearse a one-sentence description of your mission. 8. Be prepared to relate at least one quick real life example of the need for the action you are advocating. If time permits, this is a very effective strategy. 9. Consult a booklet listing your state legislator along with relevant background information (including which other counties he/she may represent, political party, committee assignments, personal history, awards, special notes about contacts or connections). 10. Call the number in your state capitol providing updates on bills, to find out exactly where the bill is in process. This is important because the legislator may ask "where the bill is" and whether it is "moving." 11. Have your notebook and calendar handy in case the legislator asks for a follow-up meeting or for additional information. 12. Be aware of the legislator's busy schedule and do not stay longer than 5 minutes unless s/he asks you to stay. 13. If the legislator cannot meet with you for some reason, meet with staff and leave personal note summarizing your mission. 14. Write a follow-up letter thanking the legislator and/or staff for time spent on your issue and include a brief summary of action to be taken. 15. Keep the legislator informed of progress or problems concerning your interest. CEC's Department of Public PolicyWT02-B20-10IA001-000011-B021-213http://www.cec.sped.org:80/ericec/ecer-db.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101073640 text/html 3322HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 07:36:49 GMTLast-modified: Tuesday, 16-Jul-96 19:57:00 GMTContent-length: 3130Content-type: text/html Exceptional Child Education Resources (ECER)Database What is ECER? Exceptional Child Education Resources (ECER) is the world's most comprehensivedatabase of resources in special education and gifted education. ECER contains morethan 80,000 citations and abstracts of print and nonprint materials dealing with theeducation and development of people of all ages with exceptionalities--those who havedisabilities and those who are gifted. Resources in all areas of special education andrelated services (including services provided by audiologists, speech therapists,occupational therapists, physical therapists, and educational psychologists) are coveredin ECER. ECER covers all types of exceptionalities, including giftedness; talent (artisticgiftedness); creativity; physical disabilities; hearing and visual impairments; mentalretardation/developmental disabilities; learning disabilities; behavior disorders/emotionaldisturbances; mental disorders; autism; speech and communication disorders; chronicillnesses (medically fragile); special health problems (e.g., eating disorders, cancer,AIDS); child abuse and neglect; and children "at risk" due to disabilities, physical orpsychological problems, minority/ethnic status, or family or environmental factors. ECER dates from 1966 to present, and is updated monthly. Is the ECER Database Like the ERIC Database? The ECER database is compatible with the ERIC database. ECER and ERIC use thesame cataloging, indexing, and abstracting rules and authorities. And ECER descriptorsare taken from the Thesaurus of ERIC Descriptors, which allows similarstrategies in searching the two databases. Some overlap exists between the ECER and ERIC databases. Approximately half ofthe database records that go into ECER also appear in ERIC. This overlap appliesprimarily to unpublished documents (curriculum and teaching guides, reports, etc.) andarticles in core special educational journals. What Are the Differences Between ECER and ERIC? The ECER records that do not appear in ERIC include published books, additionaljournal articles, and nonprint materials. References retrieved in the ERIC database canbe excluded from ECER searches to avoid duplication. How Can I Access the ECER Database? By subscription. With one economical annual subscription, you can receive ECER onCD-ROM through SilverPlatter Information, Inc.On the Internet. ECER is also available online Search the ECER Database (for information on a 30-day trial) Back to ERIC Menu Back to CEC Home Page copyright © 1996 ERIC Clearinghouse on Disabilities and Gifted Education URL: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm WT02-B20-11IA001-000011-B021-229http://www.cec.sped.org:80/ericec/reprofrm.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101073650 text/html 4986HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 07:36:57 GMTLast-modified: Wednesday, 21-Aug-96 18:29:00 GMTContent-length: 4792Content-type: text/html ERIC Reproduction Release Form ERIC REPRODUCTION RELEASE FORM U.S. DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION Office of Educational Research and Improvement (OERI) Educational Resources Information Center (ERIC) REPRODUCTION RELEASE (Specific Document) I. DOCUMENT IDENTIFICATION: Title: Author(s): Corporate Source: Publication Date: II.REPRODUCTION RELEASE: In order to disseminate as widely as possible timely and significantmaterials of interest to the educational community, documents announced inthe monthly abstract journal of the ERIC system, Resources in Education(RIE), are usually made available to users in microfiche, reproduced papercopy, and electronic/optical media, and sold through the ERIC DocumentReproduction Service (EDRS) or other ERIC vendors. Credit is given to thesource of each document, and, if reproduction release is granted, one ofthe following notices is affixed to the document. If permission is granted to reproduce the identified document, pleaseCHECK ONE of the following options and sign the release below. _____ Permission is granted to the Educational Resoureces informationCenter (ERIC) to reproduce this material in microfiche, paper copy,electronic, and other optical media (Level 1). or _____ Permission is granted to the Educational Resoureces informationCenter (ERIC) to reproduce this material in other than paper copy (Level2). Sign Here, Please Documents will be processed as indicated provided reproduction qualitypermits. If permission to reproduce is granted, but neither box ischecked, documents will be processed at Level 1. I hereby grant to the Educational Resources Information Center (ERIC )nonexclusive permission to reproduce this document as indicated above.Reproduction from the ERIC microfiche or electronic/optical media bypersons other than ERIC employees and its system contractors requirespermission from the copyright holder. Exception is made for non-profitreproduction by libraries and other service agencies to satisfy informationneeds of educators in response to discrete inquiries. Signature: Position: Printed Name: Organization: Address: Telephone Number: Date: III. DOCUMENT AVAILABILITY INFORMATION (FROM NON-ERIC SOURCE): If permission to reproduce is not granted to ERIC, or, if you wish ERICto cite the availability of this document from another source, pleaseprovide the following information regarding the availability of thedocument. (ERIC will not announce a document unless it is publiclyavailable, and a dependable source can be specified. Contributors shouldalso be aware that ERIC selection criteria are significantly more stringentfor documents which cannot be made available through EDRS). Publisher/Distributor: Address: Price Per Copy: Quantity Price: IV. REFERRAL OF ERIC TO COPYRIGHT/REPRODUCTION RIGHTS HOLDER: If the right to grant a reproduction release is held by someone otherthan the addressee, please provide the appropriate name and address: Name: Address: V.WHERE TO SEND THIS FORM: Send this form to the following ERIC Clearinghouse: ERIC Clearinghouse on Disabilities and Gifted Education 1920 Association Drive Reston, VA 20191-1589 1-800-328-0272 Top of PageBack to ERIC MenuBack to CEC Home Page copyright © 1996 ERIC Clearinghouse on Disabilities and Gifted Education Last updated: August 21, 1996 Send updates to: ericec@cec.sped.org URL: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm WT02-B20-12IA001-000011-B021-242http://www.cec.sped.org:80/ericec/rsrchdir.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101073658 text/html 2297HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 07:37:07 GMTLast-modified: Tuesday, 29-Oct-96 21:53:00 GMTContent-length: 2105Content-type: text/html ERIC/OSEP Research Directors' Project Directory Innovation and Development in Special Education Directory of Current Projects Introduction Assessment Cultural Differences Infants, Young Children, and Families Instructional Effectiveness, Models, and Learning Policy and Program Evaluation Restructuring and Service Delivery Issues Secondary Education and Postsecondary Outcomes Serious Emotional Disturbance and Behavioral Disorders Severe Disabilities Teacher Training, Retention, and Supply and Demand Technology and Software Indexes Top of Page Back to ERIC Menu Back to CEC Home Page copyright © 1996 ERIC Clearinghouse on Disabilities and Gifted Education Last updated: October 29, 1996 Send updates to: ericec@cec.sped.org URL: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm WT02-B20-13IA001-000011-B021-253http://www.cec.sped.org:80/ericec/frstchap.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101073707 text/html 17403HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 07:37:15 GMTLast-modified: Tuesday, 16-Jul-96 20:03:00 GMTContent-length: 17210Content-type: text/html FRSTCHAP READING: THE FIRST CHAPTER IN EDUCATION Reading: The First Chapter In Education No other skill taught in school and learned by school children is moreimportant than reading. It is the gateway to all other knowledge. Ifchildren do not learn to read efficiently, the path is blocked toevery subject they encounter in their school years. The past five years have brought major breakthroughs in our knowledgeof how children learn to read and why so many fail. These new insightshave been translated into techniques for teaching reading to beginningreaders, including the many students who would otherwise encounterdifficulties in mastering this fundamental skill. Researchers havecome to appreciate that early identification and treatment of suchstudents can make all the difference. Researchers have also documentedthe problems -personal, social, and educational - that too oftenresult when early attention and intervention do not occur. Reading to Learn Students who do not "learn to read" during the first three years ofschool experience enormous difficulty when they are subsequently askedto "read to learn." Teaching students to read by the end of thirdgrade is the single most important task assigned to elementaryschools. During the first three years of schooling, students "learn toread." That is, they develop the capacity to interpret the writtensymbols for the oral language that they have been hearing since birth.Starting in fourth grade, schooling takes on a very different purpose,one that in many ways is more complex and demanding of higher-orderthinking skills. If efficient reading skills are not developed by thistime, the English language, history, mathematics, current events, andthe rich tapestries of literature and science become inaccessible. In addition, a strong body of evidence shows that most students whofall behind in reading skills never catch up with their peers becomefluent readers. They fall further and further behind in school, becomefrustrated, and drop out at much higher rates than their classmates.They find it difficult to obtain rewarding employment and areeffectively prevented from drawing on the power of education toimprove and enrich their lives. Researchers speak of this syndrome asthe "Matthew Effect" - the rich get richer and the poor get poorer. Most Americans know how central reading is to education. According toa 1994 poll conducted by Peter D. Hart Research Associates for theAmerican Federation of Teachers and the Chrysler Corporation, nearly70 percent of teachers believe that reading is the "most important"skill for children to learn. Two years earlier, the same polling firmreported that 62 percent of parents believed that reading was one ofthe most important skills for their children to master. Both teachersand parents ranked reading as more critical than mathematics andcomputer skills. In other words, there is general agreement amongresearchers and the public that all children must learn to read earlyin their academic careers. The Challenges of Illiteracy More students fail to learn to read by the end of the third grade thanmany people imagine. Indeed, it is no exaggeration to say that allschools encounter students who fall into this category and that allschools should have plans for addressing the special needs of thesestudents. In its 1994 Reading Assessment, the National Assessment of EducationProgress (NAEP), a federally supported program that tracks theperformance of American students in core academic subjects, reportedthat more than four out of 10 fourth-graders (42 percent) in Americanschools were reading at a "below basic" level. This means that theycould not understand "uncomplicated narratives and high-interestinformative texts." NAEP also reported that such illiteracy persistsin the higher grades. The report found that nearly one-third (31percent) of eighth-graders and nearly one-third (30 percent) oftwelfth-graders are also reading at a "below basic" level. The latterfigures probably understate the problem, because many poor readersdrop out of school before twelfth grade. Other researchers have come to similar conclusions regarding howwidespread students' reading problems really are. Nationallongitudinal studies have measured the ability of children torecognize individual words in text. Their data suggest that more thanone child in six (17.5 percent) will encounter a problem in learningto read during the crucial first three years of school. Furtherevidence comes from the sharp rise in the number of students who arediagnosed as learning disabled or are referred to special educationbecause they cannot read at the proper grade level. In contrast to popular belief, reading failure is not concentratedamong particular types of schools or among specific groups ofstudents. To the contrary, students who have difficulty readingrepresent a virtual cross-section of American children. They includerich and poor, male and female, rural and urban, and public andprivate school children in all sections of the country. According tothe NAEP assessment, for example, nearly one-third (32 percent) offourth graders whose parents graduated from college are reading at the"below basic" level. In short, the failure of a substantial number of students to learn toread during the critical first three years of school is a nationalproblem - one that confronts every community and every school in thecountry. A Common Stumbling Block: Phonemic Awareness Whatever the reason children fail to read by the end of the thirdgrade, most non-readers share a common problem. They have notdeveloped the capacity to recognize what reading experts callphonemes. Phonemes are the smallest units of speech - the basicbuilding blocks of speaking and writing. The word "cat," for example,contains three phonemes - the /k/, /a/, and /t/ sounds. Phonemes areoften identical to individual letters, but not always. The word "ox,"for example, has two letters but three phonemes - the /o/, /k/, and/s/ sounds. Researchers have demonstrated that accomplished readers are adept atrecognizing phonemes and putting them together to construct words andphrases. They do this quickly, accurately, and automatically. Theabsence of this critical linguistic skill makes it difficult forchildren to decode and read single words, much less sentences,paragraphs, and whole stories. Teaching phonemic awareness anddiscrimination among phonemes is imperative for all students. Solutions in the Classroom Teaching beginners to read must be highly purposeful and strategic.Effective techniques have been developed for helping students,including those with learning disabilities, to develop phonologicalawareness, word recognition, and other advanced skills required forreading. Phonological awareness activities build on and enhance children'sexperiences with written (e.g., print awareness) and spoken language(e.g., playing with words). A beginning reader with successfulphonological awareness and knowledge of letters ostensibly learns howwords are represented in print. Intervention for learners who have difficulty with phonologicalawareness must be early, strategic, systematic, and carefullydesigned. It must be based on a curriculum that recognizes andbalances the importance of both phonics instruction and theappreciation of meaning. For children who have difficulty reading, effective readinginstruction strategies should be used to build phonological awarenessand alphabetic understanding. These strategies should be explicit,making phonemes prominent in children's attention and perception. Forexample, teachers can model specific sounds and in turn ask thechildren to produce the sounds. In addition, opportunities to engagein phonological awareness activities should be plentiful, frequent,and fun. Instructional strategies should consider the characteristics that makea word easier or more difficult to read. These include: the number ofphonemes in the word; phoneme position in words (initial sounds areeasier); phonological properties of words (e.g., continuants, such as/m/, are easier than stop sounds, such as /t/); and phonologicalawareness dimensions, including blending sounds, segmenting words, andrhyming. Many early readers will require greater teacher assistance andsupport. Using a research-based strategy known as scaffolding,teachers should provide students with lots of instructional support inthe beginning stages of reading instruction, and gradually reduce thesupport as students learn more about reading skills. The ultimategoal is for students to read on their own without the help of ateacher. A Balanced Approach Unfortunately, it is not always easy for teachers to recognizestudents with reading difficulties. When they do, teachers sometimesfind themselves caught between conflicting schools of thought abouthow to treat reading disabilities. One school of thought givesconsiderable attention to the teaching of phonics in the early stagesof reading. Another school of thought emphasizes the whole languageapproach. Should teachers rely on phonics instruction, whole languageinstruction, or a combination of the two? The U.S. Department of Education and the National Institute of ChildHealth and Human Development (NICHD) have supported the review ofhundreds of studies done in recent years on reading instruction anddisabilities. This body of research suggests that the relativelyrecent swing away from phonics instruction to a singular wholelanguage approach is making it more difficult to lift children withlearning disabilities out of the downward learning spiral and, infact, may impede the progress of many students in learning to readwith ease. Few dispute the value of giving children opportunities to write,surrounding children with good literature, and generally creating arich literate environment for students. But for many children this isnot enough. Such children will have continued difficulty with readingunless they master the decoding skills associated with phonicsinstruction. Research makes clear that children do not learn to read the way theylearn to talk. Speech is a natural human capacity, and learning totalk requires little more than exposure and opportunity. In contrast,written language is an artifact, a human invention, and reading is nota skill that can be acquired through immersion alone. Beginningreaders benefit from instruction that helps them understand that thewords they speak and hear can be represented by written symbols - andthat letters and the sounds associated with them, when combined andrecombined, form words - just as they benefit from experiences thatmake reading fun. California's experience with a chosen reading approach is instructive.A decade ago, the state became a leader in the movement to embracewhole language instruction. However, as a result of low readingscores, a task force was formed and has recently adopted a morebalanced reading approach that includes building phonologicalawareness along with the reading of meaningful and engaging texts. Research indicates that reading can be taught effectively with abalanced approach that uses the best of both teaching approaches.Such an approach incorporates phonics instruction with the richliteracy environments advocated by whole language instruction. The Learning to Read/Reading to Learn Initiative Throughout the Learning to Read/Reading to Learn: Helping Childrenwith Learning Disabilities to Succeed initative, three leadingresearchers in the field of reading instruction, Marilyn Jager Adams,author of Beginning to Read: Thinking and Learning about Print, a booksupported by the Office of Educational Research and Improvement(OERI); Ed Kameenui of the University of Oregon, a researchersupported by the Office of Special Education Programs (OSEP); and ReidLyon of the National Institute of Child Health and Human Development(NICHD) have identified what they believe are the most importantstrategies for improving early reading instruction. These strategiesare effective for virtually every child but are absolutely criticalfor children with learning disabilities. By evaluating the ways inwhich students learn to read, researchers have identified nine skillsessential to the learning process. Identification of these skills willalert teachers and parents to ways in which they can help childrenlearn to read more efficiently. Reading: The Key to Success As already discussed, reading is the gateway to learning. Facility tounderstand and use written language has always been a prerequisite tothe efficient acquisition of knowledge, and it is becomingincreasingly important in today's information society. In the past, itmay have been possible for persons who were illiterate to obtain agood job, support a family, and live a comfortable life, but thosedays are gone. Children who do not learn to read today can expect tolive on the margins of society in every way. Universal literacy is theultimate "access" issue in American education. American schools thus face a new and monumental challenge. For thefirst time, educators are being asked to bring all students to a levelof performance that was demanded of only a relatively few students inthe past. Educational and political leaders understand this challenge,and a major effort is underway to raise the standard of teaching andlearning in American schools. Improved reading instruction is crucialto this process. Attainment of the National Education Goals by theyear 2000 will require enhanced reading skills in American students.Developments such as national standards in core subjects, new formsof accountability, or decentralization of school management will havefew positive effects in the absence of well-conceived readinginstruction. Attaining such goals also means that ways must be found to address thelearning needs of those students who, for whatever reasons, facedifficulties in learning to read. Doing so is not only a matter ofequity; it is also a practical necessity if the overall objectives ofimproving American education as a whole are to be met. Not only are American schools facing new demands, they also are beingasked to deliver more education without the addition of substantialnew resources. Thus they must become more efficient. Incorporating thenew knowledge we now possess about reading and how to teach it isimperative if schools are to use their resources effectively andefficiently. All students must start reading as soon as they aredevelopmentally ready to do so, and they must build on basic readingskills as they move into higher grades. In the absence of such orderlyprogression, schools are put in a position of having too many childrenin remedial or special education programs. Toward a Nation of Readers We are living at a pivotal time in the history of American education.More than ever before, schools are being asked to deliver a higherlevel of education and to do so for all students. Meeting thischallenge requires that the process of "learning to read" be securelyunderway for virtually all students by the end of the third grade. No American school would knowingly withhold a vaccine from studentsthat would prevent a childhood disease like measles. Yet this is, ineffect, what is happening when it comes to the teaching of reading.Recent gains in our knowledge of the reading process have given us thetools to help the majority of students, including those with learningdisabilities, to learn to read at the level required to function aseffective individuals, workers, parents, and citizens in today'sworld. The challenge is to put this new knowledge in the hands ofteachers, parents, and school administrators so that millions ofAmerican students who otherwise would fail to learn to read will gainaccess to this important skill. Top of PageBack to MenuBack to CEC Home Page copyright © 1996 ERIC Clearinghouse on Disabilities and Gifted Education URL: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm WT02-B20-14IA001-000011-B021-265http://www.cec.sped.org:80/ericec/princple.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101073715 text/html 5884HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 07:37:24 GMTLast-modified: Tuesday, 16-Jul-96 20:18:00 GMTContent-length: 5692Content-type: text/html PRINCPLE PRINCIPLES FOR LEARNING TO READ Create Appreciation of the Written Word Long before children are able to engage in reading themselves, theymust feel that reading is something they would like to do. They mustdevelop an appreciation of the pleasures of written language and ofthe many ways language is useful. Develop Awareness of Printed Language Children need to develop a basic sense of what print looks like andhow it works. They must learn how to handle a book, which way to turnthe pages, and that the printed words - not the pictures - tells thestory when you read. Children should be taught that words are allaround them - in newspapers, mail, billboards, signs, and labels - and have many different and valuable purposes. Learn the Alphabet Comfortable and early familiarity with letters is critical forlearning to read. Children should learn the names of letters and torecognize and form their corresponding shapes. Understand the Relation of Letters and Words Children need to learn that printed words are made up of orderedstrings of letters, read left to right. They should be helped tounderstand that when the combination or order of letters is changed,the word that is spelled also changes. Understand That Language is Made of Words, Syllables, and Phonemes The ability to think about words as a sequence of phonemes isessential to learning how to read an alphabetic language. Childrenshould become aware of the building blocks of spoken language. Theyneed to understand that sentences are made up of strings of separatewords. They should become comfortable in hearing and creating rhymes.They should be led to play with the sounds of language until they canpull words apart into syllables, and pull syllables into individualphonemes.* *A phoneme is the smallest functional unit of speech. The word "cat"contains three phonemes: the /k/, /a/, and /t/ sounds. Letters often represent more thanone phoneme - the a in "cat" is a different sound thant the a in "cake" -and sometimes a single letter will contain more than one phoneme. For example, theword "ox" has two letters but three phonemes: /o/, /k/, and /s/. Fluent readers learn torecognize these discrete sounds of spoken words quickly, accurately, andautomatically. Phonemic awareness is the foundation on which all other reading skillsare built. Learn Letter Sounds Given a comfortable familiarity with letters and an awareness of thesounds of phonemes, children are ready to learn about letter-soundcorrespondence. The most important goal at this first stage is tohelp children understand that the logic of the alphabetic writingsystem is built on these correspondences. Sound Out New Words As children learn specific letter-sound correspondences, they shouldbe challenged to use this knowledge to sound out new words in readingand writing. Making a habit of sounding out unfamiliar wordscontributes strongly to reading growth, not just for beginners, butfor all readers. Children need to understand that sounding out newwords can actually be a strategy for helping them unlockpronunciations of words they have never seen before, and can makewhat they are reading understandable. Identify Words in Print Accurately and Easily The ability to read with fluency and comprehension depends onrecognizing most words almost instantly and effortlessly. Once theframework for a new word or spelling has been laid, through soundingand blending, the key to recognizing it quickly and easily ispractice. The most useful practice is reading and rereading ofmeaningful text made up of words the child has been taught to soundout. For beginners, such reading helps most if it is relatively easy.As a rule of thumb, no more than one in 20 words should causetrouble. Know Spelling Patterns As children become reasonably capable of sounding out words inreading and spelling, it is important that they notice thesimilarities in their spellings. Awareness of spelling patterns thatrecur across words hastens progress in reading and writing, and weakknowledge of spelling is an impediment to mature readers. Learn to Read Reflectively Although the ability to sound out words is essential for learning toread, it is not enough. Written language is not just speech writtendown. Instead, text brings new vocabulary, new language patterns, newthoughts, and new modes of thinking. To enjoy and profit fromreading, children must also learn to take the time to reflect onthese aspects of text. Top of PageBack to MenuBack to CEC Home Page copyright © 1996 ERIC Clearinghouse on Disabilities and Gifted Education URL: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm WT02-B20-15IA001-000011-B021-278http://www.cec.sped.org:80/ericec/ttips.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101073725 text/html 11486HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 07:37:32 GMTLast-modified: Tuesday, 16-Jul-96 20:23:00 GMTContent-length: 11293Content-type: text/html  TTIPS TIPS FOR TEACHERS Reading is the single most important educational skill your studentswill learn. Understanding the organization and meaning of text andinstruction in both phonics and literature is essential to helpingyoung children read. By understanding the prerequisite skills forreading, teachers can build a solid foundation for their students tolearn and succeed in school. Create Appreciation of the Written Word Share stories with children and invite them to explore a story'smagic. Share informational texts and invite children to wonder about the newideas presented. Take every opportunity to point out the ways in which reading isessential to the communications of everyday life (e.g., on labels, instructions, and signs). Develop Awareness of Printed Language and the Writing System Make sure students know how books are organized. They should betaught the basics about books--that they are read from left to rightand top to bottom, that print may be accompanied by pictures orgraphics, that the pages are numbered, and that the purpose ofreading is to gain meaning from the text and understand ideas thatwords convey. Read to children from books with easy-to-read large print. Usestories that have predictable words in the text. Use "big books" to help children notice and learn to recognize wordsthat occur frequently, such as a, the, is, was, and you. Label objects in your classroom. Teach the Alphabet A strong predictor of the ease with which a child learns to read ishis or her familiarity with letters of the alphabet. This familiarityis a critical building block for learning to read. It is important to go beyond knowing the names of letters. Studentsmust also develop a sense of the purpose of letters. Help them notice the letters in the print that surrounds them and thatyou share with them every day. Engage the students in activities that will help them learn torecognize letters visually. Help students learn to form the letters and encourage them toembellish their work with their names and with other first attemptsat writing. Develop the Students' Phonological Awareness In listening and speaking, we pay attention to the meaning oflanguage rather than to its sound. To learn to read, however,students must be taught to attend to the sounds, or phonology, oflanguage. This is necessary for them to understand how speech isrepresented by print. Children with learning disabilities needspecial help in learning to develop such phonological awareness. Model and demonstrate how to break short sentences into individualwords. For example, use the sentence "Frogs eat bugs," anddemonstrate with chips, cards, or other manipulatives how thesentence is made up of three words and how the order of the wordsmatters. Using manipulatives to make sentences, play with each wordand put it in order. Develop students' awareness of the sounds of individual words byasking them to clap out syllables and to listen for and generaterhymes. Once children are comfortable in playing games with words, syllables,and rhymes, move onto phonemic awareness. Develop Phonemic Awareness Phonemic awareness refers to an understanding that words andsyllables are comprised of a sequence of elementary speech sounds.This understanding is essential to learning to read an alphabeticlanguage. The majority of children with reading disabilities fail tograsp this idea. In teaching phonemic awareness, the focus of all activities should beon the sounds of words, not on letters or spellings. Use strategies that make phonemes prominent in children's attentionand perception. For example, model specific sounds, such as /s/ inthe word sat, and ask children to produce each sound in isolation andin many different words until they are comfortable with the sound andunderstand its nature. Begin with simple words and simple challenges, e.g., listen forinitial /s/ in sat, sit, sip, and sad . . . or for long /e/ in me,see, bee . . . . Teach students to blend phonemes into words. Begin by identifyingjust one phoneme, e.g., /m/-ilk, /s/-at, working gradually towardblending all the phonemes in words, e.g., /s/-/a/-/t/. Teach students to identify the separate phonemes within words, e.g.,what is the first sound of soup? What is the last sound of kiss?Beginning phonemes are easier to identify than final phonemes. Once students are comfortable listening for individual phonemes,teach them to break up words, into component sounds, e.g., /m/-/oo/-/s/= "moose". Create a sequence of segmenting and blending activities to helpstudents develop an understanding of the relationship between soundsin words. Provide children with more support when first teaching a task. Forexample, model a sound or strategy for making the sound, and have thechildren use the strategy to produce the sound. Model and practiceseveral examples. Prompt the children to use the strategy duringguided practice, and gradually add more examples. As the studentsmaster these skills, provide less teacher-directed instruction andmore practice and challenge. Make teaching phonological awareness a top priority. Opportunitiesto engage in phonological awareness activities should be plentiful,frequent, brief, and fun. Phonemic awareness is essential for learning to read, but it is notenough by itself. It must be coupled with instruction and practicein learning the relationship between letters and sounds. Teach the Relation of Sounds and Letters Students should learn the letters of the alphabet and discriminateeach letter from the other, because each stands for one or more ofthe sounds that occur in spoken words. When presenting each letter, model its corresponding sound and havechildren produce the sound themselves. For children with learningdisabilities, the teaching activities must be explicit andunambiguous. At first, teach and work with only a few letter-sound correspondencesthat have high utility in many words (e.g., /m/ in man, mad, him, andham). Postpone teaching less frequently occurring letters untilstudents have a firm understanding of how left-to-right spellingsrepresent first-to-last sounds (alphabetic understanding). Teach Children How to Sound Out Words After students have mastered a few letter-sound correspondences,teach them to decode words or sound them out. Begin with small,familiar words. Teach the children to sound out the letters, left toright, and blend them together, searching for the word in memory. Model sounding out the word, blending the sounds together and sayingthe word. The ability to sound out new words allows children toidentify and learn new words on their own. Give children stories containing words that reflect the letter-soundpatterns that have been taught, and encourage them to sound out wordswhenever they are uncertain. Help children learn spelling conventions, such as the use of final/e/'s to mark long vowels, by comparing and contrasting lots ofexamples. Teach Children to Spell Words Teach children to spell words by sounding their letters one by one.Model the sounding and spelling process for children as they spell. Begin with short words children can sound out, because these wordsfollow regular spelling conventions, e.g., cap, bat, and sit insteadof cape, bait or sight. Begin with simple words that do not contain consonant blends, e.g.,ham and pan instead of slam and plan. Encourage students to use spelling knowledge and strategies regularlyin their own writing. Introduce spelling conventions systematically. Begin with words thatexemplify the most frequent and basic conventions, and providesupport and practice to help students generalize from these words toothers. The goal is to help them see the spelling conventions in thewords. Use words in which letter-sound correspondences represent their mostcommon sounds (e.g., get instead of gem). Develop a sequence and schedule of opportunities that allow childrento apply and develop facility with sounds and words at their ownpace. Specify what skills to assess and when to assess them so thatyou will know when to move on. Take into account each student'sbackground knowledge and pace in moving from sounding out to blendingwords to reading connected text. Help Children Develop Fluent, Reflective Reading Help children learn to read fluently by requiring them to read newstories and reread old stories every day. Help children extend their experience with the words, language, andideas in books by interactively reading harder texts with them and tothem every day. Relate information in books to other events of interest to children,such as holidays, pets, siblings, and games. Engage children indiscussion of the topics. In both stories and informational texts, encourage wondering. Forexample, "I wonder what Pooh will do now?" "How do you think thefather feels ?" or "I wonder what frogs do in the winter? Do youthink that's a problem? Why?" Model comprehension strategies and provide students with guidedassistance. Point out how titles and headings tell what a book is about. Help students identify the main ideas presented in the text, as wellas the supporting detail. Graphics help to reveal main ideas, and therelationship between text and graphics helps students understand whatthey are reading. Point out unfamiliar words and explore their meaning. Revisit thesewords frequently and encourage students to use them in their ownconversations. Show children how to analyze contextual clues to figure out themeaning of an unfamiliar word. Research shows that most vocabularygrowth comes from learning new words in reading. Top of PageBack to MenuBack to CEC Home Page copyright © 1996 ERIC Clearinghouse on Disabilities and Gifted Education URL: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm WT02-B20-16IA001-000011-B021-300http://www.cec.sped.org:80/ericec/ptips.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101073737 text/html 9091HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 07:37:45 GMTLast-modified: Tuesday, 16-Jul-96 20:19:00 GMTContent-length: 8899Content-type: text/html PTIPS TIPS FOR PARENTS Parents can have a strong positive influence on their child'sreading. Research has shown that enjoying books with a child for evena few minutes a day can make a measurable difference in theacquisition of basic reading skills, and that everyday activities - such as a trip to the grocery store - can be turned into enjoyablelearning experiences. Following is a list of ways in which parents can encourage thedevelopment of the skills needed by children in order for them tobecome good readers. Create Appreciation of the Written Word Find time to read aloud with your child every day. Typically,parents play an important role in developing this skill by reading tochildren and showing how important reading is to their daily life.Lap time with picture books and stories can strongly motivate yourchild to enjoy reading. Try to make these books available for yourchildren to explore and enjoy on their own as well. Develop Awareness of Printed Language Teach about books. When reading aloud to your child, let your childopen the book and turn the pages. Point to the words as you read.Draw attention to repeated phrases, inviting your child to join ineach time they occur. Point out letters and words that you run across in daily life. Makean obvious effort to read aloud traffic signs, billboards, notices,labels on packages, maps, and phone numbers. Make outings a way toencourage reading by showing your child how printed words relate todaily living. Learn the Alphabet Play alphabet games. Sing the alphabet song to help your child learnletters as you play with alphabet books, blocks, and magneticletters. Recite letters as you go up and down stairs or give pusheson a swing. A-B-C, dot-to-dot and letter-play workbooks, games, andpuzzles are available at most toy stores. Many engaging computergames are designed for teaching children letters. Make sure thesetoys are available even when you are unable to play along. Watch "Sesame Street" with your child. Show the child how to singalong, answer the riddles, and engage actively in its fun. Make writing materials available to your child and encourage theiruse. Help your child learn to write his/her name and other importantwords or phrases. Gradually, help the child learn to write more andmore letters. At first, most children find it easier to writeuppercase letters. Understand the Relation of Letters and Words Teach your child to spell a few special words, such as his/her name,"stop," or "exit." Challenge the child to read these words everyplace they are seen. Draw attention to these and other frequentlyoccurring words as you read books with your child. Challenge thechild to read these words as they arise or to search them out on apage. Play word-building games with letter tiles or magnetic letters.Have the child build strings of letters for you to read. Understand That Language is Made of Words, Syllables, and Phonemes Sing songs and read rhyming books. Sing the alphabet with yourchild, and teach your child songs that emphasize rhyme andalliteration, such as "Willaby Wallaby Woo" and "Down By the Sea."Emphasize the sounds as you sing. Play rhyming games and clap outnames. Jumble the wording or word order of familiar poems andchallenge your child to detect the error. Talk like a robot, syllableby syllable. Play word games. Challenge your child to play with words. Forexample, ask your child to think of words that rhyme with "bat" orbegin with /m/. What would be left if you took the /k/ sound out of"cat"? What would you have if you put these sounds together: /p/ andickle; /m/ and ilk; and /s/, /a/, and /t/. Which of these wordsstarts with a different sound -- "bag", "candy", "bike"? Do "boat"and "baby" start with the same sound? Learn Letter Sounds Sound out letters. Point out other words that begin with the sameletter as your child's name, drawing attention to the similarities ofthe begining sound. Use alphabet books, computer games, or car gamessuch as, "I'm thinking of something that starts with /b/" to engagethe child in alliterative and letter-sound play. If you have a bookthat lends itself to alliteration and rhyme, such as a Dr. Seussbook, sound out rhyming words as you read or challenge the child todo so for you. Play word games that connect sounds with syllables andwords. For example: If this spells "cat," how do you spell "hat"? Sound Out New Words Point out new words. As you encounter them, say the sound whiletouching each letter in a new word. For example, say "s-u-n" and thenblend sounds to create the word. In practicing new words, usepredictable words with common sounds and spellings, like "fun" or"sat" instead of "night" or "saw." If you encounter words with unknown meanings or with complexspellings, encourage your child to try to sound out the words.However, if too many words require this kind of attention and effort,it is best to find an easier book. Play spelling games with your child. After your child beginspronouncing words, encourage spelling by saying each sound in thewords and then writing the letter that goes with the sound. Encourage your child to spell. After your child has learned topronounce words, have the child say each sound. Independent writing. Encourage your child to use inventive orindependent spelling. At this stage, the child will tend to omitletters and confuse letter names with letter sounds, producing suchspellings as LFNT for elephant, BN for bean, and FARE for fairy. Usecorrection wisely. You should be most concerned about is the child'ssensitivity to the sounds that need to be represented. Identify Words in Print Accurately and Easily Help your children to read easy, enjoyable stories as often aspossible. It is likely that your child will enjoy reading more andlearn more from reading if you sit together, taking turns reading andencouraging discussion. In the beginning, invite the child to readwell-chosen words. Gradually, as the child becomes able, take turnswith sentences, speakers, paragraphs, and pages. At the end of eachsection or story, revisit those words that caused trouble. Rereadingthe entire story over several days, and again weeks later, is apowerful way to reinforce this learning. Know Spelling Patterns Now it becomes useful to point out the similarities between wordssuch as will, fill, and hill or light, night, and sight. This is alsothe time to help your child learn the correct spelling of the wordshe/she writes. Learn to Read Reflectively Pause for discussions as you read. As you read stories to and withyour child, stop frequently to discuss their language, content, andrelevance to real life and other knowledge. Pause to explore themeanings of new words, using them in other sentences and contrastingwhat they mean with words that have similar meanings. Make an effortto revisit new words and concepts later, when the book has been putaside. When reading stories, pause to discuss the various characters,problems, events in the story, and invite your child to think abouthow the problems might be solved or to wonder about what might happennext. When resuming a story, ask your child to review what hashappened so far, drawing attention to looming mysteries andunresolved conflicts. In reading expository text, invite the child tomarvel at the creatures or events described and to wonder aboutdetails or connections not mentioned by the text. Above all: Read, read, and re-read Top of PageBack to MenuBack to CEC Home Page copyright © 1996 ERIC Clearinghouse on Disabilities and Gifted Education URL: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm WT02-B20-17IA001-000011-B021-315http://www.cec.sped.org:80/ericec/resrchrs.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101073748 text/html 11050HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 07:37:54 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 22-Aug-96 15:49:00 GMTContent-length: 10856Content-type: text/html ERIC RESEARCHERS AS RESOURCES ON READING What is the Researchers as Resources on Reading Network? The researchers who have agreed to serve as resources are listed inthe attached directory called Researchers as Resources on ReadingNetwork. These researchers are experts on the research-basedprincipals of reading instruction and include some of the premierscholars in reading and learning disabilities. All of the researchershave extensive experience working with parents, teachers, and schoolsto improve reading programs for students with learning disabilities. What can I expect the researchers to do? Researchers affiliated with the network anticipate phone calls andother forms of communication from parents and school districtpersonnel who wish to tap the expertise of the network. Limitedadvice, assistance, and consultation will be provided voluntarily,with more complicated arrangements such as on-site technicalassistance to be made solely at the discretion of the researchers andthe school. Arrangements for any consultation or technical assistanceinvolving payment are to be negotiated between the researcher and theschools or school districts and will not involve the network. It isimportant to seek a careful match between your needs and theresearcher's expertise and interests. In addition to generalexpertise in reading instruction, a researcher may have specializedknowledge that can be applied to your specific situation or problems.While specialized knowledge is important, the researcher network doesnot identify this particular expertise. How can I work with the researchers? When you contact a researcher, it is important that you have clearlyidentified the areas in which you want technical assistance. If youneed help in defining your questions, tell the researcher. He or shemay be able to assist you in clarifying problem areas that need to beaddressed. As you work with the researcher, it is important tocontinue to identify the important areas to be addressed. To get the best answers to your reading questions remember to: Clearly identify what you want from the researcher, even if it ishelp in defining your questions; Continually check to be sure you are receiving the help you want;and Provide the researcher with clear information about the context inwhich your students will learn to read. How do I contact members of the network? You should contact members of the network directly. An officetelephone number (O) and a fax number (FX) are listed for eachresearcher. How long will the network be in existence? The network will exist from July 10, 1996 to July 10, 1997. Who should I contact for more information about the network? To obtain more information about the network, contact Jane Burnette at the ERIC/OSEP Special Project, ERIC Clearinghouse onDisabilities and Gifted Education, The Council for ExceptionalChildren, 703-264-9419. This clearinghouse will maintain the Researchers asResources on Reading Network. However, members' arrangements withschools or districts are at their own discretion and will not involvethe network management. Marilyn Jager Adams, Ph.D. BBN Corporation 10 Moulton Street Cambridge, MA 02138 O- 617-873-3000 F- 617-873-2794 Scott Baker, Ph.D. University of Oregon College of Education 233 Education Eugene, OR 97403 O- 541-346-3541 F- 541-346-5818 William Bursuck, Ph.D. EPCSE/Special Education Graham Hall 225 Northern Illinois University DeKalb, IL 60115 O- 815-753-8441 F- 815-753-9250 David Chard, Ph.D. Boston University-SED 605 Commonwealth Avenue Boston, MA 02215 O- 617-353-3253 F- 617-353-3924 Don Crawford, Ph.D. Department of Special Education University of Wisconsin at Eau Claire Eau Claire, WI 54701 O- 715-836-2175 F- 715-836-3162 Shirley Dickson, Ph.D. EPCSE/ Special Education Graham Hall 225 Northern Illinois University DeKalb, IL 60115 O- 815-753-8422 F- 815-753-9250 Robert Dixon National Center to Improve the Tools of Educators (NCITE) 2716 Hillside Drive, SE Olympia, WA 98501 O- 360-754-1122 F- 360-943-7558 Lois Dreyer, Ph.D. Southern Connecticut State University Reading Department 501 Crescent Street New Haven, CT 066515 O- 203-392-6406 Lynn Fuchs, Ph.D. Professor of Special Education Peabody College Vanderbilt University Nashville, TN 37203 O- 615-343-4782 F- 615-343-1570 Lynn Gelzheiser, Ph.D. University of Albany, State University of New York Department of Education, Psychology & Statistics 1400 Washington Avenue Room ED 222 Albany, NY 12222 O- 518-442-5079 F- 518-442-4953 Mary Gleason, Ph.D. College of Education University of Oregon Room 275 Eugene, OR 97403 O- 541-346-1647 F- 541-346-5818 Cynthia Griffin, Ph.D. University of Florida Department of Special Education G315 Norman Hall Gainsville, FL 32611 O- 904-392-0701 X.253 F- 904-392-2655 Tracey Hall, Ph.D. Pennsylvania State University 231 CEDAR Building University Park, PA 16802 O- 814-863-2400 F- 814-863-1002 Jan Hasbrouck, Ph.D. Department of Educational Psychology Texas A & M College Station, TX 77843 O- 409-845-2317 F- 409-862-1256 Steve Isaacson, Ph.D. School of Education 617 S.W. Harrison Portland State University Portland, OR 97201 O- 503-725-4493 F- 503-725-5599 Joe Jenkins, Ph.D. University of Washington EEU, Box 357925 Seattle, WA 98195 O- 206-543-1827 F- 206-543-8480 Edward Kameenui, Ph.D. University of Oregon College of Education 170 Education Eugene, OR 98195 O- 541-346-1646 F- 541-346-5818 Diane Kinder, Ph.D. Department of EPCSE Northern Illinois University DeKalb, IL 60115 O- 815-753-8465 F- 815-753-9250 John Wills Lloyd, Ph.D. University of Virginia Department of Special Education Room 152 Ruffner Hall 405 Emmet Street Charlottesville, VA 22903 O- 804-924-0759 F- 804-924-0747 G. Reid Lyon, Ph.D. National Institute of Child Health and Human Development Room 4B05, 6100 Executive Blvd. National Institutes of Health Bethesda, MD 20892 O- 301-496-6591 F- 301-402-2085 Patricia Mathes, Ph.D. Florida State University Department of Special Education 205 Stone Building Tallahassee, FL 32306 O- 904-644-4880 F- 904-644-8715 Rollanda O'Connor, Ph.D. University of Pittsburgh 4F29 Forbes Quadrangle Department of Instruction and Learning 230 South Bouquet Street Pittsburgh, PA 15206 O- 412-648-2621 F- 412-648-7081 Donna Scanlon, Ph.D. Child Research Studies Center Husted Hall The University at Albany 1400 Washington Avenue Albany, NY 12222 O- 518-442-3770 F- 518-442-3746 Jeanne Shay Schumm, Ph.D. University of Miami School of Education Office of School Based Research PO Box 268065 Coral Gables, FL 33124 O- 305-284-4970 F- 305-284-6998 John Shefelbiene, Ph.D. Sacramento State University Teacher Education-CSUS 6000 J Street Sacramento, CA 95819 O- 916-278-7537 F- 916-278-5904 Deborah C. Simmons, Ph.D. University of Oregon College of Education 275 Education Eugene, OR 97403 O- 541-346-3486 F- 541-346-5818 Tim Slocum, Ph.D. Utah State University Department of Special Education Logan, UT 84322 O- 801-797-3212 F- 801-797-3572 Janet Spector, Ph.D. University of Maine College of Education 5766 Shibles Hall Orono, ME 04469 O- 207-581-2459 F- 207-581-2423 Sylvia Smith University of Oregon College of Education 5766 Shibles Hall Eugene, OR 97405 O- 541-346-3493 F- 541-346-5818 Vickie Snider, Ph.D. Department of Special Education University of Wisconsin at Eau Claire Eau Claire, WI 54701 O- 715-836-2112 F- 715-836-3162 Dixie Lee Spiegel, Ph.D. University of North Carolina CB#3500 Chapel Hill, NC 27599 O- 919-966-1346 F- 919-962-1533 Steve Stahl, Ph.D. University of Georgia 309 Aderhold Athens, GA 30602 O- 706-542-3813 F- 706-542-3817 Marcy Stein, Ph.D. University of Washington, Tacoma 917 Pacific Avenue Tacoma, WA 98402 O- 206-552-4435 F- 206-552-4424 Louise Spear-Swerling, Ph.D. Southern Connecticut State University Department of Special Education 501 Crescent Street New Haven, CT 06515 O- 203-392-5925 F- 203-392-5927 Sara Tarver, Ph.D. Department of Rehabilitation, Psychology, and Special Education University of Wisconsin, Madison Madison, WI 53706 O- 608-263-5791 F- 608-262-8108 Frank Vellutino, Ph.D. The University of Albany 135 Western Avenue Albany, NY 12222 O- 515-442-3746 F- 515-442-3771 Rose-Marie Weber, Ph.D. University at Albany, State University of New York Department of Reading 1400 Washington Avenue Room ED 331 Albany, NY 12222 O- 518-442-5106 F- 518-765-2700 Joanna Williams, Ph.D. Teachers College Columbia University Box 238 New York, NY 10027 O- 212-678-3832 F- 212-678-4048 Top of Page Back to ERIC Menu Back to CEC Home Page copyright © 1996 ERIC Clearinghouse on Disabilities and Gifted Education Last updated: August 22, 1996 Send updates to: ericec@cec.sped.org URL: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm WT02-B20-18IA001-000011-B021-334http://www.cec.sped.org:80/minibibs/phono-r.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101073800 text/html 25769HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 07:38:07 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 23-Dec-96 18:16:00 GMTContent-length: 25577Content-type: text/html READING INSTRUCTION-MINIBIB READINGS AND RESOURCES ABOUT READING INSTRUCTION FOR YOUNGCHILDREN WITH LEARNING DISABILITIES THE ERIC CLEARINGHOUSE ON DISABILITIES AND GIFTED EDUCATION(ERIC EC) The Council for Exceptional Children 1920 Association Drive Reston, VA 20191 Toll Free: 1-800-328-0272 TTY: 703-264-9449 E-mail: ericec@cec.sped.org Internet: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm READINGS AND RESOURCES ABOUT READING INSTRUCTION FORYOUNG CHILDREN WITH LEARNING DISABILITIES (E540bib) July 1996 Adams, M. J. (1990). Beginning to read: Thinking and learning about print. The MIT Press, 55 Hayward St., Cambridge, MA 02142. 494pp. Drawing on an array of research on the nature and development of reading proficiency, this book argues that educators need not remain trapped in the phonics versus teaching-for-meaning dilemma and offers instructional alternatives. The book proposes that phonics can work together with the whole-language approach to reading and provides an integrated treatment of the knowledge and processes involved in skillful reading, the issues surrounding their acquisition, and the implications for reading instruction. The book stresses the importance of preschool language and literacy experiences and includes descriptions of those that will best prepare children for reading instruction. Blachman, B. A. (1991). Early intervention for children's reading problems: Clinical applications of the research in phonological awareness. Topics in Language Disorders, 12(1), 51-65. UMI* This article reviews research on training phonological awareness in kindergarten and first-grade children and describes research-based intervention and assessment activities applicable to classroom and clinical settings. Intervention applications include categorization activities, phoneme segmentation, and metalinguistic games. Brady, S. et al. (1994). Training phonological awareness: A study with inner-city kindergarten children. Annals of Dyslexia, 44, 26-59. UMI* Inner-city kindergarten children (n=24) were given an 18-week phonological awareness training program, that incorporated auditory and articulatory techniques for fostering metaphonological development. Compared to controls, subjects had greater gains in phonological awareness at the end of kindergarten and had a trend toward better reading skills in first grade. Cunningham, P. M., & Allington, R. L. (1991). Words, letters, sounds, and big books: A beary good approach. Learning, 20(2), 91-92, 94-95. UMI* Describes how primary teachers can use decoding strategies within a literature-based, whole-language setting. A three-stage approach involves the book stage (real reading), the word stage (learning words), and the letter-soundstage (learning sounds). The article provides sample activities. Curtin, J. (1993). The effectiveness of the reading recovery program on readingachievement. (ED363863) 12p. ERIC Document Reproduction Service(EDRS)** A study examined the effect of the Reading Recovery program on the reading achievement of first-grade students. Subjects, 60 third-grade students in a Chicago public school with 97% Hispanic and 3% White student population, completed the Iowa Tests of Basic Skills. Test scores for the 30 students who were tutored using Reading Recovery lessons in first grade were compared to the scores of the 30 students who were not tutored. Results indicated that the students tutored in Reading Recovery did not obtain significantly different reading achievement gains compared to those students who received only classroominstruction. Findings affirm the goals of the Reading Recovery program, which are to assist the lowest reading achievers in first grade to reach the median oftheir class and to maintain the rate of gain. Dudley, Marling C. (1989). The role of parents in children's literacy development: Collaborating with parents of exceptional children. Pointer, 33(4),16-19. Heldref Publications, 1319 18th St. NW, Washington, DC 20036-1802. This paper discusses several strategies for promoting literacy, which teachers can share with parents of exceptional children who are having difficulty learning to read and write. Strategies include: reading aloud to children, modeling reading behavior, writing to and with children, and responding to children's reading and writing. Dyck, N. J. (1991). Phonological awareness for reading success. Beyond Behavior, 2(1), 24. The Council for Exceptional Children, 1920 Association Drive, Reston, VA 22091-1589. Noting recent research studies identifying phonological awareness ability in kindergarten as a powerful predictor of reading success, this article offers specific suggestions for developing phonological awareness. Foster, K. C. (1994). Computer administered instruction in phonological awareness: Evaluation of the DaisyQuest program. Journal of Research & Development in Education, 27(2), 26-37. UMI* DaisyQuest is a computer program that teaches and provides practice in synthetic and analytic phonological skills. Researchers found young children trained on DaisyQuest had significantly greater phonological awareness gains than children without training. Children trained on a more developed version significantly outperformed a matched group on three phonological awareness measures. Gould, T. S., & Stern, M. (1994). 30+ Games to get ready to read: Teachingkidsat home and in school. Walker & Company, 435 Hudson St., New York, NY 10014. 171pp. Intended for use with youngsters eager to begin reading as well as reluctant starters, this book is filled with time-tested, entertaining, and simple games that build on children's curiosity and sense of fun to teach reading skills. This book contains a brief introduction outlining the methods and goals of the reading games and instructions on how to play over 30 games. Games are based on proved favorites such as "Go Fish," "Bingo," "Lotto," and "Concentration." Groff, P. (1991). Teachers' opinions of the whole-language approach to reading instruction. Annals of Dyslexia, 41, 83-95. UMI* First-grade and second-grade teachers (N=275) were surveyed concerning their knowledge about and attitudes toward the whole-language approach to reading instruction. Findings suggest that many teachers are not persuaded that the whole language approach is to be preferred over other methods such as intensive phonics instruction or basal reading instruction. Hall, E. A. (1991). An examination of the process of teaching reading to learning disabled children: Vygotskian perspectives. Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the American Educational Research Association (Chicago, IL, Apr. 3-7, 1991). (ED336894). ERIC Document Reproduction Service(EDRS)** The process of teaching reading to 12 second- and third-grade learning-disabled children was investigated in mainstream classrooms and resource rooms. The study focused on how the process of achieving intersubjectivity in a routine task like reading takes place and how the construction of intersubjectivity (referred to as scaffolding) can vary as a result of the teacher norms being brought to the task. Transcripts of teacher-child interaction were coded according to Vygotskian principles. Resource teachers were found to apply these principles more consistently than mainstream teachers. As a result, resource teachers had longer interactions with children in which they made more adjustments that catered to a reader's zone of proximal development. Students in resource rooms were also more likely to have successful reading episodes and were more likely to initiate interaction. It isconcluded that resource room teacher-child interactions were longer becausemainstream teachers persisted in the use of the recitation model of teaching to agreater extent than did resource teachers, and because mainstream classroom settingsused a more hierarchical physical arrangement of space and the teacher's position. Hurford, D. P. (1994). Early identification and remediation of phonological-processing deficits in first-grade children at risk for reading disabilities. Journal of Learning Disabilities, 27(10), 647-59. UMI* Assessment of 486 first-quarter first graders identified 99 children as beingat risk for reading difficulties, half of whom then received a phonological processing intervention. Results support the early identification of children at risk for reading difficulties and the effectiveness of the phonological processing intervention. Jenkins, R. (1994). Facilitating development of preliterate children's phonological abilities. Topics in Language Disorders, 14(2), 26-39. UMI* This article from a theme issue examines the relationships between emergent literacy skills and phonological awareness in preliterate children. A developmentalmodel for facilitating literacy development is presented. Suggestions for enhancingmetaphonological skills and a checklist for the early identification of young at-riskchildren are offered. Love, H. D., & Litton, F. W. (1994). Teaching reading to disabled and handicapped learners. Charles C. Thomas, 2600 S. 1st St., Springfield, IL 62794-9265. 252pp. This book addresses issues surrounding the teaching of reading skills to students who have been diagnosed as having one or more disabilities that affect their learning processes. Various conditions teachers might encounter in students are described, and their impact on reading skills is discussed. Methods of assessing a student's reading readiness are then discussed, followed by a survey of developmental reading methods and materials, including the VAKT approach, Corrective Reading, the Rebus Reading Program, Distar, Edmark, Orton-Gillingham and Cloze. and other methods. Masland, R. L., & Masland, M. W. (Eds.). Preschool prevention of reading failure. York Press, Inc., 2712 Mt. Carmel Rd., Parkton, MD 21120. 240pp. This book of 11 author-contributed chapters is a product of a symposium concernedwith early recognition and remediation of deficiencies that lead to failure to learn toread. All papers stress that reading is a linguistic activity with the vast majority ofdyslexia-prone children having a deficiency in basic spoken language skills in thepreschool years. Chapters are organized into sections concerned with prediction ofreading failure, intervention, ongoing studies, and retrospect. Mason, J. M. et al. (1992). Toward an integrated model of early reading development. Technical Report No. 566. (ED350595). ERIC Document Reproduction Service (EDRS)** A longitudinal study examined the contributions of early language ability, home characteristics, and merging knowledge about literacy to children's later decoding and comprehension ability. The study followed 127 children from the beginning of kindergarten to the end of grade 3 (when 83 were left). Subjects attended schools in a small, rural, midwestern town or a low-income area of a small midwestern city. Results indicated that: (1) individual differences in decoding ability have little effect on children's reading comprehension, and vice versa; (2) early language understanding predicts reading comprehension; (3)emerging knowledge about reading predicts subsequent decoding ability; (4) children's early interest in and involvement in literacy predicts gains in reading and (5) home problems had a negative prediction on reading. Findings suggest support for integrating cognitive processing models, developmental models, and social constructivist models. Morrison, D. et al. (1988). Screening for reading problems: The utility of SEARCH. Annals of Dyslexia, 38, 181-92pp. UMI* The accuracy of SEARCH, a screening instrument for identifying children at risk for developing learning disabilities, was evaluated with 1107 kindergarten children. Children identified as at risk were of average intelligence. SEARCH scores were significantly correlated with sequential and simultaneous informationprocessing skills. SEARCH predicted adequacy of preacademic readingskills with 77% accuracy. O'Connor, R. E. (1993). Teaching phonological awareness to young childrenwith learning disabilities. Exceptional Children, 59(6), 532-46pp. UMI* Forty-seven children (ages 4-6) with language impairments were assigned to receive training in one of three categories of phonological tasks (rhyming, blending, andsegmenting) or a control group. Subjects made significant progress in eachexperimental category, but demonstrated little or no generalization within a category orbetween categories. Palardy, J. M. (1991). Four "teachable" reading readiness skills. Reading Improvement, 28(1), 57-60pp. UMI* Reviews selected instrctional procedures in the four reading readiness skills that canbe taught and learned: auditory discrimination, auditory comprehension, visualdiscrimination, and visual memory. Stresses that readiness skills are requisite toreading skills. Palincsar, A. S., & Klenk, L. (1992). Fostering literacy learning in supportivecontexts. Journal of Learning Disabilities, 25(4), 211-25pp. UMI* This paper focuses on enhancement of literacy skills of young children with learning disabilities, through intentional learning, reciprocal teaching, and redefining the contexts of early literacy learning. Research results show that children benefit from strategy instruction occurring within classroom cultures that support collaborative discourse, flexible application of comprehension strategies, and meaningful literacy opportunities. Pressley, M., & Rankin, J. (1994). More about whole language methods ofreading instruction for students at risk for early reading failure. Learning Disabilities Research & Practice, 9(3), 157-68. UMI* This literature review contends that whole-language approaches to reading arenot well supported by scientific analyses of reading and reading instruction. The paper argues that whole language is not the preferred approach of outstanding primary and special education teachers, who favor instruction that balances decoding instruction and development of meaning-making competencies. Reutzel, D. R., & Fawson, P. (1991). Literature webbing predictable books: A prediction strategy that helps below-average, first-grade readers. Reading Research and Instruction, 30 (4), 20-30pp. UMI* Examines the effect of using a literature webbing strategy lesson and predictable books with 22 below-average first-grade readers. This article findsthat the literature webbing strategy lesson was significantly more helpful in improving below-average readers' comprehension as measured by miscues in oral reading and answers to comprehension questions than was a directed listening/reading thinking approach. Ross, S. M. et al. (1994). Using "Success for All" to restructure elementary schools: A tale of four cities. (ED373456) ERIC Document Reproduction Service (EDRS)** The Success for All (SFA) program was designed as a K-3 preventive and intensive intervention for students at risk of failing to learn to read for the purpose of bringing every student to grade level in reading by third grade. Keyprogram elements include individualized tutoring, regrouping across grades into homogeneous reading classes, smaller reading classes, family support, and a comprehensive reading program. This paper presents findings of a study that examined the effects of the SFA program on student reading achievement in four cities. Specifically, the study sought to assess student achievement when the SFA program is introduced in settings geographically removed from program developers. A comparison of individual reading test results with those of matched control groups indicated advantages at three of the sites, with particular advantages for the lowest-achieving 25 percent of students relative to their control counterparts at all four sites. Results also indicate that theSFA program can be replicated at distant locations with limited monitoring by program developers. Sawyer, D. J. & Butler, K. (1991). Early language intervention: A deterrent to reading disability. Annals of Dyslexia, 41, 55-79. UMI* This paper discusses five language roots of reading: phonology, syntax, semantics, short-term and long-term memory, and auditory segmenting. Teachers are urged to focus early school experiences toward development of these five skills to reduce the incidence or reading difficulties. Specific teaching suggestions areoffered. Sears, S., & Keogh, B. (1993). Predicting reading performance using the Slingerland Procedures. Annals of Dyslexia, 43, 78-89pp. UMI* Longitudinal data from 104 children administered the Slingerland Procedures in kindergarten and achievement tests in later grades found significant relationships between Slingerland measures and reading outcomes, with predictionvarying across grades and according to the reading measure used. Listening contributed to reading comprehension but not to word recognition, and visual skills influenced early reading performance. Sheffield, B. B. (1991). The structured flexibility of Orton-Gillingham. Annals of Dyslexia, 41, 41-54. UMI* This paper discusses a philosophic basis for Orton-Gillingham teaching and demonstrates how features such as multisensory teaching can remediate language problems exhibited by many dyslexic students. Commonalities and differences among the Orton and Gillingham variations are examined. Thompson, K. L., & Taymans, J. M. (1994). Development of a reading strategies program: Bridging the gaps among decoding, literature, and thinking skills. Intervention in School and Clinic, 30(1), 17-27. UMI* This article describes the Reading Strategies Program, which teaches decodingskills to primary-level students with learning disabilities with a methodology intended to teach children to apply the skills to literature. Cognitive strategies also are used to apply comprehension skills to the material and to write about the material read. Torgesen, J. K. (1994). Longitudinal studies of phonological processing and reading. Journal of Learning Disabilities, 27(5), 276-86. UMI* A longitudinal (from kindergarten through grade 2) study with 244 children evaluated three hypotheses regarding the causal relationship between phonological processing abilities and reading acquisition. The study found a bidirectional relationship between phonological processing skills and reading skills and stability in individual phonological processing abilities over time. Vogel, S. A. (1992). Educational alternatives for students with learning disabilities. Springer-Verlag, 175 5th Ave., New York, NY 10010. 228pp. This collection of papers was written to address two purposes: (a) to provideteachers in preservice LD preparation programs with an overview of validated practicesthat have been proven effective for children with language learning disabilities, and (b)to provide regular education teachers preparing to enter the field or already in theclassroom with knowledge about validated teaching strategies so that they can workmore effectively in collaboration with an LD consultant. JOURNALS: Annals of Dyslexia. Orton Dyslexia Society, Chester Bldg., Suite 382, 8600 LaSalle Rd., Baltimore, MD 21204-2044. 800-222-3123. Journal of Learning Disabilities. Pro-ed, 5341 Industrial Oaks Blvd., Austin, TX78735-8809; 512-451-3246. Learning Disabilities Research & Practice. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates Inc.,10 Industrial Ave., Mahwah, NJ 07430-2262; 800-926-6579. Reading Teacher & Reading Research Quarterly. International Reading Association, 800 Barksdale Rd., PO Box 8139, Newark, DE 19714-8139; 1-800-336-READ. JOURNALS (Special issues): Reading and Writing Quarterly. Overcoming Learning Difficulties, 9(4), Oct/Dec 1993, Taylor & Francis, Inc./ Hemisphere Publishing Corp., 1900 Frost Rd., Suite101, Bristol, PA 19007. Reading & Writing: An Interdisciplinary Journal. The Role of Decoding in Reading Research and Instruction, 5(2), June 1993, UMI*. *Copies of journal articles available from UMI, Univ. Microfilms International,500 Sansome St., Suite 400, San Francisco, CA 94111-3219. (1-800-248-0360) **Documents with an ED number can also be ordered for a fee through ERIC Document Reproduction Service (EDRS) (1-800-248-ERIC). RESOURCES: Council for Learning Disabilities PO Box 40303 Overland Park, KS 66204 913-492-8755 International Reading Association 800 Barksdale Rd., PO Box 8139 Newark, DE 19714-8139 800-336-READ Learning Disabilities Association of America (LDA) 4156 Library Rd. Pittsburgh, PA 15234 412-341-1515 National Center for Learning Disabilities (NCLD) 381 Park Ave., South, Suite 1420 New York, NY 10016 212-545-7510 Orton Dyslexia Society Chester Bldg., Suite 382 8600 LaSalle Rd. Baltimore, MD 21286-2044 800-222-3123 INTERNET RESOURCES: Listservs: AUTISM Autism and developmental disabilities Subscription address: listserv@sjuvm.stjohns.edu Post messages to: autism@sjuvm.stjohns.edu LD-List Learning disability information exchange Subscription address: ld-list-request@east.pima.edu Post messages to: ld-list@east.pima.edu OURKIDS Parents of children with developmental delays Subscription address: listserv@sjuvm.stjohns.edu Post messages to: our-kids@sjuvm.stjohns.edu Electronic Newsletter: Jarrett's Journal-An electronic journal containing disabled/ medical newsbytes, book reviews and features To subscribe, send email message to: listserv@sjuvm.stjohns.edu In the body of the message, type: subscribe j-jrnl yourfirstname yourlastname Newsgroups: K12.ED.SPECIAL K12.CHAT.TEACHER K12.LANG.ART ALT.SUPPORT.LEARNING-DISAB World Wide Web: http://www.sped.ukans.edu/ http://www.yahoo.com/society_and_culture/disabilities http://www.tiac.net/users/poorrich/ http://www.psych.med.umich.edu/web/aacap/ http://www.disabilities.com/links.htm http://disability.com/cool.html http://www.dyslexia.com/ http://www.hanen.org/carconn.html http://psupsena.psu.edu/~1$k%20language-arts (contains lessons plans) http://ericir.syr.edu (contains lesson plans) AskERIC Virtual Library This is a good starting point for educational information on learning disabilities. Included are general information about AskERIC, lesson plans, InfoGuides, ERICDigests, and many other educational resources. You can also search for "LearningDisabilties" on all of the AskERIC menu items. To access the AskERIC VirtualLibrary: Type: gopher ericir.syr.edu or Telnet to: telnet ericir.syr.edu This ERIC publication is in the public domain and may be freely reproduced anddisseminated. This publication was prepared with funding from the Office of Educational Researchand Improvement, U.S. Department of Education, under contract no. RR93002005. The opinions expressed in this report do not necessarily reflect the positions or policiesof OERI or the Department of Education. Top of PageBack to ERIC MenuBack to CEC Home Page copyright © 1996 ERIC Clearinghouse on Disabilities and Gifted Education Send updates to: ericec@cec.sped.org URL: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm WT02-B20-19IA001-000011-B022-19http://www.cec.sped.org:80/minibibs/techread.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101073818 text/html 27128HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 07:38:20 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 19-Dec-96 20:37:00 GMTContent-length: 26934Content-type: text/html SPECIAL EDTECHNOLOGY-READINGS SPECIAL EDUCATION TECHNOLOGY-READINGS THE ERIC CLEARINGHOUSE ON DISABILITIES AND GIFTED EDUCATION(ERIC EC) The Council for Exceptional Children 1920 Association Drive Reston, VA 20191 Toll Free: 1-800-328-0272 TTY: 703-264-9449 E-mail: ericec@cec.sped.org Internet: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm READINGS ON THE USE OF TECHNOLOGY FOR INDIVIDUALS WITHDISABILITIES July 1996 References identified with an ED (ERIC document) number are cited in the ERICdatabase. Documents are available in ERIC microfiche collections at more than 1,000locations worldwide. Documents can also be ordered through EDRS: (800) 443-ERIC. Journal articles are available through the originating journal, interlibrary loan services, or article reproduction clearinghouses: UMI (800) 732-0616; or ISI (800) 523-1850. Aedo, I. (1994). A teaching methodology for the hearing impairedusing hypermedia and computer animation. Journal of Computing inChildhood Education, 5(3/4), 353-69. UMI. This article examines the possibilities and advantages ofcomputers in teaching hearing-impaired children. A method ofusing computers to improve the spoken and written communicationskills of the hearing impaired is presented which suggests thathypertext and multimedia technologies can be successfully appliedto speech therapy teaching, lip-reading teaching, hearingtraining development, vocabulary teaching, morphosyntactic-structure teaching, andreading instruction. Anderson, M. A. (1991). Technology integration for mainstreamedstudents. Computing Teacher, 18(4), 6-8. UMI. A discussion of the successful integration of technology toassist students with mild disabilities in mainstreamed classroomshighlights the role of the teacher. Three research studies aredescribed: one with elementary schools, one with middle schools,and one with high schools. Curriculum objectives, student needs,group learning, and teacher training are also discussed. The Arc. (1994). How to evaluate and select assistivetechnology. (ED376664) 4p. ERIC Document Reproduction Service(EDRS)** This digest discusses assistive technology for children andadults with mental retardation and other disabilities. Assistivetechnology is used to compensate for functional limitations andto enhance and increase learning, independence, mobility,communication, environmental control, and choice. A checklist isprovided that covers user questions, vendor questions, deviceperformance, convenience, reliability, safety, and practicality. Brett, A. (1995). Technology in inclusive early childhoodsettings. Day Care & Early Education, 22(3), 8-11. UMI. This article examines whether to make computers a part ofthe early childhood curriculum. It discusses the contribution ofcomputers to children's development, focusing on the role ofcomputers and related technology in benefiting children withdisabilities, facilitating inclusion, and ways of adaptingtechnology. Brett, A., & Provenzo, E.F., Jr. (1995). Adaptive technology forspecial human needs. SUNY series, Computers in education. StateUniversity of NY Press, State University Plaza, Albany, NY 12246.164pp. This publication describes the use of computers to augmentthe schooling and daily functions of individuals withdisabilities, and details currently available hardware andsoftware systems in four areas of disability: visual impairment,hearing and speech impairment, physical impairment, and cognitiveimpairment (learning disabilities and mental retardation). Fouruses of adaptive technology are identified that apply to allages: spoken and written communication; cognitive stimulation anddevelopment; recreation, leisure, and play; and environmentalcontrol. Adaptive technology applications in education aredescribed. Button, C., & Wobschall, R. (1994). The Americans withDisabilities Act and assistive technology. Journal of VocationalRehabilitation, 4(3), 196-201. UMI. This paper provides a synopsis of each section of theAmericans with Disabilities Act (ADA) and the relationship ofassistive technology to the needs and mandate of the section. Numerous suggestions are included for assistive technologydevices that may be effective resources for ADA compliance. Ellsworth, N.J. (1994). Applications of technology for studentswith learning disabilities: A survey of New York City schools. LD Forum, 20(1), 21-24pp. Council for Learning Disabilities, POBox 40303, Overland Park, KS 66204. Results are presented of a study on applications oftechnology employed in New York City schools with students withlearning disabilities (LD). The study explored the availabilityand frequency of use of 14 types of technology, as well as 68teachers' views on what kinds of technology would be mosthelpful. Information was obtained on: innovative uses oftechnology, the quality of software available, accessibility ofcomputers, equipment needs for special education, and assistanceneeded by teachers. Over two-thirds of teachers reported thatthey and their students typically had access only to videorecording and playback equipment and older personal computerswith limited software. ERIC Clearinghouse on Disabilities and Gifted Education. (1995). Instructional design of computer-assisted instruction for usewith students who have mild disabilities. TEACHING ExceptionalChildren, 27(3), 77-79. UMI. This review of the literature on computer-assistedinstruction for students with mild disabilities identifiesfeatures of effective software, offers examples of softwarefeatures that support particular instructional strategies, andoutlines findings on specific instructional principles as appliedto computer-assisted instructional software. Fitzgerald, G.E. (1994). Using the computer with students withemotional and behavioral disorders. Technology & Disability,3(2), 87-99. (Theme issue: Special education) UMI. This article describes promising practices for integratingthe computer into therapeutic instruction for students withemotional and behavioral disorders. For students with behaviorproblems, the computer can serve as an effective motivator,provide opportunities for cooperative learning, offer social andleisure time pursuits, and provide students the tools to engagein self-monitoring activities. For students with emotionalproblems, the computer can facilitate self-expression, assist indetermining effective learning strategies, and build self-esteem. Flippo, K.F. (Ed) et al. (1995). Assistive technology: A resourcefor school, work, and community. Brookes Publishing Co., Box10624, Baltimore, MD 21285-0624. 301pp. This book explores the applications of assistive technologyfor individuals with disabilities in school, work, and communitysettings, stressing the need to keep the user of such technologyas the focus of all design, training, and implementationprocesses. Issues addressed include: policy foundations,training, staff development, creative financing, communityservices, and the users' perspective of assistive technology. Ford, M.J. et al. (1993). Attending behaviors of ADHD childrenin math and reading using various types of software. Journal ofComputing in Childhood Education, 4(2), 183-96. UMI. This article compared the effects of using various computersoftware programs on the attending behavior of children withattention deficit hyperactive disorder (ADHD). It found that theattention of ADHD children increased while they used softwarewith a game format when animation was not excessive. Otherfactors affecting nonattending behaviors included the software'sdifficulty, format, and content. Green, D.W. (1995). The benefits of multimedia computer softwarefor students with disabilities. (ED382172) 21pp. EDRS. This paper assesses the current state of research andinformed opinion on the benefits of multimedia computer softwarefor students with disabilities. Topics include: a definition ofmultimedia; advantages of multimedia; Multiple IntelligenceTheory, which states intellectual abilities consist of sevencomponents; motivation and behavior modification; hyperactivechildren; attention grabbing and distraction; technology andmetacognition; the value of interactivity, immediate feedback,and hypermedia; assessment-selecting software; students asproducers; teacher skills, training, and support; and technologytrends. A set of interview questions for practitioners isincluded and the interview sample and results are discussed. Hanley, T.V. (1995). The need for technological advances inassessment related to national educational reform. ExceptionalChildren, 61(3), 222-229. UMI. This article explores the relation between the inclusionmovement and the development of national standards for "allstudents," and outlines their implications for technology-assisted improvements inassessment of students with disabilities. Testing accommodations, such asinput/output adaptations, can be facilitated with technology, and new toolsfor measuring guiding student progress are being explored. Higgins, K., & Boone, R. (1993). Technology as a tutor, tool,and agent for reading. Journal of Special Education Technology,12(1) 28-37. UMI. This article reviews the use of computer-based technology inteaching reading to students with disabilities. Research fromthe last 10 years is examined using the metaphors of Tutor, Tool,and Agent as categories of instructional purpose. Most of thesubstantive data supporting computer use concerns drill andpractice and tutorial assisted instructional programs. Holzberg, C.S. (1994). Technology in special education. Technology and Learning, 14(7) 18-21. UMI. This article presents examples of the use of technology tomotivate, teach, and empower children with physical and cognitivedisabilities. Specific applications include the use of computersfor antivictimization training, writing, self-expression, andimproving communication skills. The work of the Center forLiteracy and Disability Studies (North Carolina) is described. Kurlychek, K. (1994). Software to go: A catalog of softwareavailable for loan. (ED378719) 223pp. EDRS. This catalog lists the holdings of the Software to Gosoftware lending library and clearinghouse for programs andagencies serving students who are deaf or hard of hearing. Anintroduction describes the clearinghouse and its collection ofsoftware, much of it commercial and copyrighted material, forApple, Macintosh, and IBM (MS-DOS) computers and explains how tojoin the service and use the lending procedure. Lindsey, J.D. (Ed). (1993). Computers for exceptionalindividuals. Second edition. Pro-ed, 8700 Shoal Creek Blvd.,Austin, TX 78758-6897. 416pp. This second edition provides an updated practical discussionof current computer technology for use with individuals withdisabilities and/or gifted and talented individuals. Chaptersinclude information on: general and specific computer conceptsrelated to exceptional individuals; applications for computerswith individuals with mild disabilities, speech and languagedisorders, severe and physical disabilities, sensory impairments,and gifted and talented individuals; and administrative andinstructional applications. Appendices cover computer terms,theories, principles, languages; teacher competencies; specificsoftware packages; and courseware evaluation procedures. Ludy, R., & Blunt, M. (1995). Assistive technology resources:Building bridges for institutions for higher education. (ED380016). 17pp. EDRS. This paper describes the increased enrollment of individualswith disabilities in institutions of higher education and thespecial role of assistive technology resources making thatpossible. The paper describes the Technology-Related Assistancefor Individuals with Disabilities Act of 1988, which madediscretionary funds available to all states to facilitate theirdevelopment of consumer-responsive, statewide technology-relatedprojects. A list of 53 state assistive technology projects isincluded. Male, M. (1994). Technology for inclusion: Meeting the specialneeds of all students. Second edition. Allyn & Bacon, 160 GouldSt., Needham Heights, MA 02194. 201pp. This guide examines the implications of computer technologyon the education of students with disabilities, focusing on theuse of computers in inclusive classrooms. Chapters includeinformation on: student access to technology; roles of teachers,parents, and administrators; quality-of-life issues; suggestionsfor selecting and integrating computer hardware; using computersto develop students' social skills; word processing and desktoppublishing; applications such as database management,spreadsheets, telecommunications, and multimedia; integratingcomputer technology into individualized educational plans; andfuture trends in technology. Meyers, L.F. (1994). Access and meaning: The keys to effectivecomputer use by children with language disabilities. Journal ofSpecial Education Technology, 12(3), 257-75. UMI. This study of 18 school-age children with Down Syndromesupports the contention that combining technological access tospeech and text with teaching methods providing the languagestructure to link speech output and text with personal meaningresults in significantly improved language skills compared withuse of computers without speech output or use of pencil andpaper. Miller, E.C. (1993). Special experiences for exceptionalstudents: Integrating virtual reality into special educationclassroom. (ED363321). 10pp. EDRS. This paper discusses potential benefits and hazards thatvirtual reality holds for exceptional children in the specialeducation system. Topics include: applications of virtualreality; developing academic skills via cyberspace; vocationaltraining; and social learning in cyberspace; telepresence anddistance education; the role of teacher in cyberspace; changingteacher-training programs; the corollary curricular change; andthe risks of using virtual reality in special education. Moore, P.R. (1994). An analysis of the impact of computerplacement and training on special education teachers' attitudesand perceptions of the role of computers in instruction. TeacherEducation and Special Education, 17(4), 236-48. UMI. Results of placing a computer in eight special educationclassrooms and providing the teachers with a 4-month practicum of integrating the computer into instructional programs indicatedthat teachers viewed the computer as not only a powerfulmotivating and reinforcing tool but also as a generally usefultool for themselves and their students. Ordover, E. (1994). Assistive technology for students withdisabilities: Rights under federal law. (ED377624) 8pp. EDRS. This paper defines "assistive technology device" and"assistive technology service," outlines responsibilities ofstates receiving IDEA funds to provide such devices and services,notes eligibility requirements, examines requirements forvocational education programs, considers the use of assistivetechnology devices and services to enable placement in regulareducation settings, and discusses the provision of auxiliary aidsto students in postsecondary education programs. References tothe United States Code, the Code of Federal Regulations, andcourt cases are provided to support the paper's views. Payne, M.D., & Sachs, R. (1994). Educational software andadaptive technology for students with learning disabilities. (ED381920). 5p. EDRS. Technological solutions are described that have enabledpostsecondary students with learning disabilities to competeequally with nondisabled peers in the educational environment. Such solutions have included a variety of educational software,word processing applications, and adaptive technology. Selectedexamples are given of how campuses are providing computer access,which is mandated by the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA)and Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973. Pesta, J. (1994). Assistive, adaptive, amazing technologies. TECHNOS, 3(2), 10-12. Agency for Instructional Technology (AIT),Box A, Bloomington, IN 47402-0120. This article discusses assistive or adaptive technology andhighlights major technologies that help physically impairedindividuals at home, work, and school. Technologies includevoice recognition, microswitches, communication boards,headsticks and mouthsticks, vision control, adaptive keyboards,word prediction software, electronic readers, speech synthesizers, Brailleadapters, oversized displays, closed-captioning, and adaptedcomputers. Pisarchick, S.E. (1992). Technology. Project prepare:Competency-based personnel preparation in early childhoodeducation modules. (ED353754). 743pp. EDRS. One of nine competency-based training modules for personnelpreparation in early childhood special education, this guidefocuses on assistive technology and technological interventionsin preschool programs. The module is adaptable for use with ageneral audience, direct service personnel, or administrators. This module focuses on six goals: gaining an overview ofassistive technology and its curricular role; familiarity withswitch applications to increase the independent control andparticipation of young children; understanding the basic use ofcomputers and peripherals; understanding of how computers andperipherals can be integrated into the curriculum; gaining anoverview of augmentative and alternative communication systems,and obtaining practical information regarding funding forassistive technology devices and services. Staples, A. et al. (1993). Uses of technology and educationalmedia in literacy instruction for children with developmentaldisabilities. (ED364845). 6pp. EDRS. A 3-year research project, employing qualitative inquiry ina pair of preschool and primary grade classrooms (one self-contained and oneintegrated at each level), was undertaken toexamine the literacy learning difficulties of school-agedchildren with developmental disabilities. The multi-site casestudies of the first phase of the project used the constantcomparative method of data collection and analysis. Analysis ofthe first year of the project reveals two primary themes:technology and inclusion. Technology facilitated literacylearning opportunities when: it was available; teachers werecompetent users and programmers of the devices; and teachers hadample time to adapt materials. Inclusion facilitated learningwhen: peers had a clear understanding of and experiences withtheir roles; and the individual needs of all students wereconsidered. Storeygard, J. (1993). Making computers work for students withspecial needs. TEACHING Exceptional Children, 26(1), 22-24. UMI. A course on computers and writing for special educationmiddle school students who are reluctant writers is described. The background of the course, the role of the computer, studentattitudes, outcomes, and success factors are discussed. An addedadvantage was the improved communication between regular andspecial educators. Wolfenden, D.P. (1995). Educators' commonly asked questionsabout assistive technology devices and services. (ED393240).33pp. EDRS. This monograph for Maine educators presents basicinformation on assistive technology devices and services and therole of assistive technology in delivering appropriate educationto children with disabilities in the least restrictiveenvironment. Questions address definitions; relevant provisionsof the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA);funding sources; alternatives to purchasing assistive technologydevices; responsibilities of schools regarding devicemaintenance, repair, and replacement; relationship of devices tomedical needs; evaluation of devices or services; and trainingin use of such devices. Zabala, J. (1995). The SETT framework: Critical areas toconsider when making informed assistive technology decisions. (ED381962). 4pp. EDRS. This brief paper offers a systematic approach to makingdecisions regarding the provision of assistive technology devicesand services for students with disabilities. Initial questionsaddress which students need assistive technology, what kind oftechnology is needed, and who is involved in making thesedecisions. The question about what sort of data should becollected is answered by a proposed model, the SETT framework,which raises a series of 16 questions about the Student, theEnvironment, the Tasks, and the Tools. A form for collectingSETT information is attached. MATERIALS FROM FEDERALLY FUNDED RESEARCHPROJECTS: Activating children through technology. A final report for theproject period October 1, 1992-January 31, 1996. (ED395411). 40pp. EDRS. The primary purpose of ACTT (Activating ChildrenThrough Technology) Outreach, housed in Macomb Projects in theCollege of Education and Human Services at Western IllinoisUniversity, is to integrate assistive technology into earlychildhood services for children, ages birth to eight, withdisabilities. NCIP profiles, 1-5, 1995 (ED390230); NCIP profiles, 1-5, 1994(ED390229); Evaluation of the integration of technology forinstructing handicapped children (middle school level). Finalreport of phase I (ED342159); Evaluation of the integration oftechnology for instructing handicapped children (middle schoollevel). Final report of phase II (ED342160). EDRS. The National Center to Improve Practice (NCIP) is a 5-year project whoseoverall mission is to promote the effective use of technology,media, and materials to improve educational outcomes for studentswith disabilities. Opening the doors: Using technology to improve education forstudents with disabilities. (ED357550). EDRS. This federallysponsored project conducted by Macro International, Inc. explorededucational practices, originating in diverse communities, inwhich teachers used educational technology in innovative ways tomeet the needs of children with disabilities. Research synthesis on design of effective media, materials, andtechnology for deaf and hard-of hearing students. Technicalreport no. 1 (ED386850); Research synthesis on design ofeffective media, materials, and technology for deaf and hard-ofhearing students. Executive summary. Technical report no. 2(ED386851); Research synthesis on quality and availability ofassistive technology devices. Technical report no. 7. (ED386855); Research synthesis on quality and availability ofassistive technology devices. Executive summary. Technicalreport no. 8 (ED386856); Research Synthesis on Early InterventionPractices. Technical report no. 11 (ED386859); Technologyintegration into early childhood curricula: where we've been,where we are, where we should go (ED386901). EDRS. The National Center to Improve the Tools of Educators was established to helpdevelopers and publishers of technology (software), media(electronic media), and materials (print) meet emerging classroomneeds of diverse learners and provide guidelines to enabledevelopers and publishers to produce the most relevant andeffective materials possible. School reform and its implications for technology use in thefuture. Identifying emerging issues and trends in technology forspecial education. (ED350763). EDRS. This 3-year studyconducted by COSMOS Corporation strived to identify emergingissues and trends in technology for special education. Technology in the classroom: Applications and strategies for theeducation of children with severe disabilities; Communicationmodule; Education module; Listening and hearing (Supplement);Positioning, access, and mobility module. Available from:Fullfillment Operations, American Speech-Language-HearingAssociation (ASHA), 1081 Rockville Pike, Rockville, MD 20852(800-638-8255). The "Technology in the Classroom" projectdeveloped, field tested, and evaluated the effectiveness of self-instructional materialsthat would improve the technology skillsand knowledge of families and regular/special educationprofessionals, in order to integrate assistive technologies intothe educational programs of children (ages 2 to 7) with severedisabilities. Technology inservice project (Project TIP). Final report. (ED385991). EDRS. Technology Inservice Project (Project TIP) wasdesigned to provide technology training and information to meetthe staff development needs of early childhood administrators,teachers, and support personnel and early intervention teammembers, including families and regular educators. This bibliography was compiled by Janet Drill and BarbaraSorenson. ERIC DIGESTS are in the public domain and may be freelyreproduced and disseminated. This publication was prepared with funding from the Office ofEducational Research and Improvement, U.S. Department ofEducation, under contract no. RR93002005. Any opinions expressedin this report do not necessarily reflect the positions orpolicies of OERI or the Department of Education. Top of PageBack to ERIC MenuBack to CEC Home Page copyright © 1996 ERIC Clearinghouse on Disabilities and Gifted Education Send updates to: ericec@cec.sped.org URL: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm WT02-B20-20IA001-000011-B022-39http://www.cec.sped.org:80/minibibs/techreso.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101073842 text/html 15057HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 07:38:45 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 19-Dec-96 20:57:00 GMTContent-length: 14863Content-type: text/html SPECIAL EDTECHNOLOGY-RESOURCES SPECIAL EDUCATION TECHNOLOGY-RESOURCES THE ERIC CLEARINGHOUSE ON DISABILITIES AND GIFTED EDUCATION(ERIC EC) The Council for Exceptional Children 1920 Association Drive Reston, VA 20191 Toll Free: 1-800-328-0272 TTY: 703-264-9449 E-mail: ericec@cec.sped.org Internet: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm RESOURCES ON THE USE OF TECHNOLOGY FOR INDIVIDUALS WITHDISABILITIES July 1996 JOURNALS: Computers in the Schools. Hayworth Press Inc., 10 Alice Street, Binghamton, NY 13904 Exceptional Children. The Council for Exceptional Children, 1920 Association Dr., Reston, VA 20191-1589 Exceptional Parent. Psy-Ed Corp., 209 Harvard St., Suite 303, Brookline, MA 02146-5005 Educational Technology. Educational Technology Publications, Inc., 700 Palisade Ave., Englewood Cliffs, NJ 07632 Journal of Learning Disabilities. Pro-Ed, 5341 Industrial Oaks Blvd., Austin, TX 78735-8809 Journal of Speech & Hearing Research. American Speech and Hearing Assn., 10801 Rockville Pike, Rockville, MD 20852 Journal of Special Education Technology. Peabody College. Box 328, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN 37203 Journal of Visual Impairment & Blindness. 11 Penn Plaza, Suite 300, New York, NY 10001 Learning Disabilities Quarterly. Council for Learning Disabilities, PO Box 40303, Overland Park, KS 66204 Learning & Leading with Technology (formerly Computing Teacher). International Society for Technology in Education, 1787 Agate St., Eugene, OR 97403-1923 Teacher Education & Special Education. Boyd Printing Company, Inc., 49 Sheridan Ave., Albany, NY 12201 TEACHING Exceptional Children. The Council for Exceptional Children, 1920 Association Dr., Reston, VA 20191 Technology & Disability. Andover Medical Publishers Inc., Butterworth-Heinemann, 80 Montvale Ave., Stoneham, MA 02180 TECHNOS. Agency for Instructional Technology (AIT). Box A, Bloomington, IN 47402-0120 Topics in Language Disorders. Aspen Systems Corporation, 16792 Oakmont Ave., Gaithersburg, MD 20877 NEWSLETTERS: ACTTive Technology, Macomb Projects, 27 Horrabin Hall, Western Illinois University, Macomb, IL 61455 Assistive Device News, Elizabethtown Hospital & Rehabilitation Center, Elizabethtown, PA 17022 Augmentative Communication News (ACN), One Surf Way, Suite 215, Monterey, CA 93940 Augmentative & Alternative Communication, International Society for Augmentative & Alternative Communication (ISAAC), PO Box 1762, Station R, Toronto, ON, Canada M4G 4A3 Bulletin of Science & Technology for the Handicapped, American Association for the Advancement of Science, 1776 Massachusetts Ave. NW, Washington, DC 20036 CATALYST, Western Center for Microcomputers in Special Education, Inc., 1259 El Camino Real, Suite 275, Menlo Park, CA 94025 Classroom Computer Learning, Subscription Dept., 2451 E. River, Dayton, OH 45439-9907 Closing the Gap Newsletter, PO Box 68, Henderson, MN 56044 Computer Disability News, National Easter Seal Society, 2023 West Ogdeen Ave., Chicago, IL 60612 CONNSense Bulletin, 249 Glenbrook Road U-46, Storrs, CT 06269-2064 DIRECTIONS: Technology in Special Education, DREAMMS for Kids, Inc., 2763 Tasha Drive, Clearwater, FL 34621-1223 Finding Assistive Technology, Smiling Interface, PO Box 27892, Church Street Station, New York, NY 10008-2792 HKNC-TAC News, Technical Assistance Center, 111 Middle Neck Rd., Sands Point, NY 11050-1299 ONLine, West Virginia Rehabilitation Research & Training Center, Division of Rehabilitation Services, State Capitol Complex, PO Box 50890, Charleston, WV 25305 TAM Newsletter, Technology & Media Division, The Council for Exceptional Children, Attn: Division Chair, 1920 Association Dr., Reston, VA 20191-1589 Tapping Technology, Box 10, One Market Center, 300 W. Lexington Street, Baltimore, MD 21201 TECHTALK, Illinois Assistive Technology Project, 528 South Fifth Street, Suite 100, Springfield, IL 62701 USAAC Newsletter, United States Society for Augmentative & Alternative Communication, c/o 17210 Oak St., Fountain Valley, CA 92708-3408 VIDEOS: AbleNet Inc., 1081 10th Ave., S.E., Minneapolis, MN 55414. Growing Up Capable: Living & Learning with Simple-to-Use Technology American Occupational Therapy Association, Inc., (AOTA), Audiovisual Department, 1383 Piccard Drive, PO Box 1725, Rockville, MD 20849-1725. Applications of Technology for the Disabled American Speech-Language-Hearing Association (ASHA), 10801 Rockville Pike, Rockville, MD 20852. Assistive Technology: We Can Do It! The ARC, National Headquarters, PO Box 1047, Arlington, TX 76004. Eye on the Horizon Voices of the Future Communication Skill Builders, 3830 E. Bellevue, PO Box 42050- CS4, Tuscon, AZ 85733. The Early Communication Process Using Microswitch Technology Films for the Humanities & Sciences, PO Box 2053, Princeton, NJ 08543-2053. Crossing the Silence Barrier Laurie Collyer, 966 Dolores Street #5, San Francisco, CA 94110. THANH: A Documentary Lawren Productions, Inc., PO Box 666, Mendocino, CA 95460. To Say I Am National Center to Improve Practice in Special Education, Education Development Center, Inc., 55 Chapel St., Newton, MA 02158-1060. NCIP Profiles Series: Jeff with Expression: Writing with Word Prediction Software; Multimedia & More: Help for Students with Learning Disabilities; Telling Tales in ASL & English: Reading, Writing, & Videotapes; "Write" Tools for Angie: Technology for Students Who Are Visually Impaired National Lekotec Center, 2100 Ridge Ave., Evanston, IL 60201. Effective Methods for Using Computers with Children with Special Needs ORGANIZATIONS: Accent on Information PO Box 700 Bloomington, IL 61702 309/378-2961 (V); 309/378-4420 (fax) Access Unlimited 3535 Briarpark Dr., Ste. 102 Houston, TX 77042-5235 713/781-7441 (V); 800/848-0311; 713/781-3550 (fax) ADAMLAB 33500 Van Born Rd. Wayne, MI 48184 313/467-1415 (V); 313/326-2610 (fax) Alliance for Public Technology 901 15th Street NW, Suite 230 Washington, DC 20005 202-408-1403 (V) Center for Applied Special Technology (CAST) 39 Cross St. Peabody, MA 01960 508/531-8555 (V); 508/531-0192 (fax) Center for Computer Assistance to the Disabled (C-CAD) 1950 Stemmons Frwy., Ste. 4041 Dallas, TX 75207-4041 214/746-4217 (V) Closing The Gap, Inc. PO Box 68 Henderson, MN 56044 612/248-3294 (V); 612/248-3810 (fax) Computer Foundation for Handicapped Children 5871 S.W. Bonita Rd. Lake Oswego, OR 97035 503/624-9196 (V) CSUN Center on Disabilities California State University at Northridge 18111 Nordhoff St. Northridge, CA 91330-8340 818/885-2869 (V); 818/885-4929 (fax) Direct Link for the disABLED, Inc. PO Box 1036 Solvang, CA 93464 805/688-1603 (V); 805/686-5285 (fax) DRAGnet 119 N. 4th St. Minneapolis, MN 55401 612/338-2535 (V) EdLINC PO Box 14325 Columbus, OH 43214 614/793-0021 (V); 800/736-1405 International Society for Technology in Education University of Oregon 1787 Agate Street Eugene, OR 97403-9905 National Council on Disability 1331 F St., NW, Ste. 1050 Washington, DC 20004-1107 202/272-2004 (V); 202/272-2022 (fax) National Rehabilitation Information Center (NARIC) 8455 Colesville Rd., Ste. 935 Silver Spring, MD 20910-3319 800/346-2742 (V/TTY); 301/587-1967 (fax) ProMatura 428 N. Lamar Oxford, MS 38655 601/234-0158 (V); 601/234-0288 (fax) RESNA 1700 N. Moore St., Ste. 1540 Arlington, VA 22209-1903 703/524-6686 (V); 703/524-6639 (TTY) Technology for Language and Learning PO Box 327 East Rockaway, NY 11518-0327 516/625-4550 (V); 516/621-3321 (fax) Trace Research and Development Center Rm. S-151 Waisman Ctr., Univ. of Wisconsin 1500 Highland Ave. Madison, WI 53705-2280 608/262-6966 (V); 608/263/5408 (TTY) INTERNET RESOURCES: Listservs: IBM Screen Reader Subscription address: listserv@vm1.nodak.edu Post messages to: ibm-srt@vm1.nodak.edu ADAPT-L Adaptive technology and libraries Subscription address: listserv@american.edu Post messages to: adapt-l@american.edu ASTER-L AsTer (Audio System for Technical Reading) Subscription address: listproc@u.washington.edu Post messages to: aster-l@u.washington.edu EASI Equal access to software and information Subscription address: listserv@sjuvm.stjohns.edu Post messages to: easi@sjuvm.stjohns.edu GW-INFO GW Micro products Subscription address: listserv@gwmicro.com Post messages to: gw-info@gwmicro.com IBM-SRT ITD-TOC Information and Technology for the Disabled Journal Subscription address: listserv@sjuvm.stjohns.edu For table of contents and abstracts only, send e-mail to the same addresswith the message "SUB TOC-ITD yourfirstname yourlastname" VAT Vendors of adaptive technology Subscription address: listserv@kramden.phaedrv.on.ca Post messages to: vat@kramden.phaedrv.on.ca WAYCOOL-L Student reviews ofsoftware Subscription address: listserv@UConnvm.UConn.Edu Post messages to: waycool-l@UConnvm.UConn.Edu Internet sites: Able Informer URL: http://www.sasquatch.com:80/ableinfo/ Apple's Disability Solutions URL: http://www.apple.com/disability/welcome.html Archimedes Project (design issues for tomorrow's technology) URL: http://www.cs.rulimburg.nl/~wiesman/archimedes Breaking New Ground Resource Center URL: http://pasture.ecn.purdue.edu/~agenhtml/bng/ Cornucopia of Disability Information URL: gopher://val-dor.cc.buffalo.edu Disability Access URL: http://www.pavilion.co.uk:80/CommonRoom/ DisabilitiesAccess/ disABILITY Resource on the Internet URL: http://www.eskimo.com/~jlubin/disabled.html Disability Resources (Evan Kemp Associates) URL: http://disability.com DREAMMS for Kids, Inc. URL: http://users.aol.com/dreamms/main.html EASI, Access to Information for Persons with Disabilities URL: gopher:// sjuvm.stjohns.edu:70/11/disabled/easi URL: http://www.rit.edu:80/~easi/ HandsNet URL: http://www.handsnet.org/handsnet/index.html IBM Special Needs Solutions URL: http://www.austin.ibm.com/pspinfo/snshome.html Job Accommodation Network URL: http://janweb.icdi.wvu.edu National Center to Improve Practice (NCIP) in Special Education Through Technology, Media, and MaterialsURL: http://www.edc.org/FSC/NCIP National Rehabilitation Information Center (NARIC) URL: http://www.cais.net/naric/home.html NCSA Mosaic disability access page URL: http://bucky.aa.uic.edu/ Project Link URL: http://cosmos.ot/buffalo/edu RESNA Technical Assistance Project URL: http://www.resna.org/resna/hometa1.htm Resources for Disabled Index URL: http://www.aip.org/aip/urls/disable.html Speech Recognition Resources on the Web URL: http://146.230.32.40/homes/duncan/speech.html Trace Research and Development Center URL: http://www.trace.wisc.edu UCPA Assistive Technology Funding and Systems Change Project URL: http://www.assisttech.com/atfsc.html WebABLE URL: http://www.webable.com/ This bibliography was compiled by Janet Drill and BarbaraSorenson. ERIC DIGESTS are in the public domain and may be freelyreproduced and disseminated. This publication was prepared with funding from the Office ofEducational Research and Improvement, U.S. Department ofEducation, under contract no. RR93002005. Any opinions expressedin this report do not necessarily reflect the positions orpolicies of OERI or the Department of Education. Top of PageBack to ERIC MenuBack to CEC Home Page copyright © 1996 ERIC Clearinghouse on Disabilities and Gifted Education Send updates to: ericec@cec.sped.org URL: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm WT02-B20-21IA001-000011-B022-60http://www.cec.sped.org:80/minibibs/gtld-r.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101073853 text/html 17087HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 07:39:01 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 19-Dec-96 21:46:00 GMTContent-length: 16893Content-type: text/html GIFTED/LEARNING DISABILITIES-READINGS GIFTED/LEARNING DISABILITIES-READINGS THE ERIC CLEARINGHOUSE ON DISABILITIES AND GIFTED EDUCATION(ERIC EC) The Council for Exceptional Children 1920 Association Drive Reston, VA 20191 Toll Free: 1-800-328-0272 TTY: 703-264-9449 E-mail: ericec@cec.sped.org Internet: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm GIFTED STUDENTS WITH LEARNING DISABILITIES-SELECTEDREADINGS October 1991 Sandra L. Berger Angevine, C. (1989). Give the learning disabled child the gift of time-academic learning time. Academic Therapy, 24(5), 607-610. Provides a list of five specific strategies to promote high academic learning and student success. Armstrong, T. (1987). In their own way: Discovering and encouraging your child's personal learning style. Los Angeles CA: St. Martin's Press. A former teacher and learning disabilities specialist describes learning differences and provides suggestions. Barton, J., & Starnes, W. (1989). Identifying distinguishing characteristics ofgifted and talented/learning disabled students. Roeper Review, 12(1), 23-29. Discusses the use of the WISC-R subtest scores as a means of identifying gifted children with learning disabilities. The extent and nature of differences amongsubgroups on the WISC-R can reflect the kind and severity of learning disability. Baum, S. (1984). Recognizing special talents in learning disabled students. Teaching Exceptional Children, 16(2), 92-98. Discusses approaches toworking with learning disabled students who are also gifted, talented, or creative. An example of a secondary student with special abilities in photography is used. Baum, S. (1984). Meeting the needs of learning disabled gifted students. Roeper Review, 7(1), 16-19. Provides general information on G/LDchildren and discusses a rationale for providing enrichment activities within theframework of the gifted program. Program ideas using Renzulli's Enrichment TriadModel are suggested as well as identification strategies. Baum, S. (1988). An enrichment program for gifted learning disabled students. Gifted Child Quarterly, 32(1), 226-230. Describes a pilot programdeveloped for G/LD students based on the Enrichment Triad Model. Baum describesprocedures for identifying program participants, program activities, and programevaluation results. Baum, S. & Owen, S. (1988). High ability/learning disabled students: How are they different? Gifted Child Quarterly, 32(3), 321-325. Reports characteristics that distinguish high ability/LD students from LD students with average cognitive abilities. Conclusions indicate that high ability/LD students were more creative than average LD students, but cause the most classroom disturbances and perceive themselves as less efficacious in academic tasks. Boodoo, G. (1989). A survey of procedures used for identifying gifted learning disabled children. Gifted Child Quarterly, 33(3), 110-114. The results ofthis study indicate that not many gifted learning disabled children are identified orserved in the educational setting. A strategy is suggested for identifying G/LDchildren in which the classroom teacher plays a major role. Bos, C. (1983). Comprehensive monitoring. The Pointer, 27(2). Presents strategies to improve reading comprehension by teaching LD students tosearch actively for information and concepts. Brown-Mizuno, C. (1990). TEACHING Exceptional Children, 23(1) 10-12. Success strategies for learners who are learning disabled as well asgifted. Coleman, M. R. (Ed.) 1994. Journal of Secondary Gifted Education. Special issue: Serving Gifted Students with Learning Disabilities. Cordell, A., & Cannon, T. (1985). Gifted kids can't always spell. Academic Therapy, 21(2), 143-152. Briefly discusses characteristics of the gifted learning disabled child, possible patterns on tests, and strategies for instruction. Daniels, P. (1983). Teaching the gifted learning disabled child. Rockville, MD:Aspen Press. Designed for educators and often technical. Fox, L. H., Brody, L., & Tobin, D. (Eds.) (1983). Learning disabledgifted children: Identification and programming. Seventeen authors contributed to this book, the result of a three-year research study by Johns Hopkins University. Itincludes concepts and characteristics, identification problems and practices, and adiscussion of some of the difficulties encountered when selecting learning disabledchildren for gifted programs. Getting LD Students Ready for College. (ND). A useful fact sheet. Washington, D.C.: American Council on Education, HEATH Resource Center. Gunderson, C., Maesch, C., & Rees, J. (Fall, 1987). Thegifted/learning disabled student. Gifted Child Quarterly, 31(4), 158-160. Discusses thecharacteristics and identification of G/LD students. Outlines procedures to help ensure appropriate identification. Hansford, S. (1987). Intellectually gifted learning disabled students: A special study. Reston, VA: Council for Exceptional Children. This project investigated characteristics and implications for educational programming. Conclusions indicated that successful G/LD students overcome deficits by compensating with their strengths, and alter information processing by developing strategies using preferred performance modes. How to Choose a College: Guide for the Student with a Disability. (ND). A useful fact sheet. Washington, D.C.: American Council on Education, HEATH Resource Center. Jacobsen, V. (1984). The gifted/learning dsabled. (ED254988). This paper discusses characteristics, identification, and programming issues. Also describes problems encountered in providing appropriate services. Klausmeier, K. (1987). Identification of gifted learners: A national survey ofassessment practices and training needs of school psychologists. Gifted Child Quarterly, 31(3), 135-137. A survey of 131 school psychologists foundthat most used the WISC-R to identify G/LD students. Landrum, T. (1989). Gifted and learning disabled students: Practical considerations for teachers. Academic Therapy, 24(5), 533-544. Teachers must remain open to the possibility that G/LD students may be served in avariety of settings. Recommendations for LD, gifted, and regular classroom teachers included. Maker, C. J. (1977). Providing programs for the gifted handicapped. Reston, VA: Council for Exceptional Children. Mangrum, C., & Strichart, S. (Eds) (1988). Peterson's guide to colleges with programs for learning-disabled students. Princeton, NH: Peterson's Guides. Lists colleges with comprehensive LD programs. Offers suggestions for students applying to college. Addresses, telephone numbers, and names of contact personsin the LD field are listed. Minner, S. (1990). Teacher evaluations of case descriptions of LD Gifted children. Gifted Children Quarterly, 34(1), 37-39. Results of this research indicated that teachers of gifted children were significantly influenced by the presence of the educational label LD and the social class of the student. Prihoda, J., Bieber, T., Kay, C., Kerkstra, P., & Ratcliff, J. (Eds.) (1988). Community colleges and students with disabilities. Washington, D.C.: American Council on Education, HEATH Resource Center. Lists services and programs for disabled students at more than 650 U.S. community, technical, and junior colleges. Perry, S. (July, 1990). The hidden gifted learner. Understanding Our Gifted, p.3. Published by Open Space Communications. Rosner, S. (1985). Special twice: Guidelines for developing programs for gifted children with specific learning disabilities. Gifted Child Today, 38, 55-58. Scheiber, B., & Talpers, J. (1987). Unlocking potential. Bethesda, MD: Adler and Adler. A step-by-step guide to college and other choices for learning-disabled people. This book offers advice on everything from diagnosis and vocational assessments to specific college programs designed to accommodate the learning-disabled student and to provide them with study skills. Schulman, S. (Feb., 1986). Facing the invisible handicap. Psychology Today, 58-64. Schwartz, S., & MacArthur, C. (1990). They all have something to say: Helping learning disabled students write. Academic Therapy, 25(4), 459-470. Presents a process approach to writing instruction that emphasizes communication and problem solving through the use of a writers' workshop. Silver, L. (1984). The misunderstood child: A guide for parents of learning disabled children. New York: McGraw-Hill. An easy-to-read basic and informative book with a focus on LD, yet relevant to gifted L/D. Silverman, L. (1989). The visual-spatial learner. Preventing School Failure, 34(1), 15-20. The strengths and limitations of gifted students who are visual-spatial learners indicate that these students may have difficulty in school. Article provides successful adaptive techniques. Silverman, L. (1989). Invisible gifts, invisible handicaps. Roeper Review, 12(1), 37-42. Reviews the literature on characteristics,including WISC-R discrepancies, offers guidelines for identification, and provides successful teaching strategies. Suter, D., & Wolf, J. (1987). Issues in the identification and programming of the gifted/learning disabled child. Journal for the Education of the Gifted, 10(3), 227-237. Many G/LD children who are characterized by superior intellectual ability and difficulty in mastering basic skills are not identifiedto receive special services for either exceptionality. A multidimensional identification approach, based on a student's individual needs, is necessary forcomprehensive assessment and successful programing. Vail, P. (1987). Smart kids with school problems. New York: E. P. Dutton. This book emphasizes the traits of gifted students and the learning styles that set gifted/learning disabled students apart. Includes an annotated bibliographyand resources. VanTassel-Baska, J. (1991). Serving the disabled gifted through educational collaboration. Journal for the Education of the Gifted, 14(3), 246-266. The need for collaborative interventions to meet the needs of gofted learners with disabilities is discussed and a collaborative/consultation model is described. Vaughn, S. (1989). Gifted learning disabilities: Is it such a bright idea? Learning Disabilities Focus, 4(2), 123-126. Review of research in thefield: shows how little is currently known and indicates areas for future work. West, T. (1991). In the mind's eye: Visual thinkers, gifted people with learning difficulties, computer images, and the ironies of creativity. Buffalo:Prometheus. West provides an overview of neurological research,summarizes current knowledge about such learning difficulties as dyslexia, anddemonstrates how certain traits that are problematic in one context can be a greatadvantage in another. Whitmore, J. (1982). Recognizing and developing hidden giftedness. The Elementary School Journal, 82(3), 274-283. Explores myths aboutgiftedness that hinder the identification of gifted L/D children. Whitmore, J., & Maker, C. J. (1985). Intellectual giftedness among disabled persons. Rockville, MD: Aspen Press. One chapter discusses giftedstudents and learning disabilities. Case studies are included. Williams, K. (1988). The learning-disabled gifted: An unmet challenge. G/C/T, 11(3), 17-18. This article outlines learning patterns that canidentify G/LD students and discusses the importance of early diagnosis as well as students' participation in special programs. Offers recommendations for helpingstudents succeed. Wolf, J., & Gygi, J. (1981). Learning disabled and gifted: Success or failure? Journal for the Education of the Gifted, 4(3), 204. Well-stateddefinitions of gifted/LD qualities with ideas about identification and programming. COMPUTER SOFTWARE: WritePro. The WritePro Corporation, 43 Linden Circle, Scarborough, NY 10510. This creative writing package includes four lessons in workbook format on two disks, assisting you in creating and sticking with your own story as you proceedthrough the exercises. Takes you step-by-step through the development of character and plot and you can rewrite the material as often as you like before you go on to the next exercise. You can even compare new versions of your storywith the original, selecting the best material out of both versions and creatinga new, even better, story. RESOURCES: The following agencies provide information and resources to parents, teachers, counselors, and other who are interested in the special needs of students who are gifted and have disabilities. THE ERIC CLEARINGHOUSE ON DISABILITIES AND GIFTED EDUCATION,The Council for Exceptional Children, 1920 Association Drive, Reston, VA 22091,1-800-328-0272. The ERIC Clearinghouse gathers and disseminates educational information on all disabilities and the gifted across all age levels. The Clearinghouse abstracts and indexes the special education literature included in the computerized ERIC database and its monthly print indexes Resources in Education and Current Index to Journals in Education. Services include responses to written, phone, and electronic information requests, ERIC workshops and technical assistance, computer searches of the ERIC and Exceptional Child Education Resources (ECER) databases, and analyses of current trends and issues. HEATH HIGHER EDUCATION & ADULT TRAINING FOR PEOPLE WITHHANDICAPS, American Council of Education, One Dupont Circle, Washington, DC20013, 202/939-9320 or 800/544-3284. HEATH collects anddisseminates information on educational support services, policies and procedures,adaptations and opportunities on American campuses, vocational-technical schools,adult education programs, independent living centers, transition, and otherpost-secondary training situations. HEATH maintains a toll-free number, providessingle copies of materials free of charge, and encourages duplication and furtherdissemination. NATIONAL INFORMATION CENTER FOR HANDICAPPED CHILDREN ANDYOUTH (NICHCY), PO Box 1492, Washington, DC 20013, 1-800-695-0285. NICHCY collects and shares information and ideas that are helpful tochildren and youth with handicaps and the people who care for and about them. TheCenter answers questions, links people with others who share common concerns,provides technical assistance, publishes information products, and uses visual media toinform. Essentially, NICHCY helps information flow between the people who have itand those who need it. This ERIC publication is in the public domain and may be freely reproduced anddisseminated. This publication was prepared with funding from the Office of Educational Research and Improvement, U.S. Department of Education, under contract no. RR93002005. The opinions expressed in this report do not necessarily reflect the positions or policies of OERI or the Department of Education. Top of PageBack to ERIC MenuBack to CEC Home Page copyright © 1996 ERIC Clearinghouse on Disabilities and Gifted Education Send updates to: ericec@cec.sped.org URL: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm WT02-B20-22IA001-000011-B022-77http://www.cec.sped.org:80/minibibs/inclus-r.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101073902 text/html 12182HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 07:39:11 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 19-Dec-96 20:40:00 GMTContent-length: 11988Content-type: text/html INCLUSION-READINGS INCLUSION-READINGS THE ERIC CLEARINGHOUSE ON DISABILITIES AND GIFTED EDUCATION(ERIC EC) The Council for Exceptional Children 1920 Association Drive Reston, VA 20191 Toll Free: 1-800-328-0272 TTY: 703-264-9449 E-mail: ericec@cec.sped.org Internet: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm INCLUDING STUDENTS WITH DISABILITIES--MINIBIBLIOGRAPHY(E521.1) July 1993 References identified with an ED (ERIC document) number are cited in the ERICdatabase. Documents are available in ERIC microfiche collections at more than 1,000locations worldwide. Documents can also be ordered through EDRS: (800) 443-ERIC. References with an EJ (ERIC journal) number are available through the originatingjournal, interlibrary loan services, or article reproduction clearinghouses: UMI (800) 732-0616; or ISI (800) 523-1850. ED 307 792. The Yoke of Special Education: How to Break It. Alan Gartnerand Dorothy Kerner Lipsky. 1989. 40 pp. Available from the National Center onEducation and the Economy, 39 State Street, Suite 500, Rochester, NY 14614. (716)546-7620. Discusses the legal background of special education and its relationship to regulareducation, strategies for keeping students in regular classes, themes for school reform(student outcomes, site-based decision-making, incentives, sanctions, improvedmeasures, and improved productivity) and rights and assumptions about schoolreform. Curriculum Considerations in Inclusive Classrooms. Susan Stainback andWilliam Stainback. 1991. Paul H. Brookes Publishing Company, Baltimore,MD. This book focuses on how the curriculum can be designed, adapted, and delivered ininclusive general education classrooms. It discusses strategies for developing inclusiveclassrooms and schools as well as curriculum adaptation and delivery. This bookcomplements an earlier publication by the same authors, entitled Support Networks forInclusive Schools: Interdependent Integrated Education. ED 341 213. Children with Exceptional Needs in Regular Classrooms. Libby G.Cohen, Ed. 1992. 185 pp. This book contains nine papers reporting research findings and preferred instructionalstrategies for children with special needs. The topics include characteristics of childrenwith special needs, accommodation in the regular classroom, effective instructionalstrategies, legal requirements, and evaluation methods. ED 338 638. Strategies for Full Inclusion. Jennifer York and others. 1989. 133 pp. These seven papers discuss practical strategies and examples for designing andimplementing inclusive educational programs for students with severe disabilities inMinnesota Public Schools. It addresses middle school education, a team approach toprogram development, and the IEP process, among other topics. ED 348 806. Inclusion. U.S. Office of Special Education and RehabilitativeServices. 1992. OSERS News in Print, IV, 4. 39 pp. Available free from OSERS, U.S.Department of Education, Room 3129, Switzer Building, 330 C St., SW, Washington,DC 20202-2524. Includes a message on inclusion from the U.S. Assistant Secretary for SpecialEducation and Rehabilitative Services and articles on aspects of inclusion, such aspreschool, closing sheltered workshops, and building friendships. ED 329 081. Integrated Education. Jennifer York and Terri Vandercook, Eds. Impact, (Feature Issue)1,2. Winter, 1988. 21 pp. Provides various perspectives on a number of integrated education topics, includingsuccessful integration practices and strategies, the changing roles of teachers, theappropriate role of research and history and future of integrated education, and therealization of dreams of life in the mainstream for children with severe disabilities. ED 324 862. Report of the National Task Force on the Integration of HearingImpaired Students. Judith Raskin. 1990. 142 pp. Recommendations of a task force on the integration of hearing impaired students,focusing on procedures for early identification, standards for educational programs,staff development and training, and program quality indicators. ED 322 665. Total Integration: Young Children Learning Together. A ThreeYear Research Study of the CTL Preschool Program, Center for Teaching andLearning, University of North Dakota. Lynne A. Rocklage and Bjorn Benson, Eds. 1990. 224 pp. This study investigated the effects of total integration on manifest behavior and skilldevelopment of young children with and without disabilities. Results indicatednumerous benefits in skill gains and social integration for all participants andenthusiasm from their families. ED 319 173. Guidelines for Integration of Learners with Severe Handicaps. Derived from experiences of Indiana's Statewide Systems Change Project. 1989. 135pp. This project identified best educational practices and implemented them within adelivery system involving an agency for preschoolers with severe handicaps, a specialeducation program for elementary-aged learners, and a regular integrated educationprogram. Guidelines for systems change are presented. ED 311 229. Increasing Vocational Options for Students with LearningHandicaps: A Practical Guide. Eva Eagle and others. 989. 52 pp. Based on a study of 30 exemplary programs in six states, this guide addressesvocational education for students with mild learning handicaps in mainstream vocationalclassrooms. It provides recommendations by role for vocational education teachers,vocational education administrators, special education teachers, professional supportstaff, and principals and district administrators. ED 286 079. Handbook on Mainstreaming Handicapped Students in VocationalEducation. Second Edition. James B. Hamilton. 1987. 33 pp. Intended to assist vocational education teachers who are mainstreaming students withdisabilities, this handbook describes the concept of a continuum of services, anddiscusses vocational evaluation services, curriculum adaptation, equipmentmodification, alternative testing, and alternative grading. EJ 439 555. Educating Students with Severe Disabilities in Their NeighborhoodSchools: The Utah Elementary Integration Model. Andrea McDonnell and others. Remedial and Special Education, 12, 6. November/December, 1991. 11 pp. The Utah Elementary Integration Model places students with severe disabilities inneighborhood schools that provide supported integration in age-appropriate grade-levelhomerooms, peer-referenced and community-referenced curriculum, a transdisciplinaryteam approach, and data-based training in natural settings. Twenty-seven participantsachieved significant adaptive behavior gains over a school year. ED 343 301. Inclusive Education (Preschool-1st grade and K-12). MaryMcEvoy and Terri Vandercook, Eds. Impact, (Feature Issue), 4,#2-3. Summer,1991-Fall, 1992. 41 pp. The articles in these two theme issues discuss inclusive education at the preschool tofirst grade level and at the kindergarten to grade 12 level. They present different waysthat families and professionals include children with and without disabilities ineducational and child care settings, with the common element of their success comingthrough collaboration among many people and agencies. Articles address training, theadministrator's perspective, families' experiences with inclusive education, transition tointegrated programs, and shared agendas for special and general education, amongother topics. Lists of suggested readings on inclusive learning environments areincluded. CEC PUBLICATIONS ED 350 774. Issues and Options in Restructuring Schools and SpecialEducation Programs. Margaret J. McLaughlin and Sandra Hopfengartner Warren. 1992. 81 pp. Input was gathered from educational administrators and state policy makers to identifyissues related to restructuring and programs for children with disabilities. The issuesand options for addressing them are summarized within five critical areas ofrestructuring local schools: developing a clear vision and mission that include allstudents; establishing a system of accountability; creating an organization that supportsthe mission of restructuring; changing what schools teach and how they teach it; andcreating supports for staff development and staff renewal. ED 333 658. Preparing to Integrate Students with Behavioral Disorders. CECMini-Library. Robert A. Gable and others. 1991. 34 pp. Reviews the literature and offers guidelines to assist in the integration of students withbehavioral disorders in mainstream settings and in the delivery of appropriateinstructional services. One section addresses the concerns of principals,administrators, and program coordinators, and another addresses the concerns ofteachers. CASE Future Agenda for Special Education: Creating a Unified EducationSystem. Council of Administrators of Special Education, Inc. 1993. 38 pp. Discusses the processes for developing an inclusive community and administrativeissues in inclusive school change. Topics include stakeholder responsibility, systems ofaccountability, personnel preparation and certification, funding, staff development, andcommunity services. Two Faces Of Inclusion: The Concept and the Practice. Council ofAdministrators of Special Education, Inc. 1993. This video combines the thoughts of leading scholars with the actions and advice ofpracticing teachers, principals, parents, and leading special education administrators. In an informal conversation format, the narrator talks about what inclusion is and is not. The tape gets to the heart of the inclusion debate and suggests how to start andmaintain the momentum to change teaching and learning for all students. Facing Inclusion Together. Council of Administrators of Special Education, Inc. 1993. This video depicts collaboration and the co-teaching of professionals from regular andspecial education. Strategies appropriate for elementary, middle school, and highschool are presented. Specific attention is given to negotiating new relationshipsbetween teachers, the shared ownership of classrooms, and the issues teachers andrelated service staff have overcome in supporting all students in their schools. Note: An ERIC digest on this topic, Including Students with Disabilities in GeneralEducation Classrooms, is also available. ERIC Digests are in the public domain and may be freely reproduced anddisseminated. This publication was prepared with funding from the Office of Educational Researchand Improvement, U.S. Department of Education, under contract no. RI88062007. Theopinions expressed in this report do not necessarily reflect the positions or policies ofOERI or the Department of Education. Top of PageBack to ERIC MenuBack to CEC Home Page copyright © 1996 ERIC Clearinghouse on Disabilities and Gifted Education Send updates to: ericec@cec.sped.org URL: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm WT02-B20-23IA001-000011-B022-90http://www.cec.sped.org:80/minibibs/gtref-r.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101073912 text/html 4540HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 07:39:20 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 19-Dec-96 20:26:00 GMTContent-length: 4347Content-type: text/html GT ED REFORM-READINGS GIFTED EDUCATION REFORM-READINGS THE ERIC CLEARINGHOUSE ON DISABILITIES AND GIFTED EDUCATION(ERIC EC) The Council for Exceptional Children 1920 Association Drive Reston, VA 20191 Toll Free: 1-800-328-0272 TTY: 703-264-9449 E-mail: ericec@cec.sped.org Internet: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm GIFTED STUDENTS AND EDUCATIONAL REFORM-SELECTED READINGS(E525bib) June 1994 Dettmer, P. (1993). Gifted Education: Window of Opportunity. Gifted Child Quarterly,37(2) 92-94. Ford, D. Y. & Harris, J., III. (1993). Educational Reform and the Focus on GiftedAfrican-American Students. Roeper Review, 15(4) 200-204. Frank, R. (Mar 1992). School Restructuring: Impact on Attitudes, Advocacy, andEducational Opportunities for Gifted and Talented Students. In: Challenges in GiftedEducation: Developing Potential and Investing in Knowledge for the 21st Century. Columbus: Ohio State Dept. of Education. Gallagher, J. J. (1988). National Agenda for Educating Gifted Students: Statement ofPriorities. Exceptional Children, 55(2), 107-14. Gallagher, J. J. (1991). Educational Reform, Values, and Gifted Students. GiftedChild Quarterly, 35(1) 12-19. Gallagher, J. J. (Mar 1992). Gifted Students and Educational Reform. In: Challenges inGifted Education: Developing Potential and Investing in Knowledge for the 21stCentury. Columbus: Ohio State Dept. of Education. Gifted Students and Educational Reform: A Topical Bibliography (Jan.1994). Reston,VA: The Courncil for Exceptional Children. (Product #C586R) Jackson, N. E. (1993). Moving into the Mainstream? Reflections on the Study ofGiftedness. Gifted Child Quarterly, 37(1), 46-50. Renzulli, J. S. & Reis, S. M. (1991). The Reform Movement and the Quiet Crisis inGifted Education. Gifted Child Quarterly, 35(1) 26-35. Ross, P. (Fall 1991). Advocacy for Gifted Programs in the New Educational Climate.Gifted Child Quarterly, 35(4) 173-76. Ross, P., et.al. (1993). National Excellence: A Case for Developing America's Talent. Office of Educational Research and Improvement (ED), Washington, DC. Programs forthe Improvement of Practice. Available from: U. S. Government Printing office,Superintendent of Documents, P. O. Box 371954, Pittsburgh, PA 15250-7954; (202)783-3238. Order number 065-000-00603. Stevens, M. (Mar 1992). School Reform and Restructuring: Relationship to GiftedEducation. In: Challenges in Gifted Education: Developing Potential and Investing inKnowledge for the 21st Century. Columbus: Ohio State Dept. of Education. Tomlinson, C., & Callahan, C. (1992). Contributions of Gifted Education to GeneralEducation in a Time of Change. Gifted Child Quarterly, 36(4), 813-189. Treffinger, D. J. (1991). School Reform and Gifted Education-Opportunities and Issues. Gifted Child Quarterly, 35(1) 6-11. VanTassel-Baska, J. (1991). Gifted Education in the Balance: Building Relationshipswith General Education. Gifted Child Quarterly, 35(1) 20-25. Van Tassel-Baska, J. (1993). Linking Curriculum Development for the Gifted to SchoolReform and Restructuring. GCT,16(4), 34-37. This ERIC publication is in the public domain and may be freely reproduced anddisseminated. This publication was prepared with funding from the Office of Educational Research and Improvement, U.S. Department of Education, under contract no. RR93002005. The opinions expressed in this report do not necessarily reflect the positions or policies of OERI or the Department of Education. Top of PageBack to ERIC MenuBack to CEC Home Page copyright © 1996 ERIC Clearinghouse on Disabilities and Gifted Education Send updates to: ericec@cec.sped.org URL: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm WT02-B20-24IA001-000011-B022-103http://www.cec.sped.org:80/minibibs/somo-edu.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101073921 text/html 5346HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 07:39:29 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 19-Dec-96 20:21:00 GMTContent-length: 5153Content-type: text/html  GIFTED; SOCIAL/EMOTIONAL NEEDS-READINGS SOCIAL AND EMOTIONAL NEEDS OF GIFTED CHILDREN-SELECTEDREADINGS FOR EDUCATORS THE ERIC CLEARINGHOUSE ON DISABILITIES AND GIFTED EDUCATION(ERIC EC) The Council for Exceptional Children 1920 Association Drive Reston, VA 20191 Toll Free: 1-800-328-0272 TTY: 703-264-9449 E-mail: ericec@cec.sped.org Internet: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm SOCIAL EMOTIONAL NEEDS OF GIFTED CHILDREN-SELECTED READINGSFOR EDUCATORS (E527bib) September 1993 Adderholt-Elliot, M.(1987). Perfectionism: What's bad about being too good? Minneapolis: Free Spirit Publishing. Amabile, T. M. (1989). Growing up creative: Nurturing a lifetime of creativity. New York: Crown. Austin, A. B., & Draper, D. C. (1981). Peer relationships of the academicallygifted: A review. Gifted Child Quarterly, 25. 129-133. Baum, S. M., Owen, S. V., Dixon, J. P. (1991). To be gifted and learningdisabled: From identification to practical intervention strategies. Mansfield Center, CT:Creative learning Press. Betts, G. T., & Neihart, M. (1985). Eight effective activities to enhance theemotional and social development of the gifted and talented. Roeper Review, 8,18-23. Colangelo, N., & David, G. A. (1991). A handbook of gifted education. Needham Heights, MA: Allyn & Bacon. Colangelo, N. (1985). Counseling needs of culturally diverse gifted students. Roeper Review, 8, 33-35. Cummings, R., & Fisher, G. (1991). The school survival guide for kids with LD(learning differences). Minneapolis: Free Spirit Publishing. Delisle, J. R. (1992). Guiding the social and emotional development of the giftedand talented. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, Inc. Frasier, M. (1981). Minority gifted children. In B. S. Miller & M. Price, (Eds.). The gifted child, the family and the community. New York: American Association forGifted Children. Gardner, H. (1983). Frames of mind: The theory of multiple intelligences. NewYork: Basic Books. Halsted, J. W. (1988). Guiding gifted readers from preschool to high school: Aguide for parents , teachers, librarians and counselors. Dayton, OH: Ohio PsychologyPublishing. Hipp, E. (1987). Fighting invisible tigers: A student guide to life in "the jungle". Minneapolis: Free Spirit Publishing. Kerr, B. (1991). A handbook for counseling the gifted and talented. Alexandria,VA: American Association for Counseling and Development. Kerr, B. A. (1985). Smart girls, gifted women. Columbus, OH: Ohio PsychologyPublishing. Reilly, J. M. (1992). Mentorship: The Essential Guide for Schools and Business. Dayton, OH: Ohio Psychology Press. Rimm, S. (1985, November-December). Identifying underachievement: Thecharacteristics approach. Gifted Child Today. 2-5. Schmitz, C. C., & Galbraith, J. (1985). Managing the social and emotional needsof the gifted. Minneapolis: Free Spirit Publishing. Silverman, L. (Ed.) (1993). Counseling the gifted and talented. Acomprehensive resource for counselors and teachers of gifted learners and graduatestudents in counseling psychology. Denver, CO: Love. Sternberg, R. (1986). Intelligence applied: Understanding and increasing yourintellectual skills. Fort Worth, TX: Harcourt, Brace, Jovanovich CollegePublishers. VanTassel-Baska, J., (Ed.).(1989). A practical guide to counseling the gifted in aschool setting. Reston, VA: Council for Exceptional Children. VanTassel-Baska, J. L., & Olszewski-Kubilius, P. (1989). Patterns of influenceon gifted learners: The home, the self, the school. New York: Teachers CollegePress. Watts, J. (1990). In search of perspective. Dayton, OH: Ohio PsychologyPublishing. Webb, J. T., Meckstroth, E. A., & Tolan, S. S. (1982). Guiding the gifted child. Columbus, OH: Ohio Psychology Publishing. Whitmore, J. R., & Maker, C. J. (1985). Intellectual giftedness in disabledpersons. Rockville, MD: Aspen Publications. This ERIC publication is in the public domain and may be freely reproduced anddisseminated. This publication was prepared with funding from the Office of Educational Research and Improvement, U.S. Department of Education, under contract no. RR93002005. The opinions expressed in this report do not necessarily reflect the positions or policies of OERI or the Department of Education. Top of PageBack to ERIC MenuBack to CEC Home Page copyright © 1996 ERIC Clearinghouse on Disabilities and Gifted Education Send updates to: ericec@cec.sped.org URL: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm WT02-B20-25IA001-000011-B022-120http://www.cec.sped.org:80/minibibs/somo-par.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101073929 text/html 4776HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 07:39:38 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 19-Dec-96 20:21:00 GMTContent-length: 4583Content-type: text/html  GIFTED; SOCIAL/EMOTIONAL NEEDS-READINGS SOCIAL AND EMOTIONAL NEEDS OF GIFTED CHILDREN-SELECTEDREADINGS FOR PARENTS THE ERIC CLEARINGHOUSE ON DISABILITIES AND GIFTED EDUCATION(ERIC EC) The Council for Exceptional Children 1920 Association Drive Reston, VA 20191 Toll Free: 1-800-328-0272 TTY: 703-264-9449 E-mail: ericec@cec.sped.org Internet: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm SOCIAL EMOTIONAL NEEDS OF GIFTED CHILDREN-SELECTED READINGSFOR PARENTS (E527bib) December 1993 Adderholt-Elliot, M.(1987). Perfectionism: What's bad about being too good? Minneapolis: Free Spirit Publishing. Alvino, J. and the editors of Gifted Child Monthly. (1989). Parent's guide toraising a gifted toddler: Recognizing and developing the potential of your child frombirth to five years. Boston: Little, Brown and Company. Austin, A. B., & Draper, D. C. (1981). Peer relationships of the academicallygifted: A review. Gifted Child Quarterly, 25. 129-133. Baum, S. M., Owen, S. V., Dixon, J. P. (1991). To be gifted and learningdisabled:From identification to practical intervention strategies. Mansfield Center, CT:Creative Learning Press. Berger, S. (1989). College planning for gifted students. Reston, VA: The Councilfor Exceptional Children. Bloom, B. S. (1985). Developing talent in young people. New York:Ballantine. Delisle, J., & Galbraith, J. (1987). The gifted kids survival guide II. Minneapolis: Free Spirit Publishing. Featherstone, B. D., & Reilly, J. M. (1990). College comes sooner than youthink! The essential guide for high school students and their families. Dayton, OH: Ohio Psychology Publishing. Galbraith, J. (1984). The gifted kids survival guide for ages 10 & under. Minneapolis: Free Spirit Publishing. Galbraith, J. (1983). The gifted kids survival guide for ages 11-18. Minneapolis:Free Spirit Publishing. Halsted, J. W. (1988). Guiding gifted readers from preschool to high school: Aguide for parents, teachers, librarians and counselors. Dayton, OH: Ohio PsychologyPublishing. Hipp, E. (1987). Fighting invisible tigers: A student guide to life in "the jungle". Minneapolis: Free Spirit Publishing. Kaufman, G., & Raphael, L. (1990). Stick up for yourself: Every kid's guide topersonal power and self-esteem. Minneapolis: Free Spirit Publishing. Kerr, B. A. (1985). Smart girls, gifted women. Columbus, OH: Ohio PsychologyPublishing. Knopper, D. (1994). Parent Education: Parents as Partners. Boulder, CO: Open Space Communications. Rimm, S. (1985, November-December). Identifying underachievement: Thecharacteristics approach. Gifted Child Today. 2-5. Saunders, J. (1986). Bringing out the best: A resource guide for parents ofyoung gifted children. Sebring, A. D. (1983, November). Parental factors in the social and emotionaladjustment of the gifted. Roeper Review. 97-99. Smutny, J. F., Veenker, K., & Veenker, S. (1989). Your gifted child: How torecognize and develop the special talents in your child from birth to age seven. NewYork: Facts On File. Walker, S. Y. (1991). The survival guide for parents of gifted kids: How tounderstand, live with and stick up for your gifted child. Minneapolis: Free SpiritPublishing. Webb, J. T., Meckstroth, E. A., & Tolan, S. S. (1982). Guiding the gifted child. Columbus, OH: Ohio Psychology Publishing. This ERIC publication is in the public domain and may be freely reproduced anddisseminated. This publication was prepared with funding from the Office of Educational Research and Improvement, U.S. Department of Education, under contract no. RR93002005. The opinions expressed in this report do not necessarily reflect the positions or policies of OERI or the Department of Education. Top of PageBack to ERIC MenuBack to CEC Home Page copyright © 1996 ERIC Clearinghouse on Disabilities and Gifted Education Send updates to: ericec@cec.sped.org URL: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm WT02-B20-26IA001-000011-B022-131http://www.cec.sped.org:80/minibibs/gtmid-r.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101073943 text/html 17096HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 07:39:52 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 19-Dec-96 20:29:00 GMTContent-length: 16902Content-type: text/html GIFTED ED AND MIDDLE SCHOOLS-READINGS GIFTED EDUCATION AND MIDDLE SCHOOLS-READINGS THE ERIC CLEARINGHOUSE ON DISABILITIES AND GIFTED EDUCATION(ERIC EC) The Council for Exceptional Children 1920 Association Drive Reston, VA 20191 Toll Free: 1-800-328-0272 TTY: 703-264-9449 E-mail: ericec@cec.sped.org Internet: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm GIFTED EDUCATION AND MIDDLE SCHOOLS-SELECTEDREADINGS (E535bib) August 1995 References identified with an ED (ERIC document) number are cited in the ERICdatabase. Documents are available in ERIC microfiche collections at more than 1,000locations worldwide. Documents can also be ordered through EDRS: (800) 443-ERIC. References with an EJ (ERIC journal) number are available through the originatingjournal, interlibrary loan services, or article reproduction clearinghouses: UMI (800) 732-0616; or ISI (800) 523-1850. EJ402383 EA524120 Braddock, J. H. II (Feb 1990). Tracking the Middle Grades: National Patterns ofGrouping for Instruction. Phi Delta Kappan, 71(6) 445-49. To shed light on appropriate grouping practices for early adolescents, this articlepresents current data on using between-class grouping and regrouping in Americanschools serving this population, based on the 1988 Johns Hopkins University middleschool survey. Findings show that learning opportunities in the middle grades remainhighly stratified. EJ441230 EC602522 Clinkenbeard, P. R. (1991). Unfair Expectations: A Pilot Study of Middle SchoolStudents' Comparisons of Gifted and Regular Classes. Journal for the Education of theGifted, 15(1) 56-63. Analysis of essays comparing experiences in gifted and regular classes written by sixthgrade gifted students found that many students felt teachers and peers outside thegifted class had unfair expectations of them. Other topics addressed by studentsincluded grading, group work, lack of acknowledgement for effort, treatment by peers,and teacher expectations. ED353728 EC301759 Coleman, M. R., & Gallagher, J. (Nov 1992). Middle School Survey Report: Impact onGifted Students. Chapel Hill, NC: Gifted Education Policy StudiesProgram. This study investigated attitudes of educators from both the middle school movementand gifted education, by means of a survey of 400 members of relevant professionalorganizations. The survey focused on six interest clusters: (1) grouping strategies, (2)identification issues, (3) curriculum modifications, (4) teacher preparation, (5) programevaluation, and (6) the emotional/social needs of gifted students. Opposing attitudeswere found for two clusters: first, grouping practices (with educators of the giftedfavoring ability grouping and middle school educators opposing such grouping) andsecond, social development (with only middle school educators seeing the "gifted" labelas creating social adjustment problems). On the remaining clusters the groups had thesame opinions but differed in how strongly they felt. Educators of gifted students feltmore strongly that the regular curriculum was not challenging enough for giftedstudents, that the programs for gifted students should address the emotional needs ofthe students, and that middle school teachers need more staff development in thecharacteristics and needs of gifted students. Educators of the gifted ranked their topthree priorities as curriculum, teacher preparation, and appropriate identification whilemiddle school educators selected curriculum, grouping practices, and teacherpreparation as most important. The survey form and 24 references are attached. EC608368 Elmore, R., & Zenus, V. (1994). Enhancing Social-Emotional Development of MiddleSchool Gifted Students. Roeper Review, 16(3), 182-185. Thirty sixth graders in accelerated mathematics classes were taught in cooperativelearning teams for 12 weeks. Students appeared to benefit academically, personally,and socially from the cooperative learning strategies used to teach mathematics,cooperative learning skills, effective communications, internal locus of control, andpersonal responsibility in decision-making. EJ402382 EA524119 Epstein, J. L. (Feb 1990). What Matters in the Middle Grades--Grade Span orPractices? Phi Delta Kappan, 71(6) 438-44. A 1988 Johns Hopkins University survey gathered data on organizational variationsamong schools containing grade seven to study how grade span affects schoolprograms, teaching practices, and student progress. This article reports selected resultson the relation of grade span to school size, grade level enrollment, school goals, reportcard entries, and relevant trends. ED330082 EA022805 Epstein, J. L. & Mac Iver, D. J. (Feb 1990). Education in the Middle Grades: Overviewof National Practices and Trends. Baltimore, MD: Center for Research on Elementaryand Middle Schools, The Johns Hopkins University. In spring 1988, the Johns Hopkins Center for Research on Elementary and MiddleSchools (CREMS) conducted a national survey of principals in 2,400 public middlegrade schools that include grade 7. Using the 1988 survey date, this documentpresents an overview of educational approaches and practices in schools that serveearly adolescents. Topics examined include: (1) grade span; (2) size; (3) grouping; (4)number of teachers per students; (5) changing classmates; (6) homeroom and advisoryperiods; (7) guidance counselors; (8) teams of teachers; (9) curriculum; (10) instruction;(11) goals for students; (12) transitions and articulation practices; (13) remediation; (14)report card entries; (15) teacher certification; and (16) teacher talents. Thisdocument also summarizes principals' reports of their overall evaluation of presentpractices and presents four conclusions regarding middle grades reform based onsurvey data. The survey is appended. ED344404 EC301133 Gallagher, J. J. (Mar 1992). Gifted Students and Educational Reform. In: Challenges inGifted Education: Developing Potential and Investing in Knowledge for the 21stCentury. Columbus: Ohio State Dept. of Education. This paper examines gifted education in the context of current educational reformefforts. It offers a rationale for the differentiated education of gifted students based onAmerican values and equitable allocation of educational resources. Examples areoffered of curriculum content modification for math, science, language arts, and socialstudies which utilize four approaches: (1) acceleration, (2) enrichment, (3)sophistication, and (4) novelty. The relationship of gifted education to the America 2000program and to the six national education goals is noted. The paper then reviews majorreform efforts in the areas of accountability, the middle school concept, and cooperativelearning. Issues remaining to be solved are also identified and include personnelpreparation, unidentified students (e.g., the culturally different), curricular options,strategies and metathinking, and the value of the term, "gifted," itself. ED319747 TM014820 Ingels, S. J. (Apr 1990). Findings from the NELS:88 Base Year Student Survey.National Opinion Research Center, Chicago, Ill. Paper presented at the AnnualMeetingof the American Educational Research Association. Washington, DC: National Centerfor Education Statistics (ED). The National Education Longitudinal Study of 1988 (NELS:88), a longitudinal studysponsored by the National Center for Education Statistics, provides trend data abouttransitions experienced as young people develop, attend school, and embark oncareers. The study began with a national sample of about 26,000 eighth graders in1988and follows these students at 2-year intervals through high school and further. Findingsof the base year are summarized, drawn from the descriptive summary "A Profile of theAmerican Eighth Grader" by A. Hafner and others (1990). Characteristics of samplemembers, in-school and out-of-school experiences, and aspirations and choicebehaviors are described. The paper is divided into three sections: (1) background onthestudy; (2) cross-sectional findings from the NELS:88 base year, with 24 tables and 16graphs; and (3) issues for the next wave of data. Appendix 1 describes generating thesample; Appendix 2 gives a chart of key questionnaire items. EJ428991 JC505707 McEwin, C. K. & Thomason, J. (Apr 1991 ) Curriculum: The Next Frontier. Momentum,22(2) 34-37. Discusses the national movement to improve middle school education with respect toschool reorganization, curricular issues, instructional strategies, and various ways ofapplying the middle school concept. EJ402386 EA524123 McPartland, J. M. (Feb 1990 ). Staffing Decisions in the Middle Grades: BalancingQuality Instruction and Teacher/Student Relations. Phi Delta Kappan, 71(6)465-69. Staffing patterns can significantly affect educators' efforts to provide high-qualityinstruction and create positive teacher/student relations in the middle grades. Statedata and Johns Hopkins University survey results are used to show how staffingpatterns serving one goal may interfere with accomplishing another goal. Correctivestaffing measures are suggested. EJ408482 EA524425 Peterman, F. P. (May 1990). Successful Middle Level Schools and the Development.NASSP Bulletin, 74(526) 62-65. Discusses Joan Lipsitz's 1984 treatise on ideal middle level school characteristics.Many middle schools' creative approaches to programing and instruction (throughinterdisciplinary team teaching, interest-based activities, thematic schoolwide events,creative problem solving, and hands-on experience) and responsiveness to youngadolescents' developmental needs embody the best features of effective giftedprograms. ED327047 EC232699 Schatz, E. (Feb 1990). Ability Grouping for Gifted Learners as It Relates to SchoolReform and Restructuring. Madison: Wisconsin State Dept. of Education. This monograph uses a question-answer format to address issues concerned withmeeting the needs of gifted students as Wisconsin schools restructure and changegrouping practices as part of raising standards of learning for all students. Among 12questions considered are the following: (1) Aren't some of the principles of middle leveleducation, cooperative learning and whole class instruction in reading harmful from thestandpoint of providing appropriate programs to gifted students? (2) Isn't acceleration anecessary component of gifted education but contradictory to the middle levelphilosophy? (3) If one views middle level education as anti-tracking and anti-abilitygrouping, then how is grouping at the middle of the pyramid ever acceptable? (4)"Doesn't participation in Midwest Talent Search promote labeling and an "earlieris better" approach to gifted education? (5) Don't research reports and declining testscores clearly support as little ability grouping as possible at all levels of education? (6)Won't cooperative learning increase boredom in gifted students and hold them back?(7) How can young gifted readers be challenged by whole class instruction in reading?and (8) How can we be sure school districts are asking the right questions about giftededucation as these strategies are implemented? EJ420045 EC232396 Sicola, P. K. (Fall 1990). Where Do Gifted Students Fit? An Examination of MiddleSchool Philosophy as It Relates to Ability Grouping and the Gifted Learner. Journal forthe Education of the Gifted,14(3) 37-49. Special Issue: Educational Reform: Impact onGifted. The emphasis of middle school philosophy on heterogeneous grouping is examined inrelationship to the needs of gifted learners. Arguments supporting such grouping basedon developmental needs of young adolescents, social discrimination, and the need forpositive role models are considered. Cooperative learning is seen to be an unproveninstructional method with this population. EJ316881 EC172323 Stanley, J. C. (Feb 1985). A Baker's Dozen of Years Applying All Four Aspects of theStudy of Mathematically Precocious Youth (SMPY). Roeper Review, 7(3)172-75. Since its inception in 1971, the Study of Mathematically Precocious Youth hasexpanded from a local program serving 19 mostly seventh graders to a nationalprogram with an enrollment of 1,600. This article discusses trends experienced duringthe 13-year period and their implications for the program's future. ED344408 EC301137 Stevens, M. (Mar 1992). School Reform and Restructuring: Relationship to GiftedEducation. In: Challenges in Gifted Education: Developing Potential and Investing inKnowledge for the 21st Century. Columbus: Ohio State Dept. of Education. This chapter reviews recent trends toward increasing emphasis on excellence inAmerican business and applies these trends to school reform and restructuring in thecontext of gifted education. First, it notes the main ideas of recent business andeducation excellence studies which call for radical changes in the American educationsystem. Examined is the dilemma of balancing the educational demands of equity andexcellence especially in an age of major demographic shifts. A quality-orientedparadigm is proposed which merges equity and excellence and focuses on theindividual thus replacing the industrial model paradigm which focused on the "system".The issue of ability grouping is considered and research supporting within classgrouping is cited. Concepts underlying the middle school approach are noted asanother example where the equity/excellence dilemma and grouping concerns emerge."Equifinality" is offered as a concept which suggests many potential ways to reachresolution especially when the focus is always on the individual gifted learner and theteacher/facilitator. EJ445874 EC603237 Tomlinson, C. (Spr 1992). Gifted Education and the Middle School Movement: TwoVoices on Teaching the Academically Talented. Journal for the Education of the Gifted,15(3) 206-38. Comparison of the fields of gifted education and middle school education indicatessome major differences in such areas as organizing for instruction, how students learn,mainstreaming, delivery of instruction, affective needs, and the concept of giftedness. EC608367 Tomlinson, C. (1994). Gifted learners: The Boomerang Kids of Middle School? Roeper Review, 16(3), 177-182. A variety of beliefs and practices central to middle schools may cause special difficultiesfor gifted learners. Such practices often focus on potentially competing goals of studentcompetencies versus student excellence and include such practices as heterogeneousgrouping, cooperative learning, and an absence of clearly defined middle schoolcurricula. EC608369 Van-Tassel-Baska, J.; Olszewski-Kubilius, P.; & Kulieke, M. (1994). A Study ofSelf-Concept and Social Support in Advantaged and Disadvantaged Seventh andEighth Grade Gifted Students. Roeper Review, 16(3), 185-191. This study investigated differences among intellectually gifted students of junior highage participating in full time intensive programs for the gifted. Findings indicated somedifferences based on ethnicity and gender, but most differences were observedbetween lower and higher socioeconomic groups, particularly for social support andsocial and behavioral self concept. This ERIC publication is in the public domain and may be freely reproduced anddisseminated. This publication was prepared with funding from the Office of Educational Researchand Improvement, U.S. Department of Education, under contract no. RR93002005. The opinions expressed in this report do not necessarily reflect the positions or policiesof OERI or the Department of Education. Top of PageBack to ERIC MenuBack to CEC Home Page copyright © 1996 ERIC Clearinghouse on Disabilities and Gifted Education Send updates to: ericec@cec.sped.org URL: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm WT02-B20-27IA001-000011-B022-144http://www.cec.sped.org:80/ericec/medical.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101073952 text/html 16036HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 07:40:00 GMTLast-modified: Wednesday, 11-Dec-96 23:29:00 GMTContent-length: 15841Content-type: text/html Medical MEDICAL/MOBILITY/OTHER HEALTHIMPAIRMENTS Monthly newsletter for those in the CFS/CFIDS/M.E. community Subscription address: listserv@sjuvm.stjohns.edu Post messages to: catharsis@sjuvm.stjohns.edu Chronic fatigue syndrome Subscription address: listserv@sjuvm.stjohns.edu Post messages to: cfs-l@sjuvm.stjohns.edu Chronic fatigue syndrome medical list Subscription address: listserv@list.nih.gov Post messages to: cfs-med@list.nih.gov Exchange of news by CFS support groups Subscription address: listserv@sjuvm.stjohns.edu Post messages to: cfs-wire@sjuvm.stjohns.edu For families of children with cleaf lip/palate or other craniofacialdifferences Subscription address: listproc@mother.com Post messages to: cleft-talk@mother.com Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia Subscription address: listserv@sjuvm.stjohns.edu Post messages to: cll@sjuvm.stjohns.edu Cerebral palsy Subscription address: listserv@sjuvm.stjohns.edu Post messages to: c-palsy@sjuvm.stjohns.edu Parenting of children with cerebral palsy Subscription address: listserv@sjuvm.stjohns.edu Post messages to: cpparent@sjuvm.stjohns.edu Issues about children with special health care needs Subscription address: listserv@nervm.nerdc.ufl.edu Post messages to: cshcn-l@nervm.nerdc.ufl.edu For teens affected by cleft lip/palate Subscription address: webmaster@widesmiles.org Post messages to: ctteen@widesmiles.org Support forum for people with cystic fibrosis Subscription address: To join, send a message to Antony Dugdale@minerva.cis.yale.edu Support forum for Sjogren's syndrome Subscription address: To join, send a message to: vmd@cso.uiuc.edu ALS DIGEST Biweekly newsletter on amytrophic lateral sclerosis or motor neuron disease Subscription address: To subscribe or to submit material, writeto: bro@huey.met.fsu.edu AMPUTEE Amputees and friends/relatives/concerned professionals Subscription address: listserv@sjuvm.stjohns.edu Post messages to: amputee@sjuvm.stjohns.edu ARTHRITIS-L Arthritis/rheumatology research Subscription address: listproc@showme.missouri.edu Post messages to: arthritis-l@showme.missouri.edu BIFIDA-L Spinabifida Subscription address: listserv@mercury.dsu.edu Post messages to: bifida-l@mercury.dsu.edu BRAINTMR Braintumors information exchange Subscription address: To join, send a message to: Samantha Scolamiero,at: samajane@athena.mit.edu CATHARSIS CFS-L CFS-MED CFS-NEWS Monthly medical news about CFS/CFIDS/M.E. Subscription address: listserv@list.nih.gov Post messages to: cfs-news@list.nih.gov CFS-WIRE CLEFT-TALK CLL C-PALSY CPParent CSHCN-L CTTEEN CYSTIC-L CYSTIC FIBROSIS Private mailing list for those concerned with cystic fibrosis Subscription address: To join, send e-mail request toMichael Jorda@jorda@frsun12.bitnet DIABETES-NEWS Weekly newsletter on diabetes; distribution, not discussion Subscription address: diabetes-news-request@lists.best.com Post messages to: (not applicable) DIABETIC Diabetes Subscription address: listserv@lehighedu Post messages to: diabetic@lehighedu DYSPHAGIA Swallowing and its disorders Subscription address: majordomo@cybersport.com Post messages to: dysphagia@cybersport.com FRAGILEX Fragile X syndrome Subscription address: majordomo@counterpoint.com Post messages to: fragilex@counterpoint.com GSDNET Glycogen storage diseases (individuals/families/professionals) Subscription address: listserv@sjuvm.stjohns.edu Post messages to: gsdnet@sjuvm.stjohns.edu HCONF A conference forum with guest speakers on hydrocephalus Subscription address: listserv@listserv.utoronto.ca You will receive instructions upon subscription HIJOS-ESP Discussion in Spanish of parenting children with cerebral palsy or related affections Subscription address: listserv@listserv.rediris.es Post messages to: hijos-esp@listserv.rediris.es HUNT-DIS Huntington's disease Subscription address: listserv@sjuvm.stjohns.edu Post messages to: hunt-dis@sjuvm.stjohns.edu HYCEPH-L Information and support forum for hydrocephalus Subscription address: listserv@vm.utcc.utoronto.ca Post messages to: hyceph-l@vm.utcc.utoronto.ca IMMUNE Immunedeficiency Subscription address: listserv@weber.used.edu Post messages to: immune@weber.used.edu JARRETT'S JOURNAL Journal containing disabled/medical newsbytes, book reviews, and features Subscription address: listserv@sjuvm.stjohns.edu Message: Subscribe J-JRNL yourname L-HCAP Handicapped digest; discussion of life with a disabling condition Subscription address: listserv@vm1.nodak.edu Post messages to: l-hcap@vm1.nodak.edu LIVING Women only; physical disability (temporary or permanent) Subscription address: majordomo@qiclab.scn.rain.com Post messages to: living@qiclab.scn.rain.com LYMENET-L Biweekly newsletter focusing on Lyme disease Subscription address: listserv@lehigh.edu Post messages to: lymenet-l@lehigh.edu MD-LIST Musculardystrophy and related neuro-muscular diseases Subscription address: md-list-request@data.basix.com Post messages to: md-list@data.basix.com MOBILITY Mobility impairments Subscription address: listserv@sjuvm.stjohns.edu Post messages to: mobility@sjuvm.stjohns.edu MPD-NET Myeloproliferative disorders Subscription address: listserv@sjuvm.stjohns.edu Post messages to: mpd-net@sjuvm.stjohns.edu MS-LIST Multiple sclerosis Subscription address: listserv@technion.bitnet Post messages to: ms-list@technion.bitnet MY-FACE Facial disfigurements Subscription address: listserv@sjuvm.stjohns.edu Post messages to: my-face@sjuvm.stjohns.edu PARKNSN Parkinson's disease Subscription address: parkinsn-request@vmutcc.utoronto.ca Post messages to: parknsn@vm.utcc.utoronto.ca POLIO Polio Subscription address: listserv@sjuvm.st.johns.edu Post messages to: polio@sjuvm.st.johns.edu PRADER-WILLI Prader-Willi syndrome Subscription address: To join, send a message to: visink@delphi.com REHAB-RU Physical medicine and rehabilitation in rural settings Subscription address: listserv@ukcc.uky.edu Post messages to: rehab-ru@ukcc.uky.edu RSI Newsletter on repetitive sequence injury (carpal tunnel syndrome) Subscription address: majordomo@world.std.com Post messages to: rsi@world.std.com RSI-EAST Repetitive sequence injury; treatment, adaptive devices, friendly ears Subscription address: listserv@sjuvm.st.johns.edu Post messages to: rsi-east@sjuvm.st.johns.edu SB-PARENTS For parents of children who have spina bifida Subscription address: listserv@waisman.wisc.edu Post messages to: sb-parents@waisman.wisc.edu SERVICE-DOGS About guide/hearing/service or other assistance dogs Subscription address: majordomo@acpub.duke.edu Post messages to: service-dogs@acpub.duke.edu SJOGREN'S SYNDROME SOREHAND Carpal tunnel syndrome and tendonitis Subscription address: listserv@uscfvm.ucsf.edu Post messages to: sorehand@uscfvm.ucsf.edu STROKE-L Strokes and cerebrovascular accidents Subscription address: listserv@ukcc.uky.edu Post messages to: stroke-l@ukcc.uky.edu TBI-SPRT Traumatic brain injury/neurological impairments support Subscription address: listserv@moria.nfbcal.org Post messages to: tbi-sprt@moria.nfbcal.org TSCTALK Tuberous Sclerosis Subscription address: tcstalk-request@pebbs.com Post messages to: tsctalk@pebbs.com VOCEVAL Vocational evaluation, adaptive technology Subscription address: listserv@sjuvm.st.johns.edu Post messages to: voceval@sjuvm.st.johns.edu Top of PageBack to ERIC MenuBack to CEC Home Page copyright © 1996 ERIC Clearinghouse on Disabilities and Gifted Education Last updated: December 11, 1996 Send updates to: ericec@cec.sped.org URL: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm WT02-B20-28IA001-000011-B022-160http://www.cec.sped.org:80/faq/autism-r.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101074006 text/html 18812HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 07:40:10 GMTLast-modified: Wednesday, 11-Dec-96 23:11:00 GMTContent-length: 18617Content-type: text/html AUTISM-READINGS AUTISM-READINGS THE ERIC CLEARINGHOUSE ON DISABILITIES AND GIFTED EDUCATION(ERIC EC) The Council for Exceptional Children 1920 Association Drive Reston, VA 20191 Toll Free: 1-800-328-0272 TTY: 703-264-9449 E-mail: ericec@cec.sped.org Internet: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm READINGS AND RESOURCES ON AUTISM July 1995 Aarons, M., & Gittens, T. (1992). The handbook of autism: A guide forparents and professionals. Routledge, 29 W. 35th St., New York, NY 10001-2291. 28pp. This book attempts to dispel common myths associated with autism while providing practical, up-to-date suggestions and information for parents and practitioners working with autistic students. The history and etiology of autism are explored, and problems of diagnosis are outlined. Considerations for teaching, management, and counseling of autistic students are included, and possible alternate treatments and cures for autism are described. Amenta, C. A. III. (1992). Russell is extra special: A book about autism for children. Brunner-Mazel Publishers, 19 Union Square, New York, NY 10003. 32pp. This portrayal of an autistic boy and his family is designed to help children (ages 4-8) and their parents understand this serious developmental disorder. This book uses photographs to illustrate the boy's family life and daily activities. Russell's mood swings, problems with learning, communication, behavior, sleeping, and social skills are detailed. Berkell, Dianne E. (Ed.) (1992). Autism: Identification, education, and treatment. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc., 365 Broadway, Hillsdale, NJ 07642. 319pp. This collection of 12 papers is intended to provide an understanding of the autistic syndrome and information regarding effective diagnostic and treatment approaches. Part I introduces the reader to autism by providing an overview of past and current philosophies and practices in the field. Part II deals with intervention practices and strategies including approaches to assessment and instruction. Part III addresses emerging trends in autism such as family involvement and services, early intervention, community integration, and supported employment. Biklen, D. (1993). Communication unbound: How facilitated communication is challenging traditional views of autism and ability/disability. Teachers College Press, Columbia University, 1234Amsterdam Ave., New York, NY 10027. 221pp. This book introduces "facilitated communication," a method of assisting people with autism to communicate by means of physical assistance in typewriting. The book is organized around the author's own experience using the facilitated communication method, with examples of fieldwork using qualitative research to illustrate particular points and principals. Experiences of care givers and parents are described, as they confront the controversies surrounding the use of facilitated communication and witness its successes and failures. Davis, K. (1990). Adapted physical education for students with autism. Charles C. Thomas, 2600 S. 1st St., Springfield, IL 62794-9265. 126pp. This book is written for teachers of physical education, and adapted physical education working with students with autism. Included are the Institute for the Study of Developmental DisabilitiesGross Motor Checklist, assessments and reports, a behavior plan, sports skills check lists, adapted sports rules, teaching hints, suggestions for gymnasium activity areas, lists of resources and materials on autism and on gross motor aspects of autism. Frith, U. (1989). Autism: Explaining the enigma. Basil Blackwell, 238 Main St., Suite 501, Cambridge, MA 02142. 208pp. The theory of autism presented in this book sees the key problem as an inability to integrate pieces of information into coherent wholes, and in so doing make sense of the mind's own activities, thoughts, beliefs, and feelings. The history of autism research is reviewed and key phenomena illustrated through case studies. Groden, G., & Baron, G. M. (Eds.) (1991). Autism: Strategies for change. A comprehensive approach to the education and treatment of children with autism and related disorders. Gardner Press, Inc., 19 Union Square West, New York, NY 10003. 244pp. This book offers a blueprint on how to bring about change in program planning and management as well as in clinical and educationalpractice for individuals with autism. The model that is presented emphasizes the importance of children and young adults learning procedures to manage their own behaviors instead of being externally controlled. The model also emphasizes working intensively with families to enhance children's home behaviors and functioning. Harris, S. L., & Handleman, J. S. (Eds.) (1994). Preschool education programs for children with autism. PRO-ED, 8700 Shoal Creek Blvd., Austin, TX 78757-6897. 252pp. Ten distinguished service providers from a variety of programsfor children with autism share detailed descriptions of their classrooms. Some of the programs are in public schools, some are in private schools, and others in universities. Each of the programs provides some opportunities for integration with normally developing or less impaired peers, and each includes parent training. Each program emphasizes the importance of making appropriate plans for the child's movement to a different educational setting beyond the preschool years. Harris, S. L. (1994). Siblings of children with autism: A guide for families. Woodbine House, 6510 Bells Mill Rd., Bethesda, MD 20817. 127pp. This book provides a guide for parents and family members on how autism affects sibling relationships and how parents can support their other children while coping with the intensive needs of a child with autism. Tips for increasing family communication are offered andsuggestions for helping children become better playmates are provided. Hart, C.A. (1993). A parent's guide to autism: Answers to the most common questions. Pocket Books, Simon and Schuster Consumer Group, 1230 Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 10020. 125pp. This book for parents attempts to answer some of the most frequently asked questions surrounding autism in children, as well as describing current theory and practice in treating and educating autistic children. The neurological factors thought to cause autism are described, and key terms in discussing autism are defined. The process of diagnosis is explored, and autism is differentiated from pervasive developmental delay. Several chapters focus on autism as a communication disorder, recent research using facilitated communication, school placement, and special educational practices. Indiana Resource Center for Autism (1989-1991). Functional programming for people with autism: A series. Indiana Resource Center for Autism, 2853 E. 10th St., Bloomington, IN 47408 or EDRS 1-800-443-ERIC. 166pp. This series of nine booklets features the following titles: Learning to be independent and responsible (ED363063), Reading (ED363064), Growing towards independence by learning functional skills and behaviors (ED363065), Functional school activities(ED363066), Developing a functional and longitudinal individual plan (ED363067), Enhancing communication in individuals with autism throughthe use of pictures and word symbols (ED363068), Toileting (ED363069),Learning self-care skills (ED363070), and Sex education: Issues for the person with autism (ED363071). Koegel, R. L. (1988). How to teach pivotal behaviors to children with autism: A training manual. EDRS 800-443-ERIC. ED336901. 39pp. This manual presents a training methodology for use in changing pivotal behaviors of children with autism or other severe disabilities. Behaviors specifically addressed for their far-ranging effects involve motivation and responsivity to multiple cues. Seven instructional points are detailed with both good and poor implementation examples. A partial workbook format encourages the reader to identify appropriate personal applications of each training technique. Martin, R. (1994). Out of silence: A journey into language. Henry Holt and Company, 115 W. 18th St., New York, NY 10011. 300pp. The book describes one family's experience raising a child whobecame autistic at 18 months due to side effects of a vaccine. The nature of an autistic child's relationship to language and vocabulary is discussed throughout the narrative, as is the neurological side of language acquisition. The child's use of a keyboard by means of facilitated communication plays a major role in the narrative as a source of insight into his subjective experience of life with autism. Matson, J. L. (Ed.) (1994). Autism in children and adults: Etiology,assessment, and intervention. Brooks/Cole Publishing Co., 511 Forest Lodge Rd., Pacific Grove, CA 93950-5098. 275pp. This book provides a broad-based and multidisciplinary review of the field of autism, including background, general issues, and specific topics. Chapters include information on definition and assessment, etiology, facilitated communication, program design, differential diagnosis and behavioral assessment, self-injurious behavior, aggression, and remediation through naturalistic language training, behavior modification methods, speech and language characteristics, and social skills training. Powers, M. D. (1995). Educating children with autism: A guide to selecting an appropriate program. Woodbine House, 6510 Bells Mill Rd., Bethesda, MD 20817. 200pp. This book offers specific and concrete advice for parents of children with autism to help them choose and evaluate educational programs. The author describes key components parents should look forduring their evaluation of a school program and provides guidelines for evaluating the effectiveness of education by looking at how successfully a program helps a child reach specified goals. The information provided helps parents make the best match possible between their child and an educational program. Powers, M. D. (Ed.) (1989). Children with autism: A parent's guide. Woodbine House, 6510 Bells Mill Rd., Bethesda, MD 20817. 368pp. Intended for parents of children with autism, this guide provides important background information as well as practical guidance on managing the child with autism. After an introduction by Bernard Rimland, ten authors contribute chapters covering adjustment to the original diagnosis, daily living, medical problems and treatments, family issues, appropriate educational placement, legal rights, advocacy, and preparing for the future. Schulze, C. B. (1993). When snow turns to rain: One family's struggleto solve the riddle of autism. Woodbine House, 6510 Bells Mill Rd., Bethesda, MD 20817. 216pp. This book relates a father's experiences raising a son with delayed onset autism. The family's efforts to cope with the diagnosisof the child's condition are described, as is the family's determined 9-year search through a wide variety of treatments and educational programs. Experimental drug treatments, behavior modification programs, home schooling, vitamin and motivational therapy are all explored through the eyes of a father seeking possible solutions to his son's enigmatic disability. Seifert, C. D. (1990). Holistic interpretation of autism: A theoretical framework. University Press of America, 4720 Boston Way, Lanham, MD 20706. 75pp. The book presents a holistic approach to autism based on the premise that etiology comprises biological (genetic variation) and environmental (stress) factors. The first chapter briefly considers etiology, behavior (biosocial, affective, cognitive, and affective-cognitive), and treatment. The second chapter examines the psychodiagnostic use of human-figure drawing. The third chapter presents a biosocial approach to personality assessment. Simons, J. M. (1987). The hidden child: The Linwood method for reaching the autistic child. Woodbine House, 6510 Bells Mill Rd., Bethesda, MD 20817. 255pp. The book describes the treatment approach used with autistic children at the Linwood Children's Center in Ellicott City, Maryland. Basic to the Linwood method are four tenets: (1) the child is accepted in his totality; (2) the focus of treatment is on the health of the child; (3) all education is therapy, all therapy is education; (4) therapy is flexible. The three treatment elements are observations, establishing relationships, and changing behaviors. Chapter topics include shaping behavior, limit setting, compulsions, language and thought processes, and social and emotional development. Simpson, R. L., & Zionts, P. (1992). Autism: Information and resources for parents, families, and professionals. PRO-ED, 8700 Shoal Creek Blvd, Austin, TX 78758-6897. 179pp. This book is written for families of children with autism as well as professionals who are "nonexperts" in the field of autism. Itis written in a question-and-answer format, and covers frequently asked questions encountered by the authors in their work with autisticchildren and their families. Readers are given an overview of concepts and characteristics of autism; background on the disorder; and alternatives, considerations, and strategies for obtaining education, treatment, and support. Smith, M. D., et al. (1995). A guide to successful employment for individuals with autism. Paul H. Brookes Publishing Co., P.O. Box 10624, Baltimore, MD 21285-0624. 305pp. This book provides information on supports and methods that have proven successful in helping people with autism hold jobs. General guidelines on assessment, job development, socialization on the job, and problem solving are provided. Specific information is provided on a number of vocational areas in which people with autism have succeeded. Separate chapters focus on jobs in manufacturing, retail, printing and bulk mailing, food service, warehousing, recycling and delivery, and government. VIDEOS: ABC Distribution Company, 825 Seventh Ave., New York, NY, 10017 A lifetime of love Behavior Research Institute, 240 Laban St., Providence, RI 02909 Five severely autistic students-before and after education and treatment Fanlight Productions, 47 Halifax St., Boston, MA 02130.1-800-937-4113 Autism: A world apart Understanding autism Filmakers Library, 124 E. 40th St., New York, NY 10016. 212-808-4980 Autism: A strange, silent world Behind the curtain Films for the Humanities and Sciences, PO Box 2053, Princeton, NJ08543-2053. 800-257-5126 A is for autism An autistic child Who will teach the water to swim? Focus International, 14 Oregon Dr., Hunting Station, NY 11746-9794 Behavioral treatment of autistic children Indiana Resource Center for Autism, Indiana University, 2853 E. 10th St., Bloomington, IN, 47408-2601. 812-855-6508 Autism: Being friends Autism: Learning to live Autism: Stubborn love Building independence through the use of adaptations and enablers Creative programming for children with autism (Part I Headstart/kindergarten and Part II first grade) Introduction to autism Managing behaviors in community settings School inclusion of a student with autism who is high functioning Teaching nontraditional communicative behavior PBS Video, Public Broadcasting Service, 1320 Braddock Pl., Alexandria,VA 22314-1698. 1-800-344-3337 Autism: Reaching the child within Prisoners of silence Variety Pre-Schooler's Workshop, 47 Humphrey Dr., Syosset, NY 11791-4098. 516-921-7171. A time for Georgia Jennifer is a lady PERIODICALS: The Advocate, Autism Society of America, 7910 Woodmont Ave., Suite 650, Bethesda, MD 20814. Focus on Autistic Behavior, PRO-ED, 8700 Shoal Creek Blvd., Austin, TX78758-6897. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, University of Kansas, Lawrence, KS 66044. Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders, Plenum Publishing Corp., 227 W. 17th St., New York, NY 10011. RESOURCES: Autism Services Center The Prichard Building 605 Ninth St. PO Box 507 Huntington, WV 25710-0507 304-5215-8014 Autism Society of America 7910 Woodmont Ave., Suite 650 Bethesda, MD 20814 800-328-8476 National Information Center for Children & Youth (NICHCY) PO Box 1492 Washington, DC 20013 800-695-0285 Indiana Resource Center for Autism Indiana University 2853 E. 10th St. Bloomington, IN, 47408-2601 812-855-6508 This ERIC publication is in the public domain and may be freely reproduced anddisseminated. This publication was prepared with funding from the Office of Educational Research and Improvement, U.S. Department of Education, under contract no. RR93002005. The opinions expressed in this report do not necessarily reflect the positions or policies of OERI or the Department of Education. Top of PageBack to ERIC MenuBack to CEC Home Page copyright © 1996 ERIC Clearinghouse on Disabilities and Gifted Education Send updates to: ericec@cec.sped.org URL: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm WT02-B20-29IA001-000011-B022-178http://www.cec.sped.org:80/fact/grants.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101074017 text/html 8005HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 07:40:24 GMTLast-modified: Wednesday, 20-Nov-96 19:27:00 GMTContent-length: 7811Content-type: text/html Grants, Funding Grants/Funding Information INTERNET SITES URL: http://www.ed.gov/money.html includes links to Student Guide to Financial Aid, What Should I Know About ED Grants, Education Department General Administrative Regulations (EDGAR), Guide to U.S.Department of Education Programs, Federal Register, Commerce Business Daily, and ED Grant Announcements. URL: http://204.168.17.2:80/http://www.finaid.org/ maintained by Mark Kantrowitz, author of The Prentice Hall Guide to Scholarships and Fellowships for Math and Science Students, this site includes links to information about student aid. URL: http://www.yahoo.com/Education/Financial_Aid includes links to various scholarships and grant search services. National Science Foundation Science and Technology Information System (STIS) To access the NSF system, telnet to STIS.NSF.GOV. At the login prompt, type "public". For a user id, type in your first initial and last name with no spaces. This does not change the login id; you must continue to use "public" at the login prompt. Federal Education Info. Service (FEDIX) FEDIX links higher education communities with the federal government to facilitate research, education, and services. To access information on scholarships, fellowships, grants, and other resources, telnet to FEDIX.FIE.COM. At the login prompt, type "new". Select 1. FEDIX at the main menu. The first time that you log on, you will be asked for specific information, including name and institution. After the first time, you will be able to type in your chosen user ID without answering all the questions. Minority On-Line Info. Service (MOLIS) A service of FEDIX, MOLIS provides information on resources for minorities. To access MOLIS, telnet to FEDIX.FIE.COM. At the login prompt, type "new". Select 2. MOLIS. (See directions for FEDIX.) Higher Education Opportunities for Minorities and Women (HERO) A service of the FEDIX, HERO provides information on resources for women and minorities in higher education. To access HERO, telnet to FEDIX.FIE.COM. At the login prompt, type "new". Select 3. HERO. (See directions for FEDIX.) Office of Educational Research and Improvement (OERI) The OERI Gopher server provides public access to education research, statistics, and information about the US Department of Education and its programs. To access, gopher to: gopher.ed.gov. Dept. of Education site Grant Programs and Funding Availability URL: gopher://gopher.os.dhhs.gov/11/Topics/grantsnet/funding GRANTS-L on LISTSERV@GSUVM1.GSU.EDU Grants and Funding for International Education and ResearchGRANTS-L, an initiative of the Regents' Global Center of the University System of Georgia, promotes external funding for international education and research. Specific topics include: proposal writing and editing; federal/state laws and regulations; campus policies and procedures; animal care and use; misconduct in science; procurement integrity; consulting; cost sharing; publication rights; budget development; direct and indirect costs; grant/contract administration; client relations; Internet resources; electronic editing and software; and so on. To subscribe, send an e-mail message to: LISTSERV@GSUVM1.GSU.EDU In the body of the message, send the following: sub grants-l YourFirstName YourLastName OTHER RESOURCES The Grantwriter's Newsletter of Funding Resources is an inexpensive way to find grant sources and contests. $36 for 12 issues. 617 Wright Avenue, Terrytown, LA 70056. GRANTS. Oryx Press, 4041 North Central Avenue, Suite 700, Phoenix, AZ 85012-3397; 800/279-6799, FAX:800/279-4663, E-mail: arhjb@asuvm.inre.asu.edu Lists thousands of grants offered by federal, state, and local governments, commercial organizations, associations, and private foundations. Each entry includes full description, deadlines, qualifications, money available, and renewability. Covers more than 90 academic disciplines and topics. From the Directory of National Information Sources on Disabilities, US Department of Education, Office of Special Education and Rehabilitative Services, Nat. Institute of Disability and Rehabilitation Research (NIDRR), Vol.1. Washington, DC, 1994-95: Bauer, David, The "How To" Grants Manual. $27.50. MacMillan Publishing Co., 866 Third Ave., New York, NY 10022, 800/323-7445 or 609/461-6500. From Capitol Publications, Inc., PO Box 1453, Alexandria, VA 22313-2053, 800/327-7203: Ferguson, Jacqueline, Grants for Schools: How to Find and Win Funds for K-12 Programs. $57. Ferguson, Jacqueline, Grants for Teachers: A Guide to Federal and Private Funding. $47. Ferguson, Jacqueline, Grants for Special Education and Rehabilitation: How to Find and Win Funds for Research, Training and Services. $58. Ferguson, Jacqueline, Securing Funding for Educational Technology, Holt, Rinehart and Winston. 62pp. Securing Funding for Educational Technology, on grant resources and grant-writing strategies. 800/479-9799. Hall, Mary. Getting Funded: A Complete Guide to Proposal Writing. $23.95. Portland State University, Continuing Education Publications, PO Box 1394, Portland, OR 97207, 503/725-4891. The Xerox Foundation awards nearly $7 million in grants each year. The grants are available to public schools, as well as other nonprofit organizations. For more information, contact Joseph Calahan, Vice-President, Xerox Foundation, Box 1600, Stamford, CT 06904. The Grants Database (CD-ROM) This CD-ROM, which many research libraries purchase, provides information on a wide range of grant and RFP opportunities. Contact your nearest research library reference librarian for assistance. Classroom Connect This is for K-12 educators using the Internet and other online services in the classroom! You'll find the latest on funding issues, acceptable use policies, lesson plans using the Net, where to find online educational resources, and much more! For a free issue of CRC, send your snail mail (postal) address to Nancy Singer at connect@wentworth.com. Top of PageBack to ERIC MenuBack to CEC Home Page copyright © 1996 ERIC Clearinghouse on Disabilities and Gifted Education Last updated: November 20, 1996 Send updates to: ericec@cec.sped.org URL: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm WT02-B20-30IA001-000011-B022-189http://www.cec.sped.org:80/fact/publsher.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101074043 text/html 8407HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 07:40:48 GMTLast-modified: Wednesday, 04-Dec-96 23:04:00 GMTContent-length: 8213Content-type: text/html ERIC Publishers of Special Education Material A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z A Ablex Publishing Company 355 Chestnut Street Norwood, NJ 07648-2090 201-767-8450 Academic Therapy Publications 20 Commercial Boulevard Novato, CA 94949-6191 415-883-3314; 800-422-7249 Addison-Wesley Publishing Co. 1 Jacob Way Redding, MA 01867 617-944-3700; 800-447-2226 Alexander Graham Bell Association for the Deaf 3417 Volta Place, NW Washington, DC 20007-2778 202-337-5220 American Association on Mental Retardation 444 North Capitol Street, NW Washington, DC 20001-1570 202-387-1968; 800-424-3688 American Counseling Association 5999 Stevenson Avenue Alexandria, VA 22304 703-823-9800; 800-347-6647 American Foundation for the Blind 15 West 16th Street New York, NY 10011 212-620-2000; 800-232-5463 Aspen Publishers 200 Orchard Ridge Drive, Suite 200 Gaithersburg, MD 20878 301-417-7500; 800-638-8437 Attainment Company, Inc. PO Box 930160 Verona, WI 53593-0160 1-800-942-3865 B Basil Blackwell, Inc. 238 Main Street, Suite 501 Cambridge, MA 02142 617-225-0430 Brookes Publishing Company PO Box 10624 Baltimore, MD 21285-0624 301-337-9580; 800-638-3775 Brookline Books PO Box 1046 Cambridge, MA 02238 617-868-0360; 800-666-2665 Brooks/Cole Publishing Co. 511 Forest Lodge Road Pacific Grove, CA 93950 1-800-354-9706 Brunner/Mazel Publishers 19 Union Square West New York, NY 10003 212-924-3344 C Charles C. Thomas, Publishing 2600 South First Street Springfield, IL 62794-9265 217-789-8980; 800-258-8980 Clinical Psychology Publishing Co., Inc. (CPPC) 4 Conant Square Brandon, VT 05733 802-247-6871; 800-433-8234 Communication Skill Builders PO Box 42050 Tuscon, AZ 85733 1-800-866-4446 Corwin Press 2455 Teller Road Thousand Oaks, CA 91320-2218 E Edmark Associates PO Box 3903 Bellevue, WA 98009 206-746-3900; 800-426-0856 Elsevier North-Holland, Inc. 655 Avenue of the Americas New York, NY 10010 212-989-5800 F Free Spirit Publishing Company 400 First Avenue, North, Suite 616 Minneapolis, MN 55401 612-338-2068; 800-735-7323 G Gallaudet University Press 800 Florida Avenue, NE Washington, DC 20002-3695 202-651-5488; 800-451-1073 Gifted Psychology Press (Formerly OHIO Psychology Press) PO Box 5057 Scottsdale, AZ 85261 602-368-7862; 602-922-9920 Greenwood Press Inc. 88 Post Road West, Box 5007 Westport, CT 06881 203-226-3571; 800-225-5800 Grune & Stratton, Inc. Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, Inc. 6277 Sea Harbor Drive Orlando, FL 32821 800-545-2522 Guilford Publications, Inc. 72 Spring Street New York, NY 10012 212-431-9800; 800-365-7006 H Harcourt/Brace 525 B Street Suite 1900 San Diego, CA 92101-4495 Heinemann Educational Books, Inc. 361 Hanover Street Portsmouth, NH 03801-3959 603-431-7894; 800-541-2086 Houghton Mifflin Wayside Road Burlington, MA 01803 I International Universities Press, Inc. PO Box 1524 Madison, CT 06443-1524 203-245-4000; 800-835-3187 J Jossey-Bass 350 Sansome Street San Francisco, CA 94104 415-433-1740 Jai Press Inc. PO Box 1678 Greenwich, CT 06836-1678 203-661-7602 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 605 Third Avenue New York, NY 10128 212-850-6000; 800-225-5945 L Longman Publishing Group The Longman Building 10 Bank Street White Plains, NY 10606-1951 914-933-5000; 800-266-8855 Love Publishing Company 4925 East Pacific Place Denver, CO 80222 303-757-2579 M Macmillan Publishing Company 100 Front Street, Box 500 Riverside, NJ 08075-7500 800-257-5755 Marcel Dekker, Inc. 270 Madison Avenue New York, NY 10016 212-696-9000; 800-228-1160 Mosby-Year Book, Inc. 11830 Westline Industrial Drive St. Louis, MO 63146 314-872-8370; 800-325-4177 N National Association of the Deaf 814 Thayer Avenue Silver Spring, MD 20910 301-587-6282 P Peekan Publications PO Box 513 Freeport, Il 61032 1-800-345-7335 Plenum Publishing Corporation 233 Spring Street New York, NY 10013-1578 212-620-8000; 800-221-9369 PRO-ED Publishers 8700 Shoal Creek Boulevard Austin, TX 78758-6897 512-451-3246 Prometheus Books 59 John Glenn Drive Amherst, NY 14228-2197 716-691-0133; 800-421-0351 R Research Press 2612 N. Mattis Avenue Champaign, IL 61821 217-352-3273 Routledge 29 West 35th Street New York, NY 10001-2291 212-244-3336 S Sage Publications, Inc. 2455 Teller Road Newbury Park, CA 91320 805-499-0721 Singular Publishing Group, Inc. 401 West A Street, Suite 325 San Diego, CA 92101-7904 619-521-8000; 800-521-8545 Sopris West 1140 Boston Avenue Longmont, CO 80501 1-800-547-6747 Springer-Verlag, NY, Inc. 175 Fifth Avenue New York, NY 10010 212-460-1500; 800-777-4643 Sycamore Publishing Company PO Box 133 Sycamore, IL 60178 815-756-5388 T T.J. Publishers 817 Silver Spring Avenue Suite 206 Silver Spring, MD 20910-4617 301-585-4440; 800-999-1168 Taylor & Francis, Inc. 1900 Frost Road, Suite 101 Bristol, PA 19007-1598 215-785-5800; 800-821-8312 Teachers College Press Teachers College, Columbia University 1234 Amsterdam Avenue New York, NY 10027 212-678-3929; 800-488-2665 W J. Weston Walch 321 Valley St. PO Box 658 Portland, ME 04104-0658 1-800-341-6094 Woodbine House 6510 Bells Mill Road Bethesda, MD 20817 301-897-3570; 800-843-7323 Y York Press, Inc. PO Box 504 Timonium, MD 21094 410-560-1557 Top of Page Back to ERIC Menu Back to CEC Home Page copyright © 1996 ERIC Clearinghouse on Disabilities and Gifted Education Last updated: December 4, 1996 Send updates to: ericec@cec.sped.org URL: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm WT02-B20-31IA001-000011-B022-204http://www.cec.sped.org:80/fact/gt-stdir.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101074057 text/html 12204HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 07:41:06 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 19-Dec-96 21:04:00 GMTContent-length: 12010Content-type: text/html State Directors of Programs for the Gifted State Directors of Programs for Gifted Education Updated 10/96 Listed below are the individuals with chief responsibility for the education of the gifted atthe state level throughout the United States. State Directors serve as an informationresource concerning public school services for gifted students in their respective states. For information, contact the individual listed for your state. Alabama Dr. Bill East, Acting Director Special Education Services AL Department of Education Gordon Persons Building, Box 302101 50 North Ripley Street Montgomery, AL 36130-2101 334/242-8114 Alaska Dr. Richard Smiley, Program Manager Gifted and Talented Education Office of Special Services Department of Education 801 West 10th Street, Suite 200 Juneau, AK 99801-1894 907/465-8702 Arizona Dr. Nancy Stahl, Gifted Program Specialist Arizona Department of Education 1535 West Jefferson Phoenix, AZ 85007 602/542-7836 Arkansas Ann Biggers, Administrator Office of Gifted and Talented Arkansas Department of Education Education Bldg., Room 103-B 4 State Capitol Mall Little Rock, AR 72201 501/682-4224 California Catherine Barkett, Director Gifted and Talented Education California Department of Education 660 J St., Suite 450 Sacramento, CA 95814 916/657-5257 Colorado Frank Rainey, Consultant Gifted and Talented Education Colorado Department of Education 201 E. Colfax Avenue, Room 501 Denver, CO 80203 303/866-6849 Connecticut Dr. Alan White Gifted and Talented Programs CT State Department of Education 25 Industrial Park Road Middletown, CT 06457 203/638-4247 Delaware Dr. Margaret S. Dee, Education Associate Gifted and Talented Program Department of Public Instruction PO Box 1402, Townsend Bldg. Dover, DE 19903 302/739-4667 District of Columbia Dr. Eugene Williams Gifted and Talented Education District of Columbia Public Schools 50th & C Streets, SE Washington, DC 20019 202/576-6171 Florida Shirley Perkins, Program Specialist Bureau of Student Services and Exceptional Education Department of Education 325 W. Gaines St., Suite 614 Tallahassee, FL 32399-0400 904/488-1570 Georgia Norma McNair Gifted Education, Curriculum Services Georgia Department of Education 1954 Twin Towers East Atlanta, GA 30334-5040 404/656-2685 Guam Cheri Stock Gifted and Talented Education Guam Department of Education 120 W. O'Brien, #2-200E Agana, GU 96910 671/647-4545 Hawaii Ronald Toma, Branch Director Hawaii Department of Education 1889 Lunalilo Home Road, 2nd Floor Honolulu, HI 96825 808/396-2502 Idaho Gary Marx, GT Specialist Special Education Services Idaho Department of Education PO Box 83720 650 West State Street, 2nd Floor Boise, ID 83720-0027 208/334-3940 Illinois Susan Morrison, Education Consultant Center for Ed. Leadership Innovation Illinois Board of Education 100 N. First Street Springfield, IL 62777 217/782-3371 Indiana Patty Garret, Coordinater Gifted and Talented Education Indiana Department of Education State House, Room 229 Indianapolis, IN 46204-2798 317/232-9106 Iowa Dr. Maryellan Knowles Gifted and Talented Education Iowa Department of Education Grimes State Office Building Des Moines, IA 50319-0146 515/281-3199 Kansas Joan R. Miller, Program Specialist Gifted and Talented Education Student Support Service Kansas Department of Education 120 S.E. 10th Avenue Topeka, KS 66612 913/296-2141 Kentucky Dr. Laura Henderson, Consultant Gifted and Talented Program Division of Professional Development Kentucky Department of Education 500 Mero Street Capital Plaza Tower, Room 1718 Frankfort, KY 40601 502/564-2672 Louisana Ms. Pat Clay-Dial, Supervisor Gifted and Talented Education Louisiana Department of Education PO Box 94064 Baton Rouge, LA 70804 504/763-3933 Maine Valerie Terry Seaberg Consultant, Gifted/Talented Education Department of Education State House Station #23 Augusta, ME 04333 207/287-5950 Maryland Deborah Bellflower Student Achievement/Program Enrichment Maryland Department of Education 200 West Baltimore Street Baltimore, MD 21201-2595 410/767-0100 Massachusetts Deborah Smith-Pressley Instructional and Curriculum Services Massachusetts Department of Education 350 Main Street Malden, MA 02148 617/388-3300, ext. 260 Michigan Mary Bailey-Hengesh Consultant for Talent Development Curriculum Development Program Michigan Department of Education PO Box 30008 Lansing, MI 48909 517/373-4213 Minnesota Minnesota Department of Education Gifted and Talented Programs 731 Capitol Square Building St. Paul, MN 55101 (no coordinator) 612/296-4072 Mississippi Dr. Conrad S. Castle Consultant, Gifted/Talented Programs Mississippi Department of Education PO Box 771 Jackson, MS 39205-0771 601/359-3501 Missouri David Welch Director, Gifted Education Programs Department of Elementary and Secondary Education PO Box 480 Jefferson City, MO 65102 573/751-2453 Montana Michael Hall, Specialist Office of Public Instruction Montana Department of Education PO Box 202501 Helena, MT 59620-2501 406/444-4422 Nebraska Dr. Ellen Russell, Director NE Department of Education High Ability Learner Education 301 Centennial Mall South, Box 94987 Lincoln, NE 68509-4987 402/471-0737 Nevada Ms. Doris Betts, Gifted Ed. Specialist Nevada Department of Education Gifted/Talented Education 700 East Fifth Street Capitol Complex Carson City, NV 89710 702/687-9147 New Hampshire Michele Munson Consultant, Office of Gifted Education New Hampshire Department of Education 101 Pleasant Street Concord, NH 03301 603/271-3769 New Jersey Roberta Carol, Coordinator Gifted and Talented Education New Jersey Department of Education 240 West State Street, 7th Floor Trenton, NJ 08625-0500 609/984-1805 New Mexico Ms. Roberta Knox, Director Gifted/Talented Education New Mexico Department of Education 300 Don Gaspar-Education Bldg. Santa Fe, NM 87501-2786 505/827-6541 New York Mary Daley Coordinator, Gifted Education New York Department of Education Room 981 EBA Albany, NY 12234 518/474-8773 North Carolina Rebecca B. Garland Gifted Education Consultant Exceptional Children Division North Carolina Department of Public Education 301 North Wilmington Street Raleigh, NC 27601-2825 919/715-1565 North Dakota Ann Clapper Director, Curriculum Leadership and Improvement Division of Independent Study Department of Public Instruction State Univ. Station Box 5036 Fargo, ND 58105-5036 701/231-6030 Ohio Nancy Hamant Gifted Education Consultant Division of Special Education Ohio Department of Education 933 High Street Worthington, OH 43085-4087 614/466-2650 Oklahoma Cynthia Brown Director, Gifted/Talented Section Oklahoma Department of Education 2500 North Lincoln Blvd. Oklahoma City, OK 73105-4599 405/521-4287 Oregon Nancy Anderson, Education Specialist Gifted and Talented Programs Oregon Department of Education 255 Capital St., N.E. Salem, OR 97310-0290 503/378-3598 Pennsylvania T. Noretta Bingaman, Advisor Gifted /Talented Education Program Bureau of Special Education, 7th Floor Pennsylvania Department of Education 333 Market Street Harrisburg, PA 17126-0333 717/783-6913 Puerto Rico Blanca Aponte Gifted and Talented Education Puerto Rico Department of Education Hato Rey, PR 99024 809/765-1475 Rhode Island Dr. John Wilkinson, Coordinator Gifted/Talented Programs Rhode Island Department of Elementary and Secondary Education 255 Westminister Street Providence, RI 02903 401/277-2031 South Carolina Cindy Saylor Gifted and Talented Education Contact South Carolina Department of Education 803-A Rutledge Buildinng 1429 Senete Street Columbia, SC 29201 803/734-8371 South Dakota Shirlie Hoag Gifted Education South Dakota Department of Education 700 Governors Drive Pierre, SD 57501-2291 605/773-6400 Tennesee Janice Cobb Gifted and Talented Programs & Services Division of Special Education Tennesee Department of Education 710 James Robertson Pkwy., 8th Floor Nashville, TN 37243-0380 615/741-2851 Texas Evelyn L. Hiatt Director, Gifted and Talented Education Texas Education Agency 1701 N. Congress Avenue Austin, TX 78701 512/463-9455 Texas Ms. Jeanette Covington Consultant, Gifted and Talented Education Texas Education Agency 1701 N. Congress Avenue Austin, TX 78701 512/463-9455 Utah Connie Love Gifted/Talented Education Specialist Utah Department of Education 250 E. 500 South Salt Lake City, UT 84111 801/538-7743 Vermont Vermont Department of Education Montpelier, VT 05620 (no position funded) 802/828-3111 Virgin Islands Mary Harley Coordinator, Gifted/Talented Education St. Thomas/St. John School District #44-46 Kongens Gade St. Thomas, VI 00802 809/774-3725 Virginia Joy Baytops, Specialist Programs for the Gifted Virginia Department of Education Post Office Box 2120 Richmond, VA 23218-2120 804/225-2884 Washington Gayle Pauley, Program Supervisor Gifted and Talented Education Office of Public Instruction Old Capital Building, PO Box 47200 Olympia, WA 98504-7200 360/753-2858 West Virginia Dr. Virginia Simmons Coordinator of Gifted Programs West Virginia Department of Education Office of Special Education Capital Complex Building 6, Room 362 Charleston, WV 25305 304/558-0160 Wisconsin Wisconsin Department of Public Instruction 125 S. Webster Street PO Box 7841 Madison, WI 53707-7841 (no position funded) 608/266-3560 Wyoming Rodger Hammer, Director Wyoming Department of Education Gifted/Talented Education Hathaway Bldg., 2nd floor Cheyenne, WY 82002-0050 307/777-6226 Top of Page Back to ERIC Menu Back to CEC Home Page copyright © 1996 ERIC Clearinghouse on Disabilities and Gifted Education Last updated: December 18, 1996 Send updates to: ericec@cec.sped.org URL: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm WT02-B20-32IA001-000011-B022-221http://www.cec.sped.org:80/fact/internat.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101074106 text/html 6159HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 07:41:14 GMTLast-modified: Tuesday, 31-Dec-96 23:02:00 GMTContent-length: 5967Content-type: text/html International/National Associations for Gifted Education International/National Associations for Gifted Education Updated 11/96 For additional information on supporting the needs of children who are gifted, pleasecontact one of the following international/national professional associations. CANADA Lannie Kanevsky Faculty of Education Simon Fraser University Burnaby, BC, Canada V5A 1S6 604/291-5965 (Information on Canadian networking and resources) Centre for Gifted Education Faculty of Education 846 Education Tower University of Calgary 2500 University Dr., NW Calgary, Alberta, Canada T2N 1N4 403/220-7799 (Information on professional training) EUROPE-ECHA Secretariat of ECHA Bildundund Begabung e.V. Wissenschaftszentrum PO Box 20 14 48 D-53144 Bonn Germany tel. +49 228 302 266 fax. +49 228 302 270 FRANCE Association Francaise pour les Enfants Precoces (AFEP) 13 bis rue Albert Joly 78110 Le Vesinet France E-mail: cote@cnam.fr Telephone: ~33 (1) 34.80.03.90 UNITED STATES The Association for the Gifted (TAG) (A division of The Council for Exceptional Children [CEC]) Attn: Ella Mae Gogel 2216 Main Street Cedar Falls, IA 50613 319/266-0205 (Information on parenting, effective advocacy, and names of persons and associationsin your area) American Association for Gifted Children 1121 W. Main St., Suite 100 Durham, NC 27701 919/683-1742 Institute for the Academic Advancement of Youth (IAAY) The Center for Talented Youth (CTY) Johns Hopkins University Charles and 34th Streets Baltimore, MD 21218 410/516-0337 URL: http://www.jhu.edu/~gifted/ (One of four regional talent search programs; offers summer programs andnetworking) Center for Talent Development Northwestern University 617 Dartmouth Place Evanston, Illinois 60208 708/491-3782 URL: http://ctdnet.acns.nwu.edu (One of four regional talent search programs; offers summer programs andnetworking) Council of State Directors of Programs for the Gifted c/o Michael Hall, Specialist Office of Public Instruction Montana Department of Education PO Box 202501 Helena, MT 59620-2501 406/444-4422 URL: http://www.netc.org/web_mod/gifted_ed/ (Statistical information, names of State Consultants, and information on activities in thestates) Hollingworth Center for Highly Gifted Children PO Box 434 Portland, ME 04112-0434 207/655-3767 (Information and a newsletter on highly gifted children) National Association for Gifted Children (NAGC) Suite 550 1707 L Street, NW Washington, DC 20036 202/785-4268 URL: http://www.nagc.org/ (Advocacy organization; offers a wide range of publications and services) National Conference of Governors' Schools c/o James Bray Governor's School of West NC 2454 Lyndurst Avenue Winston-Salem, NC 27103 919/725-3109 (Information about Governors' School programs) The National Research Center on the Gifted and Talented The University of Connecticut 362 Fairfield Road, U-7 Storrs, CT 06269-2007 203/486-4826 URL:http://www.ucc.uconn.edu/~wwwgt/nrcgt.html National/State Leadership Training Institute for Gifted and Talented (N/SLTI-G/T) Hilton Center 900 Wilshire Boulevard, Suite 1142 Los Angeles, CA 90017 213/489-7470 (Professional and teacher training; publications) Supporting the Emotional Needs of the Gifted, Inc. (SENG) Dr. James Delisle SENG-College of Education 405 White Hall Kent State University Kent, OH 44242 216/672-4450 URL:http://monster.educ.kent.edu/CoE/EFSS/SENG/contacts.html (Counselor and parent training; referrals) Duke University Talent Identification Program (TIP) 1121 West Main Street, Suite 100 Durham, NC 27701 919/683-1400 URL: http://www.jayi.com/tip (One of four regional talent search programs; offers summer programs andnetworking) World Council for Gifted and Talented Children The Connie Belin International Center for Talented & Gifted Education 210 Lindquist Center The University of Iowa Iowa City, IA 52242 1-800-336-6463 URL: http://www.uiowa.edu (An international interchange of information on research and programs; researchjournal) Top of Page Back to ERIC Menu Back to CEC Home Page copyright © 1996 ERIC Clearinghouse on Disabilities and Gifted Education Last updated: December 31, 1996 Send updates to: ericec@cec.sped.org URL: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm WT02-B20-33IA001-000011-B022-234http://www.cec.sped.org:80/fact/stateadv.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101074116 text/html 11058HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 07:41:25 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 08-Nov-96 15:40:00 GMTContent-length: 10866Content-type: text/html State Associations for the Gifted State Associations for the Gifted Updated 11/96 State Associations for the gifted traditionally are advocacy organizations for giftedstudents. Membership in these organizations includes parents, teachers,administrators, and researchers concerned with the education of gifted students. Stateassociations lobby for legislation, provide information, sponsor annual conventions,organize workshops, and offer support to parents and teachers attempting to meet theneeds of gifted children. Listed below are the contact addresses of those stateassociations for which ERIC EC has current information. We appreciate the assistanceof the Duke University Talent Identification program in compiling this list. Alabama Lusia MacPherson, Ph.D., President Alabama Association for Gifted Children 655 Overland Rd. Montevallo, AL 35115 205/620-1030 Alaska Chuck Alkire, President Alaskans for Gifted and Talented Education c/o Fairbanks North Star School 520 5th Avenue Fairbanks, AK 97701-4756 Arizona Ms. Dolores Letendre-Salisz, President AZ Association for Gifted and Talented P.O.Box 31088 Tempe, AZ 85046 Arizona Eleanor M. TeSelle, Executive Secretary AZ Association for Gifted and Talented PO Box 26415 Tempe, AZ 85285 602/839-0661 Arkansas Jeanna Westmoreland, President Arkansans for GT Education (AGATE) 306 Hardin Arkadelphia, AR 71923 California Carol Brown Spencer, Administrative Assistant CA Association for the Gifted 426 Escuela Avenue, Suite 19 Mountain View, CA 94040 415/965-0653 Colorado Dr. Diana Howard, President CO Association for Gifted/Talented 3065 S. Norman Court Denver, CO 80224 Connecticut Ms. Noel Croce, President CT Association for Gifted and Talented 155 Sycamore Drive Torrington, CT 06790 Connecticut Ms. Nancy Wade CT Educators' Network for the Talented & Gifted 36 Heritage Drive Avon, CT 06001-4521 203/675-7340 Delaware Ms. Judy Cropper, President The Gifted Children Association of Delaware c/o Seaford High School 399 North Market Street Seaford, DE 19973 Delaware Dr. Margaret Dee, President Delaware TAG Department of Public Instruction PO Box 1402 Dover, DE 19903-1402 302/739-4667 Florida Hilda Rosselli, President Florida Association for the Gifted (FLAG) University of South Florida Special Education Department 4202 East Fowler, HMS 421 Tampa, FL 33620 Florida Terry Wilson, Director Parents for Able Learner Students (PALS) 5101 Lake in the Woods Blvd. Lakeland, FL 33813 941/647-3003 Georgia Ms. Helen Kelley, Executive Assistant Georgia Association for Gifted Children 890-F Atlanta Street, Suite #192 Roswell, GA 30075 Hawaii Susan Fuller Hawaii Gifted Association PO Box 22878 Honolulu, HI 96823-2878 808/732-1138 Idaho Ms. Marti Agler, President Idaho Association for the Gifted 155 E. Holly St. Boise, ID 83712 Illinois Sandy Goldberg, Executive Director Illinois Association for Gifted and Talented 643 Hillside Drive Highland Park, IL 60035 Indiana Ms. Nancy Hill, President IN Association for the Gifted 5224 E. 73rd Court Indianapolis, IN 46250 Indiana Ms. Jill Meisenheimer Community Resources Presents of Mind Resource Show IN Association for the Gifted 3923 Kitty Hawk Court Carmel, IN 46033 317/844-3920 Iowa Ms. Teresa Schaffer, Executive Secretary IA Talented and Gifted Association 206 6th Avenue, Suite 900 Des Moines, IA 50309 515/282-8192 Kansas Donna House, Chairperson Kansas Parent Information Network (KPIN) 426 Olivetti McPherson, KS 67460 316/241-5654 Kansas Ms. Sharon Slade, President KS Association for Gifted/Talented/Creative PO Box 25281 Overland Park, KS 66225 913/681-4079 Kentucky Ms. Sheila Cruse, Executive Director KY Association for Gifted Education PO Box 9610 Bowling Green, KY 42102-9610 502/745-6323 Louisiana Betty K. Turner, President LA Assoc for Gifted and Talented Students 11628 Highway 190 Kinder, LA 70648 Maine Patti Drapeau, President ME Educators of the Gifted and Talented (MEGAT) PO Box 5 South Freeport, ME 04078 207/865-4380 Maine Meg Swoboda, President ME Parents for Gifted/Talented Youth 25 Kittredge Road South Portland, ME 04106 207/767-6121 Maryland Jan Hanson, President MD Coalition for Gifted and Talented Education (MCGATE) 1816 Rawlings Place Crofton, MD 21114 Massachusetts Clista Dow, President MA Assn for Advancement of Individual Potential 18 Paul Revere Rd. P.O Box 446 Sharon, MA 02067 617/784-5182 Michigan Mr. Frank Sineni, President MI Alliance for Gifted Education 1092 Huyck Lake Coldwater, MI 49036 Minnesota Ms. Alice Moersch, President MN Educators of Gifted and Talented 817 E. 4th Street Northfield, MN 55057 Minnesota Ms. Laurie Crist, President MN Council for Gifted and Talented 5701 Normandale Road Edina, MN 55424 612/927-9546 Mississippi Dr. Mike Carr, President MS Association for Talented & Gifted Delta State University Box 31 Cleveland, MS 38733 Missouri Peggy Higginbottom, President Gifted Association of MO 14935 Country Ridge Road Chesterfield MO 63017 Montana Stephanie Smith, Newsletter Editor MT Association for G/T Education 3091 South Daffodil Billings, MT 59102 406/652-3720 Nebraska Kay Corell, Coordinator NE Association for the Gifted 4510 Eastridge Drive Omaha, NE 68134 402/493-2479 Nevada Dr. John Barker, President Nevada Association for Gifted and Talented PO Box 21387, Airport Station Carson City, NV 89721 New Hampshire Mr. Richard Bothmer, President NH Association for Gifted Education PO Box 1104 Concord, NH 03302 New Jersey Mr. Al Dorhout, President NJ Association for Gifted Children PO Box 49 Parsippany, NJ 07054 New Mexico Roberta Knox, Special Education Consultant NM State Dept. of Education 300 Don Gaspar Santa Fe, NM 87501 505/827-6541 New York Joyce McDermott, President AGATE Advocacy for Gifted & Talented Education 4790 Burrstone Road Syracuse, NY 13215 315/468-0709 North Carolina Dr. Linda Weiss Morris, Executive Director NC Association for the Gifted and Talented P. O. Box 5394 Winston-Salem, NC 27113-5394 (704) 377-2067 North Dakota Jolene Richardson, Coordinator Resource Center, Division of Independent Study University Station PO Box 5036 Fargo, ND 58102 Ohio Ms. Ann Johnson, President Consortium of Ohio Coordinators for Gifted 3220 Spring Valley Road Akron, OH 44333 Ohio Ms. Mary Deem, President Ohio Association of Gifted Children c/o Troy City Schools 413 East Canal Street Troy, OH 45373 Oklahoma Ms. Robbie Duck, President OK Association for Gifted, Creative, and Talented 4605 N. Britton Drive Stillwater, OK 74075-1609 Oklahoma Dr. Patricia Hollingsworth Network for Parents and Teachers of the Gifted 600 South College Tulsa, OK 74104 918/631-2569 Oregon Darlene Robinson, Executive Secretary Oregon Association for Talented and Gifted PO Box 1703 Beaverton, OR 97075 503/591-7899 Pennsylvania Ms. Franny F. McAleer, President PA Association for Gifted Education 3026 Potshop Road Norristown, PA 19403 610/584-5221 Rhode Island Judy Pardo, President State Advocates for Gifted Education PO Box 302 North Kingstown, RI 02852-0302 South Carolina Dr. Julie Long, President SC Consortium for Gifted Education Richland School District Two 6831 Brookfield Road Columbia, SC 29206 South Dakota Ms. Laurie Wenger, President SD Association for Gifted Education 4805 Swiss Stone Circle Sioux Falls, DS 57106 Tennesee Ms. Marie Peine, President TN Association for the Gifted 3059 Pittman Center Road Sevierville, TN 37876 Texas Connie McLendon, Executive Director TX Association for the Gifted/Talented 406 East 11th, Suite 310 Austin, TX 78701 512/499-8248 Utah Ms. Rebecca Haslam-Odoradi Utah Association for Gifted Children 6545 South State Street, #125 Murray, Utah 84107 Vermont Dr. Iris B. Lash, Director VT Network for the Gifted 35 Clearwater Rd. Shelburne, VT 05405 802/985-3405 Virginia Tommie Ellison, President VA Association for the Education of Gifted (VAEG) Newport News Public Schools 12465 Warwick Blvd. NewPort News, VA 23606 Washington Sue Fischer, President WAETAG 1807 West Pacific Spokane, WA 98009 West Virginia Anne Fishkin, Ph.D., President WV Association for Gifted & Talented West Virginia Graduate College 100 Angus E. Peyton Drive South Charleston, WV 25303-1600 304/746-2500 Wisconsin Mrs. Audrey Burkes, Executive Secretary WI Association for Talented & Gifted (WATG) 5912 Schumann Drive Madison, WI 53711-5103 608/277-8448 Wyoming Marcia McChesney, President WY Association for Gifted Education Sheridan County School Dist. 1 Box 819 Ranchester, WY 82839 307/655-9541 Top of Page Back to ERIC Menu Back to CEC Home Page copyright © 1996 ERIC Clearinghouse on Disabilities and Gifted Education Last updated: November 7, 1996 Send updates to: ericec@cec.sped.org URL: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm WT02-B20-34IA001-000011-B022-250http://www.cec.sped.org:80/faq/add-read.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101074126 text/html 16755HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 07:41:35 GMTLast-modified: Wednesday, 11-Dec-96 23:05:00 GMTContent-length: 16560Content-type: text/html ADD-READINGS ADD-READINGS (last updated April 30, 1996) THE ERIC CLEARINGHOUSE ON DISABILITIES AND GIFTEDEDUCATION (ERIC EC) The Council for Exceptional Children 1920 Association Drive Reston, VA 20191 Toll Free: 1-800-328-0272 TTY: 703-264-9449 E-mail: ericec@cec.sped.org Internet: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec READINGS AND RESOURCES ON ATTENTION DEFICIT DISORDERS(ADD)/ATTENTION DEFICIT HYPERACTIVITY DISORDERS (ADHD) September 1995 At the end of this file are links to Internet resources and Internet listservs (discussion groups) where you can obtain more specific information on this topic. Crook, W. G. (1991). Help for the hyperactive child. Professional Books, POBox 3246, Jackson, TN 38302. 245pp. This guide for parents focuses on treating hyperactivity and attention deficitdisorders, as well as related behavior and learning problems, through allergy detection,nutritional changes, and avoidance of environmental toxins, rather than drug treatment. Suggestions are given to parents, teachers and other professionals including; dietarychanges, good nutritional supplements, food allergies, lifestyle changes, control ofcandida, psychological support and discipline and helping the child succeed in school. DuPaul, G. J., & Stoner, G. (1994). ADHD in the schools: Assessment andintervention strategies. Guilford Publications Inc., 72 Spring Street, New York, NY10012. 269pp. This book addresses school-related problems associated with attention deficithyperactivity disorder (ADHD), such as academic underachievement, noncompliancewith classroom rules, and problematic peer relationships. Eleven appendices provideexamples of ADHD identification criteria, a teacher handout on ADHD medications, an ADHD self-report rating scale, suggested readings, and samples for professionalcommunications. Fouse, B., & Brians, S. (1993). A primer on attention deficit disorder. (Fastback354). Phi Delta Kappa, PO Box 789, Bloomington, IN 47402-0789. 45pp.(ED370319 microfiche only) This pamphlet explains briefly what is known about attention deficit disorder (ADD)to help parents and educators have a more positive influence on the ADD child's life. Itbegins with definitions of terminology, characteristics of preschool, school-age, andadult individuals with ADD, and causes of ADD. It discusses special problemsassociated with ADD, including academic problems, behavior problems, interpersonaldifficulties, and self-esteem difficulties. Strategies effective in managing ADD areoutlined, including medical management, behavioral strategies, cognitive-behavioral therapy, modifications in assignments and tests, and instruction inlearning strategies. Friedman, R. J., & Doyal, G. T. (1992). Management of children and adolescents with attention deficit-hyperactivity disorder. (3rd ed.) Pro-ed, 8700 ShoalCreek Blvd., Austin, TX 78758-6897. 198pp. This book combinesmedical and psychological research findings with clinical experience gained from workwith children with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) and their families. Thebook begins with definitions and statistical information, and then goes on to reviewmedical, psychological, and educational management programs. Gordon, S. B., & Asher, M. J. (1994). Meeting the ADD challenge: A practicalguide for teachers. Research Press, 2612 N. Mattis Ave., Champaign, IL 61821.188pp. This book is designed to help classroom teachers meet the challenge of servingstudents with attention deficit disorder (ADD) by presenting practical information aboutthe needs and treatment of these children and adolescents. A five-stage model forbehavioral assessment is described, involving problem identification, measurementand functional analysis, matching intervention to students, assessment of interventionstrategies, and evaluation of the intervention plan. Specific assessment methods foruse within this model are then discussed, and basic issues to be addressed prior to the design of an intervention strategy are analyzed. Hartman, T. (1994). Focus your energy: Hunting for success in business withattention deficit disorder. Pocket Books, Simon & Schuster Consumer Group, 1230Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 10020. 138pp. This book examines common characteristics of individuals with attention deficitdisorder (ADD) who have succeeded in business, and draws on these findings toprovide suggestions for adults with ADD. Guidelines for finding appropriate jobs inexisting businesses are provided, as are tips on starting one's own business. Specific suggestions focus on how to harness and manage ADD in the workplace, includinggoal-setting, running meetings, and interpersonal relationships. Johnson, D. D. (1992). I can't sit still: Educating and affirming inattentive andhyperactive children. Suggestions for parents, teachers and other care providers ofchildren to age 10. ETR Associates, PO Box 1830, Santa Cruz, CA 95061-1830.800-321-4407. 178pp. Causes, symptoms and challenges related to attention deficit hyperactivity disorderare discussed, with a strong emphasis on cultivating students' self-esteem. Diagnosisof attention problems is described, as are treatments such as behavior management,drug therapy, and cognitive-behavioral therapy. Self-esteem is approached as acombination of feeling valued, feeling in control, feeling capable and avoidingembarrassment. Methods for parents, teachers and students to moderate and controltheir frustration and anger are described. Johnston, R. B. (1991). Attention deficits, learning disabilities, and Ritalin: Apractical guide. (2nd ed.) Singular Publishing Group, Inc., 4284 41st St., San Diego,CA 92105-1197; 800-521-8545. 178pp. This book reviews practicalaspects of identifying learning and attention disabilities; examines the problems andpitfalls in diagnosis and treatment; explores the expectations, limitations, and precautions necessary in using Ritalin (brand name for methylphenidate); attempts to demystify what physicians do; addresses the dynamics ofan effective team approach; and argues the need to demedicalize learning andattention disabilities. Lerner, J. W. (1995). Attention deficit disorders: Assessment and teaching.Brooks/Cole Publishing Co., 511 Forest Lodge Rd., Pacific Grove, CA 93950.259pp. This book on attention deficit disorders (ADD) is designed to prepare current andprospective teachers and other school personnel to teach and work with students withADD in the schools. The book reviews assessment methods, the diagnostic processand testing instruments; describes methods that regular teachers can use in the classroom; describes interventions used by special educators; and discusses thechallenges faced by the parent of a child with ADD, methods of counseling, and homemanagement for parents. Issues involved in using medications and the kinds ofmedications administered to children with ADD are reviewed. Moss, R. A., & Dunlap, H. H. (1990). Why Johnny can't concentrate. BantamBooks, 666 Fifth Ave., New York, NY 10103. 225pp. This bookexplains the components of attention deficit disorder (ADD) in children, acknowledgesthe diversity of children with these dysfunctions and the limitations of the labels used to categorize them, and offers suggestions regarding the practical management of thesechildren. The book offers a general picture of the characteristics of ADD and theprocess of diagnosis, and provides chapters that look at ADD in four age groups:preschoolers, early elementary school, late elementary and junior high, and adulthood. The book also provides specific information to equip parents to help their children andto find qualified professionals when needed. Nadeau, K. (Ed.) (1995). A comprehensive guide to attention deficit disorder inadults: Research, diagnosis, and treatment. Brunner/Mazel Publishers, 19 UnionSquare West, New York, NY 10003. 408pp. This book is written forprofessionals who diagnose and treat adults with attention deficit disorder (ADD), itprovides information from psychologists and physicians on the most current researchand treatment issues regarding our understanding of ADD as a neurobiological disorder. Authors examine ADD with and without hyperactivity anddescribe a wide range of assessment tools that can be useful in developing a fulldiagnostic picture of different conditions that must be addressed in treating adults withthe disorder. Nadeau, K. G., & Dixon, E. B. (1991). Learning to slow down and pay attention.Chesapeake Psychological Services, P.C., 5041 A & B, Backlick Rd., Annandale, VA22003. 52pp. This booklet designed for children with problems of attention, impulsivity, andconcentration, is to be read along with their parents. Sections include a check list forstudents to assess their problems at school, at home, and with friends; ways that otherpeople can help the student, such as talking with a counselor; and things the studentcan do to help himself or herself. Tips on doing homework, getting ready for school,paying attention in class, and solving problems are included. The book is written ineasy-to-understand language and illustrated with cartoons. Nadeau, K. G. (1994). Survival guide for college students with ADD or LD.Brunner/Mazel Publishers, 19 Union Square West, New York, NY 10003.56pp. This book is written for college students with attention deficit disorders,hyperactivity, or learning disabilities who are applying to or are already enrolled incollege. Chapters include questions to consider in choosing a college, on-campusaccommodations, coping strategies, specific tips for organizing important informationand managing time, choosing a major, career guidance, tutoring, learningself-advocacy, and resources and services available elsewhere in the community. Neuville, M. B. (1995). Sometimes I get all scribbly. (Rev.ed.) Pro-ed, 8700Shoal Creek Blvd., Austin, TX 78757-6897. 159pp. This first-personaccount of life with a child with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD)addresses the author's struggles to help and understand her son. The story is amother's testament to the day-to-day, moment-to-moment existence of life with a childwho is hyperactive. It validates the struggles and triumphs of their lives. Paltin, D. M. (1993). The parents' hyperactivity handbook: Helping the fidgetychild. Plenum Publishing Corporation, 233 Spring St., New York, NY 10013.800-221-9369. 291pp. This book is written to provide information and suggestions on aspects of attentiondeficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) which parents of children with ADHD find mostchallenging. The first part of the book deals with behavior problems rooted ininattention, impulsivity, and hyperactivity. Aspects of childrens' affective developmentare discussed, including relationships among children and the interaction amongself-concept, self-esteem, and self-mastery. The second part of the book thenaddresses specific issues such as medication, discussing ADHD with affected children,and working with schools and teachers. Quinn, P. O. (Ed.). (1994). ADD and the college student: A guide for highschool and college students with attention deficit disorder. Magination Press,Brunner/Mazel Publishers, 19 Union Square West, New York, NY 10003.800-825-3089. 113pp. This handbook was designed to help high school and college students who haveattention deficit disorder (ADD) make a successful transition to college life. Chaptersexamine various aspects of ADD and its effects on college preparation andselection. Quinn, P. O., & Stern, J. M. Putting on the brakes: Young people's guide tounderstanding attention deficit disorder (ADHD). (1991). 64pp.; The "Putting on theBrakes" activity book for young people with ADHD. (1993). 88pps. Brunner/Mazel, Publishers, 19 Union Square West, New York, NY 10003. This guideand accompanying activity book were designed to teach children between 8 and 13 thefacts about attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD)and how to gain a sense ofcontrol. Tips are provided for organizing their lives through time management, improved study habits, and developing test taking skills. The activity book uses pictures,puzzles, and other techniques to assist in the learning of a wide range of skills. Rief, S. F. (1993). How to reach and teach ADD/ADHD children: practicaltechniques, strategies, and interventions for helping children with attention problemsand hyperactivity. University of Minnesota, Dept. of Professional Development and Conference Services,214 Nolte Center, 315 Pillsbury Drive, SE, Minneapolis, MN 55455-0139. JOURNALS: Attention, CHADD (Children with Attention Deficit Disorder), 499 Northwest 70thAve., Suite 101, Plantation, FL 33317; 305-587-3700. Journal of Learning Disabilities, Pro-ed, 5341 Industrial Oaks Blvd., Austin, TX78735-8809; 512-451-3246. Learning Disabilities Quarterly, Council for Learning Disabilities, PO Box 40303,Overland Park, KS 66204; 913-492-8755. JOURNALS (SPECIAL ISSUES): Exceptional Children. Issues in the Education of Children with Attention DeficitDisorder, Vol.60 No.2, Oct/Nov 1993 The Council for Exceptional Children, 1920Association Dr., Reston, VA 22091-1589; 800-232-7323. Intervention in School and Clinic. Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder: AcademicStrategies, Comprehensive Assessment, Students with ADHD in the InclusiveClassroom, Vol.30 No. 4, Mar 1995, Pro-ed, 5341 Industrial Oaks Blvd., Austin, TX78735-8809; 512-451-3246. Topics in Language Disorders. ADD and Its Relationship to Spoken and WrittenLanguage, Vol.14 No.4, Aug 1994, Aspen Publishers, Inc., 200 Orchard Ridge Dr.,Gaithersburg, MD 20878; 800-638-8437. NEWSLETTERS: ADDendum (for and by ADD adults) c/o CPS 5041A Backlick Road Annandale, VA 22003 ADD-ONS PO Box 675 Frankfort, IL 60423 ADDult News Newsletter of ADDult Support Network 2620 Ivy Place Toledo, OH 43613 Brakes Magination Press Brunner/Mazel Publishers 19 Union Square West New York, NY 10003 800-825-3089 CH.A.D.D.E.R, and CH.A.D.D.E.R. Box Newsletters of CHADD (Children withAttention Deficit Disorder) 499 NW 70th Ave., Suite 308 Plantation, FL33317 Challenge [newsletter of ADDA (Attention Deficit Disorder Association)] POBox 2001 West Newbury, MA 01985 RESOURCES: Attention Deficit Disorder Association (ADDA) PO Box 972 Mentor, OH 44061 800-487-2282 Attention Deficit Information Network (AD-IN) 475 Hillside Avenue Needham, MA 02194 617-455-9895 Children with Attention Deficit Disorder (CHADD) 499 NW 70th Avenue, Suite 308 Plantation, FL 33317 305-587-3700 (call for the number of your local CHADD group) National Information Center for Children and Youth with Disabilities (NICHCY) PO Box 1492 Washington, DC 20013 800-695-0285 Internet Resources Internet Listservs This ERIC publication is in the public domain and may be freely reproduced anddisseminated. This publication was prepared with funding from the Office of Educational Researchand Improvement, U.S. Department of Education, under contract no. RR93002005. The opinions expressed in this report do not necessarily reflect the positions or policiesof OERI or the Department of Education. copyright © 1996 ERIC Clearinghouse on Disabilities and Gifted Education URL: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm WT02-B20-35IA001-000011-B022-268http://www.cec.sped.org:80/faq/addfaq.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101074138 text/html 24058HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 07:41:43 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 09-Sep-96 20:35:00 GMTContent-length: 23866Content-type: text/html ADD-FAQ ADD-FAQ (File last updated: July 22, 1996) THE ERIC CLEARINGHOUSE ON DISABILITIES AND GIFTEDEDUCATION (ERIC EC) The Council for Exceptional Children 1920 Association Drive Reston, VA 20191 Toll Free: 1-800-328-0272 TTY: 703-264-9449 E-mail: ericec@cec.sped.org Internet: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm What can you tell me about Attention Deficit Disorders (ADD)? This file includes information about ADD and, at the end of the file, links to Internet resources and Internet listservs (discussion groups) where you can obtain more specific information on this topic. There are several ERIC digests and an annotated bibliography thatprovide further information on this topic. You can read the full text of our ERIC digestsunder our listing at the U.S.Department of Education, Office of Educational Research and Improvement. Enclosed are several citations from the ERIC database. These records are asample of the kind of information you can find in the ERIC database. For morecitations on your topic of interest, you may want to search the ERIC database yourself onthe Internet. References with ED (ERIC Document) and EJ (ERIC Journal) identifiers are cited inthe ERIC database; for example, ED333123 or EJ333999. ERIC documents areavailable in microfiche collections at more than 825 locations worldwide (check yourlocal college or public library). They can also be ordered for a fee through the ERICDocument Reproduction Service (EDRS) at 1-800-443-ERIC. References with anEJ (ERIC Journal) number are available for a fee from the originating journal (checkwith your local college or public library), through interlibrary loan services, or fromarticle reproduction clearinghouses, such as UMI: 1-800-248-0360; or ISI:1-800-523-1850. EJ499958 PS522951 Nurturing the Growing Brain. Healy, Jane M. NAMTA Journal, v20 n1 p44-66 Win 1995 Issue theme: Montessori: Nurturing the Human Potential. Language:English Document Type: NON-CLASSROOM MATERIAL (055); JOURNAL ARTICLE (080)Journal Announcement: CIJJUL95 Asserts that family environment and the parent-child relationship have a significanteffect on the neurological development of young children. Suggests that parents needto encourage thinking, problem-solving, and language skills in their children throughmeaningful conversation and interaction. Maintains that attention deficit hyperactivitydisorder (ADHD) and dyslexia often have environmental causes. (MDM) Descriptors: Attention Deficit Disorders; *Cognitive Development; Dyslexia; EarlyChildhood Education; *Environmental Influences; Family Environment; Hyperactivity;*Language Skills; *Learning Disabilities; Neurology; *Parent Child Relationship;Problem Solving; Thinking Skills; *Young Children EJ499251 EC610494 Comprehensive Assessment of Children and Youth with ADHD. Burcham,Barbara G.; DeMers, Stephen T. Intervention in School and Clinic, v30 n4 p211-20 Mar 1995 ISSN: 1053-4512 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); NON-CLASSROOM MATERIAL(055) Journal Announcement: CIJJUL95 Principles of comprehensive assessment of students with attention deficithyperactivity disorder are examined in relation to legal compliance, specialconsiderations for cultural diversity, medical diagnosis versus educational identification,and the problem-solving assessment model. Strengths and weakness of specificstrategies are identified as are promising school-based and clinic-based practices.(DB) Descriptors: *Attention Deficit Disorders; Clinical Diagnosis; Compliance (Legal);Cultural Differences; Disability Identification; Educational Diagnosis; *EducationalPractices; Elementary Secondary Education; *Evaluation Methods; * Hyperactivity;Medical Evaluation; Models; Problem Solving; *Student Evaluation ED376665 EC303495 Attention Deficit Disorders: Assessment and Teaching. Lerner, Janet W.; AndOthers 1995 259p. ISBN: 0-534-25044-0 Available From: Brooks/Cole Publishing Co., 511 Forest Lodge Rd., Pacific Grove,CA 93950 ($20.25). Document Not Available from EDRS. Language: English Document Type: BOOK (010); TEACHING GUIDE (052) Geographic Source: U.S.; California Journal Announcement: RIEAPR95 Target Audience: Teachers; Parents; Practitioners This book on attention deficit disorders (ADD) is designed to prepare current andprospective teachers and other school personnel to teach and work with students withADD in the schools. Part 1 introduces the field; reviews characteristics of ADD,symptoms at different stages of life, and coexisting conditions; offers a brief history ofthe field; and discusses the role of legislation. Part 2 reviews assessment methods,the diagnostic process, and testing instruments; describes methods that regularteachers can use in the classroom; describes interventions used by special educators;and discusses the challenges faced by a parent of a child with ADD, methods ofcounseling, and home management for parents. Part 3 reviews the kinds ofmedications administered to children with ADD; examines issues involved in usingmedications; and focuses on the neurobiology that underlies ADD, neurobiologicaltheories, and current research. Appendices contain a clarification of U.S. Departmentof Education policy to address the needs of children with ADD, a list of support groups,and a list of videotapes and teaching and training materials. Contains approximately300 references. (JDD) Descriptors: *Attention Deficit Disorders; Child Rearing;*Classroom Techniques; *Disability Identification; *Drug Therapy; *EducationalDiagnosis; Educational Legislation; Elementary Secondary Education; FederalLegislation; Intervention; Mainstreaming; Public Policy; Student Evaluation; Symptoms(Individual Disorders); Testing ED379886 EC303760 School Based Assessment of Attention Deficit Disorders. Carter, Susanne Western Regional Resource Center, Eugene, OR. [Jan 1994] 56p. SponsoringAgency: Office of Special Education and Rehabilitative Services (ED), Washington,DC. Contract No: H028-A30003 EDRS Price - MF01/PC03 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: REVIEW LITERATURE (070); NON-CLASSROOM MATERIAL(055); TEST, QUESTIONNAIRE (160) Geographic Source: U.S.; Oregon Journal Announcement: RIEJUL95 Target Audience: Practitioners; Policymakers This paper analyzes and synthesizes information on assessment of attention deficitdisorder (ADD), to provide guidance to states as they formulate policies and practices.The paper presents an overview of ADD from an educational perspective, focusing onstudent characteristics, developmental patterns, and coexisting disorders. Schoolwideassessment of all students is recommended, to screen for problems and to monitorindividual social and academic progress. This schoolwide assessment would befollowed by modification of learning environments, and subsequent individualevaluation of only those students in need of additional assistance. The paper identifiesthe best composition for a multidisciplinary assessment team, describes phases in theassessment process, and describes various strategies appropriate for individualstudent assessments in school settings. Instruments used in the assessment processare provided, including the Conflict Behavior Questionnaire, Skamp Rating Scale,Home Situations Questionnaire-Revised, School Situations Questionnaire-Revised,and Academic Performance Rating Scale. A brief paper by Jeanne M. Kincaid titled"Legal Considerations Pertaining to the Evaluation of ADD/ADHD" and a paper byPerry A. Zirkel titled "A Checklist for Determining Legal Eligibility of ADD/ADHDStudents" are appended. A list of parent support groups and information centersconcludes the paper. (Contains 26 references.) (JDD) Descriptors: *AttentionDeficit Disorders; *Educational Diagnosis; Elementary Secondary Education; Eligibility;*Evaluation Methods; Legal Responsibility; Prereferral Intervention; *Screening Tests;Student Characteristics; *Student Evaluation; Symptoms (Individual Disorders) ED374599 EC303321 Promising Classroom Interventions for Students with Attention Deficit Disorders. Fiore, Thomas A.; Becker, Elizabeth A. Research Triangle Inst., Research Triangle Park, NC. Center for Research inEducation. Jul 1994 215p. Sponsoring Agency: Special Education Programs (ED/OSERS), Washington, DC. Contract No: H023S10005 EDRS Price - MF01/PC09 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: NON-CLASSROOM MATERIAL (055) Geographic Source: U.S.; North Carolina Journal Announcement: RIEFEB95 Target Audience: Teachers; Practitioners This report presents school-based interventions that teachers can employ in regularclassrooms to educate students with attention deficit disorders (ADD). The reportattempts to compensate for the limitations in the ADD research literature byextrapolating from research on other difficult-to-teach students to identify and describeacademic and social skills interventions that are likely to be effective in regularclassrooms with students who have ADD. The first chapter provides an overview ofthe interventions and explains procedures followed in selecting the interventions. Eachof the remaining eight chapters focuses on a single intervention program. Theseinclude: (1) classwide peer tutoring, (2) early literacy program, (3) "Tribes," (4)self-regulated strategy development in writing, (5) earth science videodisc program, (6)skills for school success, (7) aggression replacement training, and (8) life-centeredcareer education. Each of the eight chapters provides a description of theintervention's purpose, its content and activities, implementation requirements, impacton teachers, significant costs, testimonials of effectiveness, limitations, researchsupport, contact point for more information, and a list of references. To a large extent,the program developers, as well as the teachers and administrators who are using theprograms successfully, describe the interventions in their own words. (JDD) Descriptors: Aggression; *Attention Deficit Disorders; Career Education; ClassroomEnvironment; *Classroom Techniques; Cooperative Learning; Earth Science;*Educational Practices; Elementary Secondary Education; *Intervention; LiteracyEducation; Mainstreaming; Peer Teaching; Self Management; Study Skills; *TeachingMethods; Tutorial Programs; Videodisks; Writing Strategies ED370337 EC303069 Attention Deficit Disorder: What Parents Should Know. Chesapeake Inst.,Washington, DC. [1994] 6p. Sponsoring Agency: Office of Special Education and Rehabilitative Services (ED),Washington, DC. Div. of Innovation and Development. Contract No: HS92017001 EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: NON-CLASSROOM MATERIAL (055) Geographic Source: U.S.; District of Columbia Journal Announcement: RIEOCT94 Target Audience: Parents This paper outlines practical information on children with attention deficit disorder(ADD). Guidelines for identifying ADD are presented, followed by a summary of whatparents and students can expect from special education and related services in publicschools. Pros and cons of medication are noted, and recommendations for managingthe child's behavior at home are provided. (PB) Descriptors: *Attention DeficitDisorders; Behavior Modification; Behavior Problems; *Child Rearing; DisabilityIdentification; Drug Therapy; *Educational Methods; Intervention ED370336 EC303068 Attention Deficit Disorder: What Teachers Should Know. Chesapeake Inst.,Washington, DC. [1994] 7p. Sponsoring Agency: Office of Special Education and Rehabilitative Services (ED),Washington, DC. Div. of Innovation and Development. Contract No: HS92017001 EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: NON-CLASSROOM MATERIAL (055) Geographic Source: U.S.; District of Columbia Journal Announcement: RIEOCT94 Target Audience: Teachers; Practitioners This paper provides guidelines on how to identify and work with students withattention deficit disorder (ADD). It begins by outlining common symptoms of ADD inthe classroom and general principles for the incorporation of medication into school life.The paper presents features of schools successful in dealing with ADD. School-widesuggestions emphasize individualizing classroom and lesson planning, usingcooperative learning, pairing ADD students with non-ADD peers, and using checkliststo formalize communication between the school and the home. Further suggestionsprovide for serving the student with ADD within the classroom context and as anindividual learner. Principles of behavior management effective in working withstudents with ADD are also presented. (PB) Descriptors: *Attention Deficit Disorders; *Classroom Techniques; *DisabilityIdentification; *Educational Methods; Elementary Secondary Education; Intervention;Student Behavior; Student Characteristics; Symptoms (Individual Disorders) ED370335 EC303067 Attention Deficit Disorder: Beyond the Myths. Chesapeake Inst., Washington, DC. [1994] 5p. Sponsoring Agency: Office of Special Education and Rehabilitative Services (ED),Washington, DC. Div. of Innovation and Development. Contract No: HS92017001 EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: NON-CLASSROOM MATERIAL (055) Geographic Source: U.S.; District of Columbia Journal Announcement: RIEOCT94 This paper attempts to dispel widely held misconceptions about attention deficitdisorder (ADD). Diagnosis, prevention, prevalence, behavior control, medication, andmainstreaming issues are briefly addressed, in discussions of such myths as "ADD canbe prevented," "medication can cure students with ADD," and "students with ADDcannot learn in the regular classroom." The long-term prognosis for children with ADD isalso explored. (PB) Descriptors: *Attention Deficit Disorders; Disability Identification; EducationalDiagnosis; Elementary Secondary Education; Etiology; Student Characteristics;*Symptoms (Individual Disorders) ED370334 EC303066 Attention Deficit Disorder: Adding Up the Facts. Chesapeake Inst., Washington, DC. [1994] 9p. Sponsoring Agency: Office of Special Education and Rehabilitative Services (ED),Washington, DC. Div. of Innovation and Development. Contract No: HS92017001 EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: NON-CLASSROOM MATERIAL (055) Geographic Source: U.S.; District of Columbia Journal Announcement: RIEOCT94 This paper presents an introduction to attention deficit disorder (ADD). Answers areprovided to common questions including "What Is Add?" "What Behaviors Does ADDCause?" "How Can We Tell If A Child Has ADD?" "What Causes ADD?" "What CanWe Do about ADD?" "How Does ADD Affect School Performance?" "What Are theLegal Rights of Children with ADD?" and "What Happens to Children with ADD?" Thebooklet proposes that through supervised use of medication, counseling, behaviormanagement, and modification of classroom lessons, children with ADD canexperience academic success and fulfilling lives. (PB) Descriptors: *AttentionDeficit Disorders; Disability Identification; Educational Diagnosis; ElementarySecondary Education; Etiology; *Intervention; Student Behavior; StudentCharacteristics; Student Rights; *Symptoms (Individual Disorders) ED370333EC303065 Where Do I Turn? A Resource Directory of Materials about Attention DeficitDisorder. Chesapeake Inst., Washington, DC. [1994] 57p. Sponsoring Agency: Office of Special Education and Rehabilitative Services (ED),Washington, DC. Div. of Innovation and Development. Contract No: HS92017001 EDRS Price - MF01/PC03 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: BIBLIOGRAPHY (131); DIRECTORY (132) Geographic Source: U.S.; District of Columbia Journal Announcement: RIEOCT94 This directory lists government agencies, advocacy groups, and reading materials onattention deficit disorder (ADD). The directory includes 19 national organizations, 37general print information sources, 32 books and pamphlets for parents of children withADD, 20 resources for children with ADD, 9 books and pamphlets for adults with ADD,36 resources for educators, 9 resources on the legal rights of children with ADD, 26resources on medication and other treatments, 16 magazines and newsletters, 54videotapes, and 55 organizations and publishers. Contact information for the Directorof Special Education and for the Learning Disabilities Association offices in each stateof the United States and its protectorates is also provided. (PB) Descriptors:Adults; *Advocacy; *Attention Deficit Disorders; Elementary Secondary Education;*Organizations (Groups); *Parent Associations; Parent Rights; *Public Agencies;*Resources; Student Rights; Voluntary Agencies ED370332 EC303064 Teaching Strategies: Education of Children with Attention Deficit Disorder. Chesapeake Inst., Washington, DC. 1994 43p. Sponsoring Agency: Office of Special Education and Rehabilitative Services (ED),Washington, DC. Div. of Innovation and Development. Contract No: HS92017001 EDRS Price - MF01/PC02 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: REVIEW LITERATURE (070); TEACHING GUIDE (052) Geographic Source: U.S.; District of Columbia Journal Announcement: RIEOCT94 Target Audience: Teachers; Practitioners This booklet presents practices currently in use by teachers of students with attentiondeficit disorder (ADD) in elementary and middle school. Guidelines for diagnosingADD and discussing diagnosis with parents are provided, and special considerationsfor working with students who are taking medication are presented. Teachingstrategies to build on students' strengths and work around their weaknesses aredescribed, including strategies for classroom management, lesson modification, andfamily cooperation. A final chapter presents tips for professional development,collaboration, and administrator support. The booklet concludes with guidelines forlocating additional resources. (PB) Descriptors: *Attention Deficit Disorders;*Classroom Techniques; Drug Therapy; *Educational Diagnosis; ElementarySecondary Education; Parent Teacher Cooperation; Symptoms (Individual Disorders);*Teaching Methods ED378729EC303625 Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder. NICHCY Briefing Paper. Revised Edition. Fowler, Mary Academy for Educational Development, Inc., Washington, D.C.; National InformationCenter for Children and Youth with Disabilities, Washington, DC. Oct 1994 17p. Sponsoring Agency: Special Education Programs (ED/OSERS), Washington, DC. Contract No: H030A30003 Available From: National Information Center for Children and Youth with Disabilities,P.O. Box 1492, Washington, DC 20013 (single copy free). EDRS Price -MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: SERIAL (022); NON-CLASSROOM MATERIAL (055) Geographic Source: U.S.; District of Columbia Journal Announcement: RIEJUN95 Target Audience: Parents; Practitioners This briefing paper is intended to improve understanding of attention/deficithyperactivity disorder (Ad/HD)--what it is, what to look for, and what to do. Threesubtypes are identified: (1) the predominantly combined type; (2) the predominantlyinattentive type; and (3) the predominantly hyperactive/impulsive type. Causes andincidence of ADHD are briefly addressed. Signs of ADHD are discussed, includinginattention, hyperactivity, and impulsivity. Essential diagnostic features of thesyndrome based on the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (4thedition) are listed, and components and sources of a professional diagnostic evaluationfor ADHD are explained. The discussion of ADHD treatment addresses: effects ofimproved understanding of ADHD, behavior management, medication, and educationalintervention. Provision of special educational services is also considered and basicguidelines for educational intervention are listed. Parents are given suggestions onwhat to do if their child is found ineligible for services, how to help their child improvehis/her self-esteem, and how to find parent support groups. (Contains 7 references, alisting of 21 readings and resources, a listing of 2 policy clarifications of the Departmentof Education on ADHD, and a list of 6 organizations.) (DB) Descriptors: *AttentionDeficit Disorders; Clinical Diagnosis; Elementary Secondary Education; Eligibility;*Hyperactivity; *Intervention; *Parent Student Relationship; Special Education;*Student Characteristics; *Symptoms (Individual Disorders) A Continuing Education Program on ADHD Video Training Package Incorporating the latest research available on the topics of ADHD, this video training package provides information in four key areas: Characteristics and Identification, Model School Programs, Effective Classroom Interventions, and Policy and Administrative Issues. The package includes a 30-minute video and a comprehensive manual that provides detailed information in each of the critical areas. The program was developed by leading educators in the field: Ron Reeve, University of Virginia; Mary Spessard, Coloma Schools, MI; Ron Walker, Walker Educational Consulting, Inc.; Ann Welch, Albemarle County Public Schools, Charlottesville, VA; James Wright, Auburn University at Montgomery, AL; and Judy Schrag, Learning Systems Group, Washington, DC. A Continuing Education Program on Attention Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder was supported by a federally funded grant from the Division of Personnel Preparation, Office of Special Education Programs, U.S. Department of Education. Closed Captioned. To order, call 1-800-CEC-READ. #M5144 1996 ISBN 0-86586-278-8 $109 CEC Members $76 Internet Resources Internet Listservs Top of PageBack to ERIC MenuBack to CEC Home Page copyright © 1996 ERIC Clearinghouse on Disabilities and Gifted Education URL: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm WT02-B20-36IA001-000011-B022-278http://www.cec.sped.org:80/faq/add-lega.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101074149 text/html 19245HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 07:41:56 GMTLast-modified: Tuesday, 10-Sep-96 21:57:00 GMTContent-length: 19052Content-type: text/html ADDlegal ADDlegal-FAQ (last updated September 9, 1996) THE ERIC CLEARINGHOUSE ON DISABILITIES AND GIFTEDEDUCATION (ERIC EC) The Council for Exceptional Children 1920Association Drive Reston, VA 20191 Toll Free: 1-800-328-0272 TTY: 703-264-9449 E-mail: ericec@cec.sped.org Internet: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm What information is available on court cases or legal issues and attention deficit disorder? This file includes information about ADD and legal issues. At the end of this file are links to Internet resources and Internet listservs (discussion groups) where you can obtain more specific information on the topic. There may be ERIC digests that provide information on related topics. You can read the full text of ERIC EC digests under our listing at the U.S. Department of Education, Office of Educational Research and Improvement. Enclosed are several citations from the ERIC database. These records are a sample of the kind of information you can find in the ERIC database. For morecitations on your topic of interest, you may want to search the ERIC database yourself on the Internet. References with ED (ERIC Document) and EJ (ERIC Journal) identifiers are cited inthe ERIC database; for example, ED333123 or EJ333999. ERIC documents areavailable in microfiche collections at more than 825 locations worldwide (check yourlocal college or public library). They can also be ordered for a fee through the ERICDocument Reproduction Service (EDRS) at 1-800-443-ERIC. References with anEJ (ERIC Journal) number are available for a fee from the originating journal (checkwith your local college or public library), through interlibrary loan services, or fromarticle reproduction clearinghouses, such as UMI: 1-800-248-0360; or ISI:1-800-523-1850. ERIC descriptors (search terms) used: Attention Deficit Disorder or Attention Deficit Disorders and IDEA (*Individuals with Disabilities Education Act ) or Rehabilitation Act 1973 (Section 504) or Legal Compliance or Students Rights or Court Litigation EJ499251 EC610494 Comprehensive Assessment of Children and Youth with ADHD. Burcham, Barbara G.; DeMers, Stephen T. Intervention in School and Clinic, v30 n4 p211-20 Mar 1995 ISSN: 1053-4512 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); NON-CLASSROOM MATERIAL (055) Journal Announcement: CIJJUL95 Principles of comprehensive assessment of students with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder are examined in relation to legal compliance, special considerations for cultural diversity, medical diagnosis versus educational identification, and the problem-solving assessment model. Strengths and weakness of specific strategies are identified as are promising school-based and clinic-based practices. (DB) Descriptors: *Attention Deficit Disorders; Clinical Diagnosis; Compliance (Legal); Cultural Differences; Disability Identification; Educational Diagnosis; *Educational Practices; Elementary Secondary Education; *Evaluation Methods; *Hyperactivity; Medical Evaluation; Models; Problem Solving; *Student Evaluation EJ503054 EC611129 Section 504 and "Front Line" Educators: An Expanded Obligation to Serve Children with Disabilities. Fossey, Richard; And Others Preventing School Failure, v39 n2 p10-14 Win 1995 ISSN: 1045-988X Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); POSITION PAPER (120) Journal Announcement: CIJSEP95 Target Audience: Administrators; Practitioners This overview of Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 notes differences between this law and the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act. The procedural requirements that Section 504 imposes on teachers and principals are outlined, and issues concerning the possible coverage of children with attention deficit disorder are discussed. Practical suggestions for implementing this law conclude the article. (DB) Descriptors: *Attention Deficit Disorders; *Compliance (Legal); *Disabilities;Educational Legislation; Elementary Secondary Education; Eligibility; *Federal Legislation; Rehabilitation; *School Responsibility Identifiers: *Rehabilitation Act 1973 (Section 504) EJ497557 EC610213 Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder and Section 504. Reid, Robert; Katsiyannis, Antonis Remedial and Special Education, v16 n1 p44-52 Jan 1995 ISSN: 0741-9325 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); REVIEW LITERATURE (070) Journal Announcement: CIJJUN95 Target Audience: Practitioners; Administrators A review is presented of Office of Civil Rights rulings on the eligibility, assessment, and accommodations for children with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder under Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973. Emphasis is on requirements of the law for educational settings and differences and similarities with requirements of the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act. (DB) Descriptors: Accessibility (for Disabled); *Attention Deficit Disorders; *Civil Rights Legislation; *Compliance (Legal); Eligibility; Federal Legislation; Federal Regulation; *Hyperactivity; Intervention; Rehabilitation; Student Evaluation; Student Rights Identifiers: Individuals with Disabilities Education Act; Office for Civil Rights; *Rehabilitation Act 1973 (Section 504) ED378750 EC303647 ADHD--New Legal Responsibilities for Schools. Policy Briefs. Gregg, Soleil Appalachia Educational Lab., Charleston, WV. State Policy Program. 1994 9p.; Sponsoring Agency: Office of Educational Research and Improvement (ED), Washington, DC. Contract No: RP91002002 EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: SERIAL (022); NON-CLASSROOM MATERIAL (055) Geographic Source: U.S.; West Virginia Journal Announcement: RIEJUN95 Target Audience: Policymakers; Administrators; Practitioners Children with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) are provided for under three federal statutes: the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA), Part B; Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973; and the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990. State education agencies have ultimate responsibility for providing a free appropriate education for students with this disability by providing services directly, by contracting for services, or by delegating responsibility to local education agencies. To meet legal requirements, schools must identify and provide services for eligible children, educate children with ADHD along with nondisabled children to the extent possible, eliminate practices and policies that allow disabled children to be suspended or expelled for more than 10 days for behavior associated with their disability, and follow procedural safeguards outlined in IDEA. Because state education agencies are responsible for school oversight, a state's education policymakers have a clear mandate to formulate policy and develop a state plan for educating disabled students. To prevent school failure for children with ADHD and unnecessary lawsuits, they must be sure the policy and plan are known and implemented in the state's schools. Questions that policymakers need to ask about providing services to students with ADHD are listed. Efforts in Kentucky, Tennessee, Virginia, and West Virginia to train regular education teachers to educate children with ADHD are described. (Contains 15 references.) (JDD) Descriptors: *Attention Deficit Disorders; *Compliance (Legal); Educational Legislation; *Educational Policy; Elementary Secondary Education; Federal Legislation; Government Role; *Hyperactivity; Inclusive Schools; *Legal Responsibility; Mainstreaming; School Districts; School Policy; School Responsibility; *State Departments of Education; State Government; Student Rights EJ492851 EA529949 Individuals with Disabilities: The School Principal and Section 504. Katsiyannis, Antonis NASSP Bulletin, v78 n565 p6-10 Nov 1994 ISSN: 0192-6365 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: EVALUATIVE REPORT (142); JOURNAL ARTICLE (080) Journal Announcement: CIJMAR95 Given principals' responsibility to ensure that all their students are appropriately educated, they are obligated to provide adequate leadership for developing the knowledge base and competence to secure Section 504 compliance (and avoid unnecessary penalties). Section 504 applies to students with Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder who do not qualify under IDEA to receive necessary services. (MLH) Descriptors: *Administrator Responsibility; *Attention Deficit Disorders; *Disabilities; Elementary Secondary Education; Hyperactivity; *Leadership Qualities; *Principals Identifiers: Inclusive Educational Programs; *Individuals with Disabilities Education Act; *Rehabilitation Act 1973 (Section 504) EJ492836 EA529927 The Approaching Epidemic of Attention Deficit Disorder. Zirkel, Perry A. School Administrator, v51 n10 p28-30 Nov 1994 ISSN: 0036-6439 Language: English Document Type: EVALUATIVE REPORT (142); JOURNAL ARTICLE (080) Journal Announcement: CIJMAR95 The crisis concerning attention-deficit-disorder students is overblown as a legal matter. Although perceived acutely by particular parents and advocated aggressively by the Children and Adults with Attention Deficit Disorders (CHADD), the needs of ADD/ADHD students range from noneligibility to entitlement for full services under the Individuals with Disabilities Act. Providing proper evaluation and classroom accommodations is essential. (MLH) Descriptors: Administrator Responsibility; *Attention Deficit Disorders; Elementary Secondary Education; *Eligibility; *Hyperactivity; *Legal Problems; Regular and Special Education Relationship; *Student Evaluation Identifiers: *Individuals with Disabilities Education Act; Rehabilitation Act 1973 (Section 504) ED354688 EC301871 Attention Deficit Disorder and the Law. A Guide for Advocates. Latham, Peter S.; Latham, Patricia H. 1992; 127p. Available From: JKL Communications, 1016 16th St., N.W., Suite 700, Washington, DC 20036 ($25; quantity discount available). EDRS Price - MF01 Plus Postage. PC Not Available from EDRS. Language: English Document Type: NON-CLASSROOM MATERIAL (055) Geographic Source: U.S.; District of Columbia Journal Announcement: RIEJUL93 This guide provides a survey of those laws that directly affect the child with attention deficit disorder (ADD), with or without hyperactivity. The guide addresses three general classes of rights: (1) civil rights (for example, the right to equal treatment and opportunity under the law); (2) the right to society's support in educational services and disability payments; and (3) the right to exemption from military service. The guide is divided into 14 parts, of which the first 3 are an introduction, an outline of the judicial system, and an explanation of equal protection and due process guaranteed by the U.S. Constitution. Subsequent parts address the major federal laws which define the rights of individuals with ADD, including: the Rehabilitation Act of 1973; the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act; the Americans with Disabilities Act; the Social Security Act; and the Selective Service Act. Other sections deal with individualized inquiry, state law remedies, court litigation, and parent advocacy. A final section on resources lists approximately 20 textbooks, policy documents, and organizations. (JDD) Descriptors: *Attention Deficit Disorders; Child Advocacy; *Civil Rights; *Court Litigation; Court Role; Due Process; Elementary Secondary Education; Equal Protection; *Federal Legislation; Hyperactivity; *Legal Responsibility; Military Service; School Law; State Legislation; *Student Rights EJ484544 CG544907 Comments on Legal Rights of Students with Attention Deficit Disorder. Gammel, Dorothy L. School Psychology Quarterly, v7 n4 p298-301 Win 1992 ISSN: 1045-3830 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: POSITION PAPER (120); JOURNAL ARTICLE (080) Journal Announcement: CIJOCT94 Responds to previous article (Hakola, this issue) on legal rights of students with Attention Deficit Disorder (ADD). Discusses resistance on part of special and regular educators to comply with law, calling resistance understandable and perhaps warranted when it stems from philosophical orientation, diagnostic and classification issues, and monetary concerns. (NB) Descriptors: *Attention Deficit Disorders; Elementary Education; *Elementary School Students; Federal Legislation; *Legal Responsibility; Special Education; *Student Rights ED364014 EC302583 Section 504. Guidelines for Educators. Fishbaugh, Mary Susan Montana State Dept. of Public Instruction, Helena. Oct 1992; 119p. EDRS Price - MF01/PC05 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: NON-CLASSROOM MATERIAL (055) Geographic Source: U.S.; Montana Journal Announcement: RIEAPR94 Government: State Target Audience: Administrators; Practitioners This manual, developed in Montana, is intended to assist schools in complying with Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 which requires the provision of services to people with disabilities in a nondiscriminatory manner. The first section provides an introduction to Section 504, noting that some students not covered by the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA) may be covered under Section 504. The second section examines school district responsibilities under the law, including written assurance of nondiscrimination, designation of a compliance coordinator, grievance procedures, and procedural safeguards. Eligibility procedures under Section 504 for receiving a free appropriate public education are considered next, including referral, Section 504 student determination, evaluation procedures, the individualized program, placement, reevaluation, and procedural safeguards. A Section 504 policy/procedures checklist is attached. The fourth section looks at special issues including transportation, residential placement, nonacademic services, program accessibility, students with special health care needs, students with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, and funding. Definitions of key terms in the law and a variety of sample forms to be used by schools are also provided. Appendices contain: (1) the text of Section 504 as amended in 1990; (2) memoranda from the Office of Civil Rights regarding substance abuse, distinctions between Section 504 and IDEA, and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder; (3) a systematic comparison of IDEA, Section 504, and the Americans with Disabilities Act; and (4) additional resources. (DB) Descriptors: Accessibility (for Disabled); Attention Deficit Disorders; *Compliance (Legal); *Disabilities; Due Process; Educational Legislation; Elementary Secondary Education; *Eligibility; *Federal Legislation; Hyperactivity; *Legal Responsibility; Regular and Special Education Relationship; Rehabilitation; Residential Programs; School Responsibility; State School District Relationship; Student Evaluation; Student Placement; Transportation Identifiers: Individuals with Disabilities Education Act; *Montana; *Rehabilitation Act 1973 (Section 504) ED343319 EC301001 Special Education for Children with Attention Deficit Disorder: Current Issues. CRS Report for Congress. Aleman, Steven R. Library of Congress, Washington, D.C. Congressional Research Service. 5 Dec 1991; 23p. Report No: CRS-91-862-EPW EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: GENERAL REPORT (140) Geographic Source: U.S.; District of Columbia Journal Announcement: RIEAUG92 Government: Federal Target Audience: Policymakers This paper examines issues concerning the eligibility of children with attention deficit disorder (ADD) for special education and related services under the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA). A policy memorandum was issued by the Department of Education in September 1991, identifying those circumstances under which such children are eligible for special services. Such children are seen to qualify under IDEA's "other health impairments" category if ADD is a chronic or acute health problem that limits alertness, adversely affects educational performance, and requires special education. They may also qualify under other IDEA disability categories or under Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973. The policy interpretation memorandum was issued after reviewing public comments required under the Education of the Handicapped Act Amendments (1990) and is intended to clarify for states and local school districts their responsibilities under federal law toward children with ADD. Currently at issue is implementation of the Department's ADD policy and further consideration by Congress of eligibility of children with ADD under IDEA. An appendix summarizes the history, causes, prevalence, diagnosis, treatment, and educational implications of ADD. (Includes 53 bibliographic footnotes.) (DB) Descriptors: *Attention Deficit Disorders; Compliance (Legal); Definitions; *Educational Legislation; Educational Policy; Elementary Secondary Education; *Eligibility; *Federal Legislation; Pupil Personnel Services; *Special Education; Student Needs Identifiers: *Individuals with Disabilities Education Act; Rehabilitation Act 1973 (Section 504) Internet Resources Internet Listservs Top of Page Back to ERIC Menu Back to CEC Home Page copyright © 1996 ERIC Clearinghouse on Disabilities and Gifted Education URL: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm WT02-B20-37IA001-000011-B022-293http://www.cec.sped.org:80/faq/ritalin.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101074202 text/html 17058HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 07:42:09 GMTLast-modified: Tuesday, 10-Sep-96 14:41:00 GMTContent-length: 16865Content-type: text/html Ritalin Ritalin (last updated August 8, 1996) THE ERIC CLEARINGHOUSE ON DISABILITIES AND GIFTEDEDUCATION (ERIC EC) The Council for Exceptional Children 1920Association Drive Reston, VA 20191 Toll Free: 1-800-328-0272 TTY: 703-264-9449 E-mail: ericec@cec.sped.org Internet: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm What can you tell me about the use of Ritalin and other medications in the treatment of ADD? What are some alternatives to medication? This file includes information about Ritalin. At the end of the file are links to Internet resources and Internet listservs (discussion groups) where you can obtain more specific information on the topic. There may be an ERIC digest on related topics that provides further information. You can read the full text of ERIC EC digests under our listing at the U.S. Department of Education, Office of Educational Research and Improvement. Enclosed are several citations from the ERIC database. These records are asample of the kind of information you can find in the ERIC database. For morecitations on your topic of interest, you may want to search the ERIC database yourself on the Internet. References with ED (ERIC Document) and EJ (ERIC Journal) identifiers are cited inthe ERIC database; for example, ED333123 or EJ333999. ERIC documents areavailable in microfiche collections at more than 825 locations worldwide (check yourlocal college or public library). They can also be ordered for a fee through the ERICDocument Reproduction Service (EDRS) at 1-800-443-ERIC. References with anEJ (ERIC Journal) number are available for a fee from the originating journal (checkwith your local college or public library), through interlibrary loan services, or fromarticle reproduction clearinghouses, such as UMI: 1-800-248-0360; or ISI:1-800-523-1850. ERIC descriptors (search terms) used: Ritalin, Drug Therapy, and Attention Deficit Disorders EJ517863 EA531621 Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder: A Parent's Perspective. Thompson, Anna M. Phi Delta Kappan, v77 n6 p433-36 Feb 1996 ISSN: 0031-7217 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: EVALUATIVE REPORT (142); JOURNAL ARTICLE (080) Journal Announcement: CIJJUN96 A parent and educator who has spent the past 10 years struggling to help her own ADHD (attention deficit-hyperactivity disorder) child offers suggestions for managing the challenges facing such children and enhancing the quality of their lives. Since drug regimens have limitations, parents need to read appropriate literature and receive instruction in behavior management. (MLH) Descriptors: *Attention Deficit Disorders; *Behavior Problems; Drug Therapy; Elementary Secondary Education; *Hyperactivity; *Neurological Impairments; *Parent Attitudes Identifiers: Antidepressants; *Behavior Management; Dexedrine; Medications; Ritalin EJ517864 EA531622 Teaching Tommy: A Second-Grader with Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder. Fachin, Katharina Phi Delta Kappan, v77 n6 p437-41 Feb 1996 ISSN: 0031-7217 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: EVALUATIVE REPORT (142); PROJECT DESCRIPTION (141); JOURNAL ARTICLE (080) Journal Announcement: CIJJUN96 Recounts a second-grade teacher's efforts to help a rough-and-tumble boy diagnosed with ADHD (attention deficit hyperactivity disorder). After comprehensive behavioral and academic programs (including token rewards, peer tutoring, resource room activities, an inclass aide) failed to stabilize Tommy's behavior, Ritalin was (successfully) prescribed as a last resort. (MLH) Descriptors: *Attention Deficit Disorders; *Behavior Problems; Case Studies; *Classroom Techniques; Elementary Education; Grade 2; *Intervention; Neurological Impairments; Peer Teaching; Resource Room Programs; *Rewards; Student Placement; Tutoring Identifiers: *Behavior Management; *Medications; Ritalin; Token Reinforcement System EJ517862 EA531620 Is Attention Deficit Disorder Becoming a Desired Diagnosis? Smelter, Richard W.; And Others Phi Delta Kappan, v77 n6 p429-32 Feb 1996 ISSN: 0031-7217 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: EVALUATIVE REPORT (142); JOURNAL ARTICLE (080) Journal Announcement: CIJJUN96 The rush to label schoolchildren as suffering from attention deficit disorder (ADD) or attention deficit-hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) has reached nearly epidemic proportions. The diagnosis often meets parents' needs to assign behavior control to Ritalin; it should be an explanation leading to genuine help, not a license for unacceptable student behavior. (MLH) Descriptors: *Attention Deficit Disorders; *Behavior Problems; Elementary Secondary Education; *Hyperactivity; *Identification; *Labeling (of Persons); Neurological Impairments; *Parent Attitudes; Teacher Responsibility Identifiers: Behavior Management; Medications; *Ritalin EJ517845 EA531578 Making a Way for Diana. Shima, Kate; Gsovski, Barbara K. Educational Leadership, v53 n5 p37-40 Feb 1996 ISSN: 0013-1784 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: PROJECT DESCRIPTION (141); JOURNAL ARTICLE (080) Journal Announcement: CIJJUN96 Although many parents and educators hesitate to involve children in a regular course of drug therapy, Ritalin often proves beneficial to Attention Deficit Disorder sufferers. Diana, an intelligent, easily distracted middle schooler, was helped by a team approach using evaluation, remediation, behavioral therapy, medication, and a supportive classroom environment. (MLH) Descriptors: *Attention Deficit Disorders; *Behavior Modification; Case Studies; *Classroom Environment; Intermediate Grades; Middle Schools; *Remedial Programs; *Student Evaluation; *Teamwork Identifiers: Medications; *Ritalin EJ517096 SP524716 When Is Ritalin the Answer? Laughlin, Carolyn; Hall, Susan B. Learning, v24 n1 p56-58 Aug 1995 ISSN: 0090-3167 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: POSITION PAPER (120); JOURNAL ARTICLE (080) Journal Announcement: CIJMAY96 Target Audience: Teachers; Practitioners Two elementary teachers discuss their experiences of having children with attention deficit disorder and learning disabilities in their second-grade classrooms, focusing on the process involved in deciding whether or not to medicate the children with Ritalin to enhance their ability to learn. (SM) Descriptors: *Attention Deficit Disorders; *Drug Therapy; Elementary Education; Grade 2; *Learning Disabilities; Regular and Special Education Relationship; *Student Behavior Identifiers: *Ritalin ED380717 CG026080 Relationship between Teachers' Anti-Stimulant Attitudes and Their Experience with ADHD Students. Davino, Dana; And Others 1995; 18p. EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: RESEARCH REPORT (143) Geographic Source: U.S.; Pennsylvania Journal Announcement: RIEAUG95 Teachers play an important role in monitoring the effects of stimulant medication used to treat Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD). Any negative attitudes they hold toward ADHD students or the students' parents, doctors, or medication, can compromise treatment efficacy. To assess teachers' perceptions of ADHD concerning social variables, drug therapy, causal factors, parental support, teacher training, involvement, and experience with ADHD students, 206 teachers, drawn from 11 elementary, middle, and high schools, were administered a 44-item survey. Comparative analysis revealed no significant relationship between teachers' stimulant attitudes and causal beliefs and their amount of experience with ADHD students. Teachers who advocated the use of ritalin were more likely to believe in genetic causal factors, and seemed more sensitive and aware of the social, academic, and medical problems associated with these disorders. Neither age nor experience appeared to mediate teachers' attitudes toward ADHD causes or treatment. Most teachers desired a high responsibility role in helping students with ADHD. Older and more experienced teachers expressed dissatisfaction both with their college training and in-service training on stimulant medication. Future studies may concentrate on the adequacy of teacher training on stimulant medication, both on the college level and through in-service training. Contains six references. (RJM) Descriptors: Adolescents; *Attention Deficit Disorders; Children; Elementary Secondary Education; *Hyperactivity; *Stimulants; *Teacher Attitudes; Teacher Education; *Teacher Expectations of Students; Teacher Student Relationship; *Teaching Experience Identifiers: Methylphenidate; *Ritalin EJ452798 EA527240 Kids Who Can't Sit Still. Black, Susan Executive Educator, v14 n11 p31-34 Nov 1992 ISSN: 0161-9500 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); EVALUATIVE REPORT (142) Journal Announcement: CIJMAR93 Little advanced research exists on the causes, diagnosis, and treatment of hyperactivity disorders in children. This article debates the pros and cons of ritalin and other medical treatments and defines the principal's role in studying recent research on attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, examining current identification policies, overseeing the identification process to ensure fair practices, and encouraging parents' participation. (MLH) Descriptors: *Attention Deficit Disorders; Elementary Education; *Hyperactivity; *Identification; *Medical Services; Parent Participation; *Principals Identifiers: *Dexedrine; *Ritalin EJ427122 EC600581 Ritalin and Reading: A Reaction to Mick. Cooter, Robert B., Jr.; Werner, Patrice H. Intervention in School and Clinic, v26 n5 p304-05 May 1991 ISSN: 0001-396X Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); POSITION PAPER (120) Journal Announcement: CIJOCT91 In response to a critique by Lori Bell Mick (EC 600 580), the original author counters objections to ideas concerning the nature of Ritalin, Ritalin's side effects, drug dependency, and teachers as classroom pushers. The response concludes that evidence for Ritalin's positive effect on reading achievement in children with attention deficit disorder and hyperactivity is lacking. (DB) Descriptors: *Attention Deficit Disorders; Drug Abuse; Drug Therapy; Elementary Secondary Education; *Hyperactivity; Pharmacology; Reading Achievement; *Reading Difficulties Identifiers: *Ritalin EJ427121 EC600580 The Nature of Ritalin: A Response to Cooter. Mick, Lori Bell Intervention in School and Clinic, v26 n5 p302-03 May 1991 ISSN: 0001-396X Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); POSITION PAPER (120) Journal Announcement: CIJOCT91 In response to Robert Cooter, Jr. (EC 202 670), who questioned the widespread use of Ritalin with children having attention deficit hyperactivity disorders, this commentary considers four specific points: how Ritalin works, Ritalin's side effects and relationship to Tourette syndrome, the assumption that Ritalin leads to drug abuse, and the allegation that "teachers are pushers." (DB) Descriptors: *Attention Deficit Disorders; Drug Abuse; *Drug Therapy; Elementary Secondary Education; *Hyperactivity; Pharmacology Identifiers: *Ritalin ED385080 EC304113 A Parent Guide To Understanding the Effects of Ritalin (Methylphenidate Hydrochloride). Villegas, Orlando; And Others Oakland County Schools, Pontiac, Mich. Div. of Special Education. Sep 1992; 30p. Available From: Psychology Clinic, Oakland Schools, 2100 Pontiac Lake Rd., Waterford, MI 48328-2735 (1-5 copies, $3 each; 6-10 copies, $2.50 each; 11 or more copies, $1.75 each). EDRS Price - MF01/PC02 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: NON-CLASSROOM MATERIAL (055) Geographic Source: U.S.; Michigan Journal Announcement: RIEDEC95 Target Audience: Parents This guide provides information to help parents decide whether their child with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) should take methylphenidate hydrochloride (Ritalin). Information is provided in a question-and-answer format on various concerns, including: the meaning of ADHD, whether Ritalin is overprescribed, when this medication is appropriate and who can prescribe and monitor it, what research indicates about the effects of Ritalin, how to know if the medication is working, the effects of medication on family functioning, different forms and dosages of Ritalin, the effects of Ritalin on attention span and impulse control, effects of medication on social behavior and academic performance, age at which the medication can be started and whether it helps adults with hyperactive behavior, documented side effects of Ritalin, and unusual negative results that have been reported about Ritalin use.Points for the parents to consider are summarized: the effects of Ritalin can be linked to the adequacy of dosage and regularity of intake; symptoms return once the medication wears off; along with the medication, behavior management and parent education or counseling are important; the medication may facilitatethe application of behavior management to improve control over ADHD symptoms; and at some point medication will be stopped. (Contains 31 references.) (SW) Descriptors: *Attention Deficit Disorders; Behavior Change; Child Behavior; Decision Making; *Drug Therapy; *Hyperactivity; Outcomes of Treatment Identifiers: *Ritalin EJ387058 EA523213 Ritalin: Education's Fix-It Drug? Divoky, Diane Phi Delta Kappan, v70 n8 p599-605 Apr 1989 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); LEGAL MATERIAL (090); EVALUATIVE REPORT (142) Journal Announcement: CIJAUG89 Describes the case of Casey Jesson, a hyperactive child ordered by the state of Hew Hampshire to ingest Ritalin or forego a public education. Despite adverse side effects and the perils of drug dependency, there is greater parental and educator acceptance of Ritalin than ever before. Scientologists are sparking an anti-Ritalin campaign. Includes 40 references. (MLH) Descriptors: *Behavior Problems; *Case Studies; *Drug Therapy; Elementary Education; *Hyperactivity; *Legal Problems; Student Rights Identifiers: *Jesson (Casey); *Ritalin EJ427020 EC600392 Stimulant Medication and Parent Training Therapies for Attention Deficit-Hyperactivity Disorder. Anastopoulos, Arthur D.; And Others Journal of Learning Disabilities, v24 n4 p210-18 Apr 1991 ISSN: 0022-2194 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); REVIEW LITERATURE (070) Journal Announcement: CIJOCT91 This article provides an overview of two commonly used therapies for attention deficit-hyperactivity disorder in children: stimulant medication treatment and training parents in child behavior management skills. The clinical issues involved in the use of each treatment, its limitations, and evidence for its efficacy are reviewed. (Author/JDD) Descriptors: *Attention Deficit Disorders; *Drug Therapy; Elementary Secondary Education; *Hyperactivity; *Intervention; *Parent Education; Parent Participation; Stimulants Identifiers: *Behavior Management Internet Resources Internet Listservs Top of Page Back to ERIC Menu Back to CEC Home Page copyright © 1996 ERIC Clearinghouse on Disabilities and Gifted Education URL: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm WT02-B20-38IA001-000011-B022-306http://www.cec.sped.org:80/faq/addadult.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101074214 text/html 18908HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 07:42:20 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 09-Sep-96 20:32:00 GMTContent-length: 18716Content-type: text/html ADD-Adult ADD-Adult-FAQ (last updated March 28, 1996) THE ERIC CLEARINGHOUSE ON DISABILITIES AND GIFTEDEDUCATION (ERIC EC) The Council for Exceptional Children 1920Association Drive Reston, VA 20191 Toll Free: 1-800-328-0272 TTY: 703-264-9449 E-mail: ericec@cec.sped.org Internet: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm Please provide information on attention deficit disorders (ADD) in adults. This file includes information about attention deficit disorders in adults and Internet resources where you can obtain more information. At the end of this file are links to Internet resources and Internet listservs (discussion groups) where you can obtain more specific information on this topic. There may be an ERIC digest that provides further information on this topic. You can read the full text of ERIC EC digests under our listing at the U.S. Department of Education, Office of Educational Research and Improvement. Enclosed are several citations from the ERIC database. These records are asample of the kind of information you can find in the ERIC database. For morecitations on your topic of interest, you may want to search the ERIC database yourself on the Internet. References with ED (ERIC Document) and EJ (ERIC Journal) identifiers are cited inthe ERIC database; for example, ED333123 or EJ333999. ERIC documents areavailable in microfiche collections at more than 825 locations worldwide (check yourlocal college or public library). They can also be ordered for a fee through the ERICDocument Reproduction Service (EDRS) at 1-800-443-ERIC. References with anEJ (ERIC Journal) number are available for a fee from the originating journal (checkwith your local college or public library), through interlibrary loan services, or fromarticle reproduction clearinghouses, such as UMI: 1-800-248-0360; or ISI:1-800-523-1850. ERIC descriptors (search terms) used: Attention Deficit Disorders and Adults EJ518186 HE534800 Resources Addressing Issues for Students with ADHD in Postsecondary Education: An Annotated Bibliography. Goldhammer, Richard F. Journal of Postsecondary Education and Disability, v11 n2-3 p62-68 Spr-Fall 1995 Language: English Document Type: BIBLIOGRAPHY (131); JOURNAL ARTICLE (080) Journal Announcement: CIJJUN96 This annotated bibliography lists 38 books, journal articles, handouts, and journals addressing issues concerning Attention Deficit-Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) in adult and postsecondary students. Citations are grouped in these categories: general references, postsecondary students, assessment of adults with ADHD, legal issues, medications, psychosocial issues, cognitive treatment interventions, and workplace issues. (MSE) Descriptors: Adults; Annotated Bibliographies; *Attention Deficit Disorders; *Clinical Diagnosis; *College Students; Counseling Services; Disabilities; Drug Therapy; *Hyperactivity; Information Sources; Intervention; Legal Problems; Postsecondary Education; Reference Materials; Scholarly Journals; Student Evaluation; Work Environment ED389131 EC304417 The Adult Sequelae of a Childhood Diagnosis of Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder: A Review of the Literature for the Past Decade. Stokeld, Cheryl L. May 1995; 50p.; Doctoral Research Paper, Biola University. EDRS Price - MF01/PC02 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: REVIEW LITERATURE (070); DISSERTATION (040) Geographic Source: U.S.; California Journal Announcement: RIEAPR96 This paper reviews literature on the adult outcomes for children diagnosed with attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder (AD/HD). It critiques methodological issues, including diagnostic definitions, research designs, sample characteristics, and assessment instruments. It examines the relationship of AD/HD to a variety of adult disorders and pathology, including: (1) impaired lifestyle functioning (continuance of AD/HD symptomology and educational or occupational problems); (2) substance abuse (alcohol and drugs); (3) social pathology (antisocial behavior, criminality, and pathological gambling); and (4) psychiatric symptoms (mood disorders, anxiety disorders, and antisocial personality disorder). The paper concludes that some individuals diagnosed with AD/HD in childhood continue to experience the full or partial syndrome in adulthood, tend to have lower educational and occupational status, have an increased risk for alcohol and substance abuse, and appear to be at greater risk for psychopathology. In particular, there seems to be a link between AD/HD in childhood and antisocial personality disorder in adulthood. (Contains 49 references.) Descriptors: *Adjustment (to Environment); Adults; Alcohol Abuse; *Antisocial Behavior; *Attention Deficit Disorders; Clinical Diagnosis; Drug Abuse; *Hyperactivity; *Incidence; Mental Disorders; Multiple Disabilities; Psychiatry; Psychopathology; Research Methodology; *Substance Abuse ED386006 EC304208 A Review of Diagnostic Methods for Identifying Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder in Adults. Beuttler, Richard C. May 1995; 64p.; Ph.D. Research Paper, Biola University. EDRS Price - MF01/PC03 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: REVIEW LITERATURE (070); DISSERTATION (041) Geographic Source: U.S.; North Carolina Journal Announcement: RIEJAN96 This paper reviews the assessment and diagnosis of attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) in adults. To provide baseline information, consideration is given to outcome studies for adults who were first diagnosed with ADHD as children. Studies of clinical assessment methods are addressed, and previous diagnostic criteria are compared to current criteria. Also considered is the area of retrospective childhood diagnosis. The retrospective approach of reviewing childhood symptoms was found to provide moderate agreement between parental and subject recollections of childhood behavior; however, there may be a tendency for subjects to under-report their symptoms compared to parents. Presence of co-morbid disorders such as learning disabilities has confounded much of the clinical assessment of symptomotology. Tests which have been used to differentiate children with ADHD and those with learning disabilities are examined, as are the use of neuropsychological tests in adults. It is concluded that the lack of consensus in the existing literature suggests that a multimodal method of assessment appears necessary at this time. (Contains 39 references.) (SW) Descriptors: *Adults; *Attention Deficit Disorders; *Clinical Diagnosis; Diagnostic Tests; *Disability Identification; Evaluation Criteria; *Evaluation Methods; *Hyperactivity; Learning Disabilities; Multiple Disabilities; Symptoms (Individual Disorders) EJ496276 EC610151 How to Achieve Academic and Creative Success in Spite of the Inflexible, Unresponsive Higher Education System. Stolowitz, Margaret A. Journal of Learning Disabilities, v28 n1 p4-7 Jan 1995 ISSN: 0022-2194 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); PROJECT DESCRIPTION (141) Journal Announcement: CIJMAY95 An adult, nontraditional student with learning disabilities and attention deficit disorder, now enrolled in a community college, describes the pain of her school experiences, her quest for self-identity and personal satisfaction, and the value of drug therapy and other treatments. Suggestions are offered for students with similar problems. (JDD) Descriptors: Adults; *Attention Deficit Disorders; Elementary Secondary Education; Higher Education; Individual Development; *Learning Disabilities; Nontraditional Students; Personal Narratives; Self Evaluation (Individuals); *Student Development; *Student Experience EJ495320 PS522736 Book Review. Christensen, Linda Child Study Journal, v24 n2 p169-70 1994 ISSN: 0009-4005 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: BOOK-PRODUCT REVIEW (072); JOURNAL ARTICLE (080) Journal Announcement: CIJAPR95 Reviews "Attention Deficit Disorder: ADHD and ADD Syndromes" (D. R. Jordan), a short book about the characteristics and differences between attention deficit disorder (ADD) and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) and the effect they have on children and adults in their classrooms, home, and workplace. The book includes techniques for parents and teachers, a bibliography, and checklists. (TJQ) Descriptors: Adults; *Attention; *Attention Deficit Disorders; *Attention Span; Behavior Disorders; Book Reviews; Children; *Hyperactivity; Learning Disabilities EJ483942 PS521867 When the Problem Is Not the Problem: Understanding Attention Deficit Disorder with and without Hyperactivity. Aust, Patricia H. Child Welfare, v73 n3 p215-27 May-Jun 1994 ISSN: 0009-4021 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: PROJECT DESCRIPTION (141); JOURNAL ARTICLE (080) Journal Announcement: CIJSEP94 Describes and distinguishes between symptoms of Attention Deficit Disorder without (ADD) and with hyperactivity (ADHD). Notes that confusion exists in distinguishing between problems related to ADD and ADHD and problems related to other causes. A fictitious case study demonstrates problems of families with children with ADD and ADHD. A multimodal treatment of the child and family is described. (TM) Descriptors: Adolescents; Adults; *Attention Deficit Disorders; Case Studies; Children; *Clinical Diagnosis; Comparative Analysis; Counseling; Definitions; Emotional Problems; Family Problems; *Hyperactivity; Learning Problems Identifiers: *Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder; Diagnostic Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders; Intergenerational Analysis; *Multimodal Treatment; Treatment Program ED368899 CE066100 National Resources for Adults with Learning Disabilities. Payne, Mario D., Ed.; Robins, Eve, Ed. Academy for Educational Development, Washington, DC. National Adult Literacy and Learning Disabilities Center.; American Council on Education, Washington, DC. HEATH Resource Center. Mar 1994; 34p. Sponsoring Agency: Department of Education, Washington, DC.; National Inst. for Literacy, Washington, DC. Contract No: H030C-30003; X257B30002 EDRS Price - MF01/PC02 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: DIRECTORY (132) Geographic Source: U.S.; District of Columbia Journal Announcement: RIESEP94 This resource guide is designed to help adults who suspect they have a learning disability gather sufficient information to set realistic goals, achieve those goals, and lead productive lives. The first section, which discusses assessing learning disabilities, includes lists of agencies equipped to help diagnose learning disabilities in adults and questions to ask qualified professionals. A checklist of 28 identified characteristics of adults with learning disabilities is presented along with annotated lists of 13 national resource centers, 9 organizations concerned with general education, 8 learning disability organizations, 3 attention deficit disorder organizations, 4 organizations concerned with employment issues, 5 organizations concerned with technology, 16 organizations concerned with life management issues, and 20 publications of relevance to learning-disabled adults. A list of 16 pertinent toll-free numbers and information on the HEATH Resource Center and National Adult Literacy and Learning Disabilities Center conclude the guide. (MN) Descriptors: Adaptive Behavior (of Disabled); *Adults; Adult Vocational Education; Annotated Bibliographies; Attention Deficit Disorders; Check Lists; Daily Living Skills; *Educational Diagnosis; Educational Resources; Employment Services; *Learning Disabilities; Literacy Education; *National Organizations; *National Programs; *Resource Materials EJ461191 EC605422 Dissociative Disorders in Children: Behavioral Profiles and Problems. Putnam, Frank W. Child Abuse and Neglect: The International Journal, v17 n1 p39-45 Jan-Feb 1993 Special Issue: Clinical Recognition of Sexually Abused Children. ISSN: 0145-2134 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); REVIEW LITERATURE (070) Journal Announcement: CIJAUG93 Clinical research has established a connection between childhood trauma and the development of dissociative disorders in adults. Pathological dissociation produces a range of symptoms and behaviors such as amnesias, rapid shifts in mood and behavior, and auditory and visual hallucinations. Many of these symptoms are misdiagnosed as attention, learning, or conduct problems, or even psychoses. (Author/JDD) Descriptors: Adults; Attention Deficit Disorders; Behavior Disorders; *Child Abuse; Children; *Clinical Diagnosis; Emotional Disturbances; Influences; Learning Problems; *Psychological Characteristics; *Psychopathology; Psychosis; *Sexual Abuse; *Symptoms (Individual Disorders) ED370319 EC303051 A Primer on Attention Deficit Disorder. Fastback 354. Fouse, Beth; Brians, Suzanne Phi Delta Kappa Educational Foundation, Bloomington, Ind. 1993; 45p.; This fastback is sponsored by the Rose City Texas Chapter of Phi Delta Kappa. ISBN: 0-87367-354-9 Available From: Phi Delta Kappa, P.O. Box 789, Bloomington, IN 47402-0789 ($1.25; Phi Delta Kappa members, $1). EDRS Price - MF01 Plus Postage. PC Not Available from EDRS. Language: English Document Type: REVIEW LITERATURE (070); BIBLIOGRAPHY (131) Geographic Source: U.S.; Indiana Journal Announcement: RIEOCT94 Target Audience: Teachers; Parents; Practitioners This pamphlet explains briefly what is known about attention deficit disorders (ADD), to help parents and educators have a more positive influence on the ADD child's life. It begins with definitions of terminology; characteristics of preschool, school-age, and adult individuals with ADD; and causes of ADD. It discusses special problems associated with ADD, including academic problems, behavior difficulties, interpersonal difficulties, and self-esteem difficulties. Strategies effective in managing ADD are outlined, including medical management, behavioral strategies, cognitive-behavioral therapy, modifications in assignments and tests, and instruction in learning strategies. The pamphlet concludes that with appropriate management and treatment during the formative years, the individual with ADD can live a normal and productive life, and that it behooves educators to realize the important facilitative roles they serve in the overall treatment plan of children and adolescents with ADD. The pamphlet concludes with a list of 14 resources for educators, 8 resources for students, 9 resources for parents, and 8 parent support groups and organizations. (Contains 23 references.) (JDD) Descriptors: Adults; *Attention Deficit Disorders; *Classroom Techniques; Elementary Secondary Education; Etiology; *Intervention; Preschool Education; *Student Characteristics; *Symptoms (Individual Disorders); Teacher Role; Teaching Methods EJ356804 EC200019 What Are Hyperactive Children Like as Young Adults? Kramer, John R. Journal of Children in Contemporary Society, v19 n1-2 p89-98 Fall-Win 1986 For related information, see EC 200 013-024. Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); PROJECT DESCRIPTION (141) Journal Announcement: CIJNOV87 The article presents case studies of two males with Attention Deficit Disorder when first referred for clinical evaluation as children with follow-up at age 21. Results indicated consistency in behavior patterns and differences between subjects at referral predicted outcomes as adults. (Author/DB) Descriptors: *Attention Deficit Disorders; *Behavior Patterns; Case Studies; Children; *Followup Studies; *Hyperactivity; Males; Young Adults 4 A Continuing Education Program on ADHD Video Training Package Incorporating the latest research available on the topics of ADHD, this video training package provides information in four key areas: Characteristics and Identification, Model School Programs, Effective Classroom Interventions, and Policy and Administrative Issues. The package includes a 30-minute video and a comprehensive manual that provides detailed information in each of the critical areas. The program was developed by leading educators in the field: Ron Reeve, University of Virginia; Mary Spessard, Coloma Schools, MI; Ron Walker, Walker Educational Consulting, Inc.; Ann Welch, Albemarle County Public Schools, Charlottesville, VA; James Wright, Auburn University at Montgomery, AL; and Judy Schrag, Learning Systems Group, Washington, DC. A Continuing Education Program on Attention Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder was supported by a federally funded grant from the Division of Personnel Preparation, Office of Special Education Programs, U.S. Department of Education. Closed Captioned. To order, call 1-800-CEC-READ. #M5144 1996 ISBN 0-86586-278-8 $109 CEC Members $76 Internet Resources Internet Listservs Top of Page Back to ERIC Menu Back to CEC Home Page copyright © 1996 ERIC Clearinghouse on Disabilities and Gifted Education URL: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm WT02-B20-39IA001-000011-B022-323http://www.cec.sped.org:80/faq/gt-add.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101074230 text/html 20059HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 07:42:34 GMTLast-modified: Wednesday, 04-Dec-96 23:24:00 GMTContent-length: 19864Content-type: text/html GT-ADD-FAQ GT-ADD-FAQ (last updated July 17, 1996) THE ERIC CLEARINGHOUSE ON DISABILITIES AND GIFTEDEDUCATION (ERIC EC) The Council for Exceptional Children 1920Association Drive Reston, VA 20191 Toll Free: 1-800-328-0272 TTY: 703-264-9449 E-mail: ericec@cec.sped.org Internet: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm Do you have any information on attention deficit disorder and children who are gifted? Recently, an increasing number of gifted children have been identified or diagnosed as having attention deficit disorder, with or without hyperactivity. This dramatic increase is somewhat disturbing, and has been explained in many different ways including greater awareness on the part of educational professionals and improved diagnostic techniques. However, ADD in gifted students is difficult to assess because so many of the behavioral characteristics are similar to those associated with giftedness or creativity. A child who is gifted may have ADD. Without a thorough professional evaluation, including a physical examination by a physician, it is hard to tell. This file includes information about gifted students and ADD. At the end of this file are links to Internet resources and Internet listservs (discussion groups) where you can obtain more specific information on this topic. There may be an ERIC digest that provides further information on this topic. You can read the full text of ERIC EC digests under our listing at the U.S.Department of Education, Office of Educational Research and Improvement. Enclosed are several citations from the ERIC database. These records are a sample of the kind of information you can find in the ERIC database. For more citations on your topic of interest, you may want to search the ERIC database yourself on the Internet. References with ED (ERIC Document) and EJ (ERIC Journal) identifiers are cited in theERIC database; for example, ED333123 or EJ333999. ERIC documents are availablein microfiche collections at more than 825 locations worldwide (check your local college or public library). They can also be ordered for a fee through the ERIC Document Reproduction Service (EDRS) at 1-800-443-ERIC. References with an EJ (ERIC Journal) number are available for a fee from the originating journal (check with your local college or public library), through interlibrary loan services, or from articlereproduction clearinghouses, such as UMI: 1-800-248-0360; or ISI:1-800-523-1850. ERIC descriptors (search terms) used: Gifted and Attention Deficit Disorders EJ501389 EC611021 ADD Gifted: How Many Labels Can One Child Take? Delisle, James Gifted Child Today Magazine, v18 n2 p42-43 Mar-Apr 1995 ISSN: 1076-2175 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); POSITION PAPER (120) Journal Announcement: CIJAUG95 Target Audience: Practitioners This paper argues that the Attention Deficit Disorder/Gifted (ADD/Gifted)label is both unfair and overused, discounts the possibility of naturaldevelopmental lags, and focuses on the child's weaknesses. A call is made forseeking a full understanding of contextual, curricular, and environmentalfactors outside the child before labeling students. (PB) Descriptors: *Attention Deficit Disorders; *Educational Diagnosis; ElementarySecondary Education; *Gifted Disabled; *Labeling (of Persons); Self FulfillingProphecies EJ494764 EC608841 Gifted/Learning Disabled Adolescent to Adult. Hayes, Marnell L. Journal of Secondary Gifted Education, v5 n3 p75-82 Spr 1994 ISSN: 1047-1885 Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); NON-CLASSROOM MATERIAL (055) Journal Announcement: CIJAPR95 Target Audience: Parents This article offers guidelines on the development of the gifted adolescentwith learning disabilities into an adult. Topics considered include thestruggle for autonomy, provision of all diagnostic information to the youngadult, the special problems of the adult with attention deficit hyperactivitydisorder, rights and responsibilities, living arrangements, and independentliving. (DB) Descriptors: Adolescent Development; Attention Deficit Disorders; *GiftedDisabled; Hyperactivity; Independent Living; *Learning Disabilities; *PersonalAutonomy ED375605 EC303445 Mainstreaming the Gifted. Knopper, Dorothy, Ed. Understanding Our Gifted, v6 n6 Jul-Aug 1994 20p.; In: Silverman, Linda Kreger, Ed.; Knopper, Dorothy, Ed. UnderstandingOur Gifted. Volume 6, Issues 1-6, September 1993-August 1994; see EC 303 439.Available From: Open Space Communications, Inc., 1900 Flosom, Suite 108,Boulder, CO 80302. 1-800-494-6178 (annual subscription for six issues: individual, $30; institutions, $35; international individual, $40; international institutions,$45). EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: SERIAL (022) Geographic Source: U.S.; Colorado Journal Announcement: RIEMAR95 This journal theme issue focuses on mainstreaming of gifted children. "HowGifted Kids Can Survive in 'Inclusion' Classrooms" by Susan Winebrenner offersguidelines for compacting and differentiating the curriculum for giftedstudents within the regular classroom setting. It also addresses guidingindependent study. "Challenging Ben" by Barbara Gilman and Linda Greenerecounts one child's individualized programming including abilityidentification, classroom modifications, and issues of course and gradeacceleration. "Hidden Gifted Learner: Creativity and Attention DeficitDisorder" by Deidre V. Lovecky summarizes characteristics of gifted studentswith ADD and stresses the importance of using students' creative strengths."Instructional Perspectives: Mainstreaming and the Gifted Child" by Shirley W.Schiever questions whether the regular class setting is, in fact, the leastrestrictive environment for gifted students. Regular columns review children'sbooks and address the issues of school choice, and picture books as art museums.(DB) Descriptors: *Attention Deficit Disorders; Classroom Techniques; Creativity;Curriculum; Elementary Secondary Education; *Gifted; Gifted Disabled;*Inclusive Schools; Individualized Instruction; *Mainstreaming; StudentPlacement Identifiers: *Differentiated Curriculum (Gifted) ED375604 EC303444 Attention Deficit Disorders. Silverman, Linda Kreger, Ed. Understanding Our Gifted, v6 n5 May-Jun 1994 20p.; In: Silverman, Linda Kreger, Ed.; Knopper, Dorothy, Ed. UnderstandingOur Gifted. Volume 6, Issues 1-6, September 1993-August 1994; see EC 303 439.Available From: Open Space Communications, Inc., 1900 Flosom, Suite 108,Boulder, CO 80302 1-800-494-6178 (annual subscription for six issues: individual, $30; institutions, $35; international individual, $40; international institutions,$45). EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: SERIAL (022) Geographic Source: U.S.; Colorado Journal Announcement: RIEMAR95 This journal theme issue focuses on attention deficit disorders (ADD) ingifted children. "Gifted Children with Attention Deficit Disorder" by DeirdreV. Lovecky outlines symptoms of ADD, types of ADD, issues of giftedness,strengths of gifted children with ADD, and methods for helping gifted childrenwith ADD. "The Perplexed Perfectionist" by George W. Dorry accepts thepositive and negative sides of perfectionism, notes the high personal andinterpersonal expectations of gifted children with attentiondeficit/hyperactivity disorder, and describes treatment of these children byencouraging them to accept approximations of the perfect solution to a problemand by building steps of new learning that help the child to step away fromdependence gradually. A special feature titled "ADHD or Gifted?" presents adialogue with Sharon Lind and Linda Silverman which reviews 13 questionsparents and teachers should ask to determine the child's need for specialservices. Regular columns discuss revisiting childhood, the dangers ofignoring the gifted, literature resources, creative ventures, and turnaboutchildren. (JDD) Descriptors: *Attention Deficit Disorders; Elementary Secondary Education;*Gifted; *Gifted Disabled; *Intervention; *Student Characteristics; Symptoms(Individual Disorders) Identifiers: Perfectionism ED375599 EC303439 Understanding Our Gifted. September 1993-August 1994. Silverman, Linda Kreger, Ed.; Knopper, Dorothy, Ed. Understanding Our Gifted, v6 n1-6 Sep 1993-Aug 1994 122p.; For volume 5, see ED 361 955. For individual issues, see EC 303 440-445. ISSN: 1040-1350 Available From: Open Space Communications, Inc., 1900 Folsom, Suite 108,Boulder, CO 80302 1-800-494-6178 ($35 annual subscription for 6 issues).EDRS Price - MF01/PC05 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: SERIAL (022) Geographic Source: U.S.; Colorado Journal Announcement: RIEMAR95 Target Audience: Teachers; Parents; Practitioners Each of these issues of "Understanding Our Gifted" is based on the followingthemes: valuing parents, excellence revisited, networking, talent searches,attention deficit disorders, and mainstreaming the gifted. Feature articles ofthe six issues include: "'Pushy and Domineering': A Stigma Placed on Parents ofGifted Children" (Lynn C. Cole and Roxana M. DellaVecchia); "EducatingEducators" (Cathy Silva); "Making Connections for the At-Risk Gifted Child"(Mary Kay Finholt and Kathy Peckron); "Positive Aspects of Full-TimeProgramming" (Mary F. Toll); "A Network of Scholars" (Jerry Flack); "TheCourage To Network" (Maddi Wallach); "Talent Search: A Driving Force in GiftedEducation" (Paula Olszewski-Kubilius); "University-Based Talent Searches forthe Gifted" (Mark R. DeLong); "Gifted Children with Attention Deficit Disorder"(Deirdre V. Lovecky); "The Perplexed Perfectionist" (George W. Dorry); "HowGifted Kids Can Survive in 'Inclusion' Classrooms" (Susan Winebrenner); and"Challenging Ben" (Barbara Gilman and Linda Greene). In addition to thefeature articles, the issues occasionally contain interviews or poetry, andeach issue contains recurring columns, such as "Hidden Gifted Learner,""Parenting the Gifted," "Instructional Perspectives," "The Reading Room,""Bright Beginnings," "Personality Plus," "The Highly Gifted," "CreativeVentures and Encounters," "From Parent to Parent," "Kaleidoscope," and "CurrentDevelopments in Gifted Education." (Some papers contain references.) (JDD) Descriptors: Ability Identification; Attention Deficit Disorders; *ChildRearing; *Educational Methods; Elementary Secondary Education; Excellence inEducation; *Gifted; Gifted Disabled; Mainstreaming; Networks; Parent Role;Parent School Relationship; *Student Development EJ470768 EC607012 ADHD and Children Who Are Gifted. Webb, James T.; Latimer, Diane Exceptional Children, v60 n2 p183-84 Oct-Nov 1993 Special Issue: Issues in the Education of Children with Attention DeficitDisorder. ISSN: 0014-4029 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); NON-CLASSROOM MATERIAL (055) Journal Announcement: CIJFEB94 Target Audience: Teachers; Counselors; Practitioners Guidelines are offered for the differential identification of children whohave attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), giftedness, or both.Careful evaluation of the situation and setting in which behavior orattentional problems occur is recommended, as is individual evaluation forchildren who may be gifted and ADHD. (DB) Descriptors: *Ability Identification; *Attention Deficit Disorders;Elementary Secondary Education; *Gifted; *Gifted Disabled; HandicapIdentification; Student Characteristics; Student Evaluation EJ462569 EC605896 John Adam Hartley: An ADD Story. Hartley, Donna T. Gifted Child Today (GCT), v16 n2 p34-37 Mar-Apr 1993 ISSN: 0892-9580 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); PROJECT DESCRIPTION (141) Journal Announcement: CIJSEP93 This case study of a gifted young man diagnosed with attention deficitdisorder (ADD) at the age of three, and later identified as learning disabled,describes the boy's development and his positive and negative educationalexperiences in preschool, public elementary school, special school, mainstreaming back into public school, and postsecondary education. (JDD)Descriptors: *Attention Deficit Disorders; Case Studies; *Educational Methods;Elementary Secondary Education; *Gifted Disabled; Intervention; *LearningDisabilities; Mainstreaming; Postsecondary Education; Preschool Education;Private Schools; Public Schools; *Student Characteristics; Student Development;Student Needs ED358673 EC302267 ADHD and Children Who Are Gifted. ERIC Digest #522. Webb, James T.; Latimer, Diane Council for Exceptional Children, Reston, Va.; ERIC Clearinghouse onDisabilities and Gifted Education, Reston, VA. Jul 1993; 3p. Sponsoring Agency: Office of Educational Research and Improvement (ED), Washington, DC. Contract No: RR93002005 Report No: EDO-EC-93-5 Available From: Council for Exceptional Children, Publication Sales, 1920Association Dr., Reston, VA 22091-1589 ($1 each, minimum order $5 prepaid).EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: ERIC PRODUCT (071); ERIC DIGESTS (SELECTED) (073) Geographic Source: U.S.; Virginia Journal Announcement: RIENOV93 Target Audience: Parents; Teachers; Practitioners This fact sheet summarizes information on children who have an attentiondeficit disorder with hyperactivity (ADHD), are gifted, or are both ADHD andgifted. Fourteen diagnostic criteria for ADHD from the Diagnostic andStatistical Manual of Mental Disorders III are listed. A comparison ofbehaviors associated with ADHD and with giftedness is offered, noting the manysimilarities. Parents and teachers are urged to consider the situation andsetting of problematic behaviors, noting that children with ADHD typicallyexhibit problem behaviors in all settings (both at home and at school) whereasgifted children are most likely to exhibit such behaviors in situations wherethey are bored or waiting for other students. Other differences noted includea long attention span (when interested) by gifted students and a greatervariability in task performance by children with ADHD. Careful evaluation isurged for students who may be both gifted/talented and ADHD. (DB) Descriptors: *Attention Deficit Disorders; Attention Span; *Behavior Problems;*Gifted; Gifted Disabled; *Hyperactivity; *Student Characteristics; StudentEvaluation; Symptoms (Individual Disorders); Talent Identifiers: ERIC Digests ED374630 EC303355 Surviving Gifted Attention Deficit Disorder Children in the Classroom. Wolfle, Jane A.; French, Michael P. Oct 1990; 26p.; Paper presented at the Annual Conference of the National Association of Gifted Children (Little Rock, AR, October 1990). EDRS Price - MF01/PC02 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: CONFERENCE PAPER (150); NON-CLASSROOM MATERIAL (055) Geographic Source: U.S.; Ohio Journal Announcement: RIEFEB95 Target Audience: Practitioners This paper examines characteristics of a typical 6-year-old andcharacteristics of attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), includingdistractibility, impulsiveness, inattention, and hyperactivity. The occurrenceof ADHD in gifted students is discussed. Possible causes of ADHD are noted.The 5 "M" program of treatment is presented, which involves: (1) medicationwith stimulants to help the student pay attention; (2) management usingbehavior modification techniques, which included acknowledging adherence toclassroom rules, teaching self-monitoring of behavior, allowing children tohelp design classroom rules, and using rewards and punishments to reinforcerules; (3) modification of the classroom environment to meet student needs; (4)modeling appropriate behavior; and (5) mothering (and fathering, too ), whichcalls for unconditional love and acceptance of the child, as ADHD children mustperceive that they are loved if they are to accept themselves. The paperconcludes that through steady support and management, the gifted ADHD child isnot only teachable, but can provide a great deal of positive stimulation to theclassroom environment. (JDD) Descriptors: *Attention Deficit Disorders; Behavior Modification; *ClassroomTechniques; Drug Therapy; Elementary Secondary Education; Etiology; *GiftedDisabled; *Hyperactivity; Intervention; Self Management; *StudentCharacteristics Identifiers: Behavior Management EJ402482 EC221862 Diagnosis and Treatment of the Gifted Student with Attention DeficitDisorder: A Structure of Intellect (SOI) Approach. Maxwell, Valerie Journal of Reading, Writing, and Learning Disabilities International, v5 n3p247-52 1989 Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); PROJECT DESCRIPTION (141) Journal Announcement: CIJJUN90 Comprehensive diagnosis of the learning abilities of gifted students withattention deficit disorder can be accomplished using the Structure of Intellect(SOI) tests, which distinguish giftedness and disability. SOI uses a wholisticapproach to analyze student performance, and offers strategies for developingremedial educational programming. Two cases are briefly presented.(Author/JDD) Descriptors: *Attention Deficit Disorders; *Educational Diagnosis; ElementarySecondary Education; *Gifted Disabled; Holistic Approach; *Intervention;Preschool Education; Remedial Instruction; *Teaching Methods Identifiers: *Structure of Intellect EJ349243 EC191627 The Gifted Dyslexic. Jones, Bobbie H. Annals of Dyslexia, v36 p301-17 1986 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); TEACHING GUIDE (052) Journal Announcement: CIJJUN87 Target Audience: Practitioners Guidelines are offered for diagnosing and teaching the gifted dyslexic.Characteristics of the gifted and of children with attention-deficit disordersare listed. A diagnostic battery is recommended. Educational suggestionsinclude family involvement, remediation of academic skill deficits, and studentguidance in developing organization and study skills. (DB) Descriptors: *Attention Deficit Disorders; *Dyslexia; Educational Diagnosis;Elementary Secondary Education; *Gifted; *Student Characteristics; StudentEvaluation Internet Resources on Gifted Education Internet Resources on Attention Deficit Disorders Internet Listservs on Gifted Education Internet Listservs on Attention Deficit Disorders Top of Page Back to ERIC Menu Back to CEC Home Page Copyright ©1996 ERIC Clearinghouse on Disabilities and Gifted Education URL: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm WT02-B20-40IA001-000011-B023-10http://www.cec.sped.org:80/faq/gt-ident.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101074238 text/html 22864HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 07:42:47 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 09-Sep-96 21:44:00 GMTContent-length: 22672Content-type: text/html  NAME OF FILE, GT-Ident-FAQ GT-Ident-FAQ (last updated July 20, 1996) THE ERIC CLEARINGHOUSE ON DISABILITIES AND GIFTEDEDUCATION (ERIC EC) The Council for Exceptional Children 1920Association Drive Reston, VA 20191 Toll Free: 1-800-328-0272 TTY: 703-264-9449 E-mail: ericec@cec.sped.org Internet: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm How can gifted students be identified? School districts throughout the U.S. use a variety of instruments and proceduresto identify gifted students. When looking for instruments or procedures, it is important to keep in mind thatidentification should be linked to curriculum. If an instrument is used to identify talent,then school districts should be prepared to adapt curriculum to nurture and foster those identified talent areas. The National Research Center on the Gifted and Talented at the University of Virginiahas a database of empirically sound identification instruments that can be used with a variety of populations. When contacting NRC/GT at UVA for information about identification instruments, it is suggested that you provide specific information about your school district and the populations you wish to assess. The University of Virginia Research Site Dr. Carolyn M. Callahan, Associate Director Curry School of Education The University of Virginia 405 Emmet Street Charlottesville, VA 22903 804/924-0791 This file includes information about ability identification. At the end of this file are links to Internet resources and Internet listservs (discussion groups) where you can obtain more specific information on this topic. There may be an ERICdigest that provides further information on this topic. You can read the full text of ERIC EC digests under our listing at the U.S.Department of Education, Office of Educational Research and Improvement. Enclosed are several citations from the ERIC database. These records are a sample of the kind of information you can find in the ERIC database. For morecitations on your topic of interest, you may want to search the ERIC database yourself onthe Internet. References with ED (ERIC Document) and EJ (ERIC Journal) identifiers are cited inthe ERIC database; for example, ED333123 or EJ333999. ERIC documents areavailable in microfiche collections at more than 825 locations worldwide (check yourlocal college or public library). They can also be ordered for a fee through the ERICDocument Reproduction Service (EDRS) at 1-800-443-ERIC. References with anEJ (ERIC Journal) number are available for a fee from the originating journal (checkwith your local college or public library), through interlibrary loan services, or from articlereproduction clearinghouses, such as UMI: 1-800-248-0360; or ISI:1-800-523-1850. ERIC descriptors (search terms) used: Gifted or Talent and Ability Identification ED388024 EC304379 A Review of Assessment Issues in Gifted Education and Their Implications forIdentifying Gifted Minority Students. Research Monograph 95204. Frasier, Mary M.; And Others National Research Center on the Gifted and Talented, Storrs, CT. Feb 199546p.; Executive Summary on p.vii-xiii also published separately.Sponsoring Agency: Office of Educational Research and Improvement (ED),Washington, DC.Contract No: R206R00001 Available From: NRC/GT, University of Connecticut, 362 Fairfield Road, U-7,Storrs, CT 06269-2007. EDRS Price - MF01/PC02 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: REVIEW LITERATURE (070); POSITION PAPER (120) Geographic Source: U.S.; Connecticut Journal Announcement: RIEMAR96 This review of research and literature examines issues related to theidentification of potentially gifted students from groups most likely to beunderrepresented in gifted education programs, including racial and ethnicminority groups, economically disadvantaged students, and those with limitedEnglish proficiency. Three major reasons for underrepresentation areidentified and discussed: (1) test bias (the most frequent attribution forunderrepresentation in programs); (2) selective referrals (usually because ofteacher attitudes and knowledge about minority students and the type of schoolstudents are likely to attend); and (3) reliance on deficit-based paradigms(making recognition of the strengths of minority children less likely). Recommendations for modifying traditional assessment procedures include the useof multiple criteria and nontraditional measures and procedures andmodification of selection criteria. Four aspects of assessment are discussed:the construct of giftedness, the referral process, the identification process,and the process by which decisions are made using assessment information forcurriculum and instructional planning. (Contains approximately 140references.) (DB) Descriptors: *Ability Identification; Economically Disadvantaged; ElementarySecondary Education; Ethnic Groups; *Evaluation Methods; *Gifted; LimitedEnglish Speaking; *Minority Groups; Referral; *Student Evaluation; TeacherAttitudes; Test Bias Identifiers: *Disproportionate Representation (Spec Educ) EJ506647 EC611516 The Triarchic Model Applied to Identifying, Teaching, and Assessing GiftedChildren. Sternberg, Robert J.; Clinkenbeard, Pamela R. Roeper Review, v17 n4 p255-60 May-Jun 1995 ISSN: 0278-3193 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); NON-CLASSROOM MATERIAL (055); PROJECT DESCRIPTION (141) Journal Announcement: CIJNOV95 Target Audience: Practitioners A triarchic model for identifying, teaching, and assessing children who aregifted is presented. The model involves three abilities: memory-analytic,creative-synthetic, and practical-contextual. Results are presented of theYale Summer Psychology pilot project that is based on this model. Expandingthe model to other fields beyond psychology is also addressed. (SW) Descriptors: *Ability Identification; Cognitive Processes; EducationalStrategies; Elementary Secondary Education; *Gifted; *Models; Psychology;*Student Evaluation; Talent Identification; *Teaching Methods; Theories;Thinking Skills EJ505160 EC611481 Creativity and Giftedness: Published Instrument Uses and Abuses. Hunsaker, Scott L.; Callahan, Carolyn M. Gifted Child Quarterly, v39 n2 p110-14 Spr 1995 ISSN: 0016-9862 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); RESEARCH REPORT (143) Journal Announcement: CIJOCT95 Instruments used to measure creativity by 418 school districts as part oftheir identification procedures for gifted programs were studied. Resultsindicated that districts often select instruments for assessing creativitywithout attending to the definition of the construct. Creativity is oftenassessed in ways that may not be valid or reliable. (SW) Descriptors: *Ability Identification; *Creativity; *Creativity Tests;Definitions; Elementary Secondary Education; *Gifted; School Districts; *TalentIdentification; Test Reliability; *Test Selection; Test Validity EJ501402 EC611034 Temporal Stability of Gifted Children's Intelligence. Spangler, Robert S.; Sabatino, David A. Roeper Review, v17 n3 p207-10 Feb-Mar 1995 Theme Issue: The Psychology of the Gifted. ISSN: 0278-3193 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); RESEARCH REPORT (143) Journal Announcement: CIJAUG95 Target Audience: Researchers The longitudinal stability of the Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children-Revised was examined for consistency in determining eligibility for giftedprograms among 66 elementary children. All subtest scales except one remainedextremely stable, producing less than one scale score point difference acrossthree test administrations. Children originally found eligible for giftedprograms maintained their eligibility status over six years. (Author/PB)Descriptors: *Ability Identification; Elementary Education; Eligibility;*Gifted; Intelligence Quotient; *Intelligence Tests; Longitudinal Studies;Student Placement; *Test Reliability Identifiers: *Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children (Revised) EJ499302 EC610665 A Qualitative Approach to Portfolios: The Early Assessment for ExceptionalPotential Model. Shaklee, Beverly D.; Viechnicki, Karen J. Journal for the Education of the Gifted, v18 n2 p156-70 Win 1995 ISSN: 0162-3532 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); PROJECT DESCRIPTION (141) Journal Announcement: CIJJUL95 The Early Assessment for Exceptional Potential portfolio assessment modelassesses children as exceptional learners, users, generators, and pursuers ofknowledge. It is based on use of authentic learning opportunities; interactionof assessment, curriculum, and instruction; multiple criteria derived frommultiple sources; and systematic teacher preparation. The model's standardsfor credibility, transferability, dependability, and confirmability are noted. (Author/DB) Descriptors: *Ability Identification; Early Childhood Education; ElementaryEducation; Evaluation Methods; *Gifted; Models; *Portfolio Assessment; *StudentEvaluation Identifiers: *Early Identification EJ481555 EC608473 Assessing Artistic and Problem-Solving Performance in Minority andNonminority Students Using a Nontraditional Multidimensional Approach. Clasen, Donna Rae; And Others Gifted Child Quarterly, v38 n1 p27-32 Win 1994 ISSN: 0016-9862 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); RESEARCH REPORT (143) Journal Announcement: CIJAUG94 Target Audience: Researchers; Practitioners This study investigated several nontraditional identification methodologiesfor their efficacy in identifying both minority and nonminority gifted students. Sixth graders (n=433) were given drawing and problem-solving tasks. Peer andteacher nominations were also used. The assessments identified a proportionatenumber of minority and nonminority students with potential in art or problemsolving. (Author/DB) Descriptors: *Ability Identification; Culture Fair Tests; Disadvantaged Youth;*Freehand Drawing; *Gifted; Interdisciplinary Approach; Intermediate Grades;*Minority Groups; *Problem Solving; *Talent Identification EJ481553 EC608471 Research Related to the Schoolwide Enrichment Triad Model. Renzulli, Joseph S.; Reis, Sally M. Gifted Child Quarterly, v38 n1 p7-20 Win 1994 ISSN: 0016-9862 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); REVIEW LITERATURE (070) Journal Announcement: CIJAUG94 Target Audience: Researchers; Practitioners This article reviews research on the Schoolwide Enrichment Triad Model, whichcombines the previously developed Enrichment Triad and Revolving DoorIdentification Models of gifted education. Research reviewed addresses: modeleffectiveness, creative productivity, personal and social development,underserved populations, self-efficacy, curricular framework, learning styles,and longitudinal studies. (DB) Descriptors: Ability Identification; Cognitive Style; Creativity; *CurriculumDevelopment; Elementary Secondary Education; *Enrichment Activities; *Gifted;*Instructional Effectiveness; Longitudinal Studies; Productivity; Self Efficacy;Student Development; *Teaching Models Identifiers: Enrichment Triad Model; Revolving Door Identification Model;*Schoolwide Enrichment Triad Model ED368096 EC302841 Use of the Raven Progressive Matrices Test in an Ethnically Diverse GiftedPopulation. Saccuzzo, Dennis P.; And Others 1994 15p.; In: Saccuzzo, Dennis P.; And Others. Identifying UnderrepresentedDisadvantaged Gifted and Talented Children: A Multifaceted Approach. (Volumes 1and 2); see EC 302 840. Contract No: R206A00569 EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: RESEARCH REPORT (143); REVIEW LITERATURE (070) Geographic Source: U.S.; California Journal Announcement: RIEAUG94 The efficacy of use of the Raven Progressive Matrices Test (RPM) in theselection of gifted children from traditionally underrepresented groups wasinvestigated in a large-scale study with a diverse population. A total of16,985 subjects were given the Raven Progressive Matrices Test. These included22.7 percent Latinos, 37 percent Whites, 14 percent African-Americans, 2.8percent Asians, 8.4 percent Filipinos, and 5.6 percent Indochinese, each ofwhom had been identified as potentially gifted on the basis of a case studyanalysis by a school psychologist. The sample of children certified as giftedbased on Raven performance was compared to a group certified as gifted based onindividual administrations of the Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children -Revised (WISC-R), and to actual enrollment ratios of cultural subgroups for theschool district. Findings support the position that the RPM is a moreequitable test than the WISC-R for evaluating students from ethnically diversepopulations, as well as for ensuring greater gender equity. (PB) Descriptors: *Ability Identification; Aptitude Tests; Comparative Analysis;Cultural Differences; *Culture Fair Tests; *Disadvantaged Youth; EducationalDiagnosis; Elementary Education; Elementary School Students; *Gifted;Intelligence Tests; *Minority Group Children; Screening Tests; Sex Bias; TestBias Identifiers: *Raven Progressive Matrices; San Diego Unified School DistrictCA; *Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children (Revised) ED368095 EC302840 Identifying Underrepresented Disadvantaged Gifted and Talented Children: AMultifaceted Approach. (Volumes 1 and 2.) Saccuzzo, Dennis P.; And Others San Diego State Univ., Calif. 1994 147p.; For individual chapters, see EC 302 841-846. Sponsoring Agency: Department of Education, Washington, DC. Contract No: R206A00569 EDRS Price - MF01/PC06 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: RESEARCH REPORT (143); REVIEW LITERATURE (070) Geographic Source: U.S.; California Journal Announcement: RIEAUG94 The primary purpose of this study was to determine if a model for identifyinggifted and talented students could be developed which would provide equalaccess to gifted programs for children of all ethnic and economic backgrounds. The culturally and ethnically diverse San Diego City School District provided apool of over 35,000 children referred for giftedness whose records were codedand analyzed through this research. Based on these findings, a model designedto increase the proportion of ethnically and economically diverse studentsreferred for assessment and identified as gifted was implemented and evaluated,with the Raven Progressive Matrices used as the criterion measure ofintellectual ability. Component research papers by Dennis P. Saccuzzo, NancyE. Johnson and Tracey L. Guertin cover the following topics: the use of theRaven Matrices in an ethnically diverse gifted population; use of the WechslerIntelligence Scale for Children - Revised (WISC-R) with disadvantaged giftedchildren; evaluation of risk factors in selecting children for gifted programs;information processing in gifted versus nongifted African-American, Latino,Filipino, and White children; ethnic and gender differences in locus of controlin at risk gifted and nongifted children; and understanding giftedunderachievers in an ethnically diverse population. Appendices include ateacher nomination form, a student/parent information form, and an independentevaluation review, in which author Margie Kitano finds the new model to havesignificantly impacted school system practice and increased the number andproportion of underrepresented students referred and identified althoughfailing to fully meet the initial criterion for equal access. (Contains 222references.) (Author/PB) Descriptors: *Ability Identification; Aptitude Tests; Cultural Differences;Culture Fair Tests; *Disadvantaged Youth; Educational Diagnosis; ElementarySecondary Education; Ethnic Groups; *Gifted; *Intelligence Tests; Low IncomeGroups; Minority Group Children; *Screening Tests; Test Bias Identifiers: *Raven Progressive Matrices; *San Diego Unified School DistrictCA ED367127 EC302929 Identifying Outstanding Talent in American Indian and Alaska Native Students. Callahan, Carolyn M.; McIntire, Jay A. Office of Educational Research and Improvement (ED), Washington, DC. Apr 1994 93p. Contract No: 433JAH2P148 Report No: PIP-94-1219 ISBN: 0-16-043150-6 Available From: U.S. Government Printing Office, Superintendent of Documents,Mail Stop: SSOP, Washington, DC 20402-9328. EDRS Price - MF01/PC04 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: REVIEW LITERATURE (070); NON-CLASSROOM MATERIAL (055) Geographic Source: U.S.; District of Columbia Journal Announcement: RIEJUL94 Government: Federal Target Audience: Practitioners; Administrators This report reviews and synthesizes the most promising practices used toidentify exceptionally talented students from the Native American population. Preliminary information includes an Indian Student Bill of Rights, discussionof the problem of talent identification, and discussion of special issuesincluding diversity within the Native American population and culturalassimilation versus accommodation. Eight principles of identification are thenpresented. These include, among others, using assessments that go beyond anarrow conception of talent; using appropriate instruments with underservedpopulations; and using a multiple-measure/multiple-criteria approach toidentification. Specific practices are then considered, which address:balancing the ideal and the practical; deciding on a concept of talent;recognizing the issues of a particular school; identifying traits that mayinfluence manifestations of talent; recognizing behaviors that distinguish someNative American students from the general population; looking formanifestations of talent potential, alternative behaviors, situations, andinterpretations; selecting and constructing appropriate assessment tools; andusing the collected student data to make decisions. Recommendations addresstechnical assistance, professional development, assessment portfolios,experimental programs, and program funding. Five appendices include technicalinformation concerning evaluation measures, two sample case studies, and a listof assessment instruments. (Contains 77 references.) (DB) Descriptors: *Ability Identification; Alaska Natives; *American Indians;Cultural Differences; Cultural Influences; Culture Fair Tests; Decision Making;*Educational Practices; Educational Quality; Elementary Secondary Education;Evaluation Methods; *Gifted; Psychometrics; Student Evaluation; StudentPlacement; *Talent; *Talent Identification EJ470813 EC607057 Development of the Scale for the Evaluation of Gifted IdentificationInstruments (SEGII). Callahan, Carolyn M.; And Others Gifted Child Quarterly, v37 n3 p133-40 Sum 1993 ISSN: 0016-9862 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); EVALUATIVE REPORT (142) Journal Announcement: CIJFEB94 Target Audience: Administrators; Researchers; Practitioners This article describes the Scale for the Evaluation of Gifted IdentificationInstruments, developed for use by school decision makers. Development of thescale is reviewed in terms of five areas of assessment: validity, reliability,propriety, respondent appropriateness, and utility. Specific guidelines andcautions in using the scale are also provided. (DB) Descriptors: *Ability Identification; *Gifted; Screening Tests; TestReliability; *Test Selection; Test Use; Test Validity Identifiers: *Scale for Evaluation Gifted Identification Instru; TestEvaluation ED352785 EC301715 Developmental Approaches to Identifying Exceptional Ability. Abstracts ofSelected Papers from the Annual Esther Katz Rosen Symposium on PsychologicalDevelopment of Gifted Children. (2nd, Lawrence, Kansas, February 28-29, 1992).Kansas Univ., Lawrence. Feb 1992 75p. EDRS Price - MF01/PC03 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: BIBLIOGRAPHY (131) Geographic Source: U.S.; Kansas Journal Announcement: RIEMAY93 Target Audience: Researchers This monograph presents extensive abstracts of 49 papers on developmentalapproaches to identifying exceptional ability. Sample topics include: thegifted population in prison; identification of gifted rural children; use ofthe Stanford-Binet for identification; student characteristics and placementinto special programs for the highly gifted; identification of culturallydiverse students; longitudinal development of the intellectually gifted;cognitive style of gifted preschoolers; eidetic imagery; development of problemfinding ability in gifted students; quantitative electrophysiology and behaviorof gifted and talented children; identification of mathematically talentedelementary students; the development of aesthetic experience; programs forunderserved pupils; applying the theory of multiple intelligences; giftednessin the multi-age multi-ability primary school; and creativity tests andartistic talent. (DB) Descriptors: *Ability Identification; *Child Development; ElementarySecondary Education; *Gifted; *Talent; *Talent Identification Internet Resources Internet Listservs Top of Page Back to ERIC Menu Back to CEC Home Page Copyright ©1996 ERIC Clearinghouse on Disabilities and Gifted Education URL: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm WT02-B20-41IA001-000011-B023-23http://www.cec.sped.org:80/faq/gt-place.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101074251 text/html 28072HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 07:42:55 GMTLast-modified: Tuesday, 10-Sep-96 14:02:00 GMTContent-length: 27879Content-type: text/html GT-Placement-FAQ GT-Placement (last updated July 17, 1996) THE ERIC CLEARINGHOUSE ON DISABILITIES AND GIFTEDEDUCATION (ERIC EC) The Council for Exceptional Children 1920Association Drive Reston, VA 20191 Toll Free: 1-800-328-0272 TTY: 703-264-9449 E-mail: ericec@cec.sped.org Internet: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm My child has just been identified as "gifted and talented." How do we decide whether to enroll her in the gifted program? How do we decide about acceleration? I am concerned that my child will be separated from friends andclassmates and may be teased by other children. I am also concerned that my child will feel pressured by the work, to a point that she dislikes school. Also my child does not want to leave her current school, and does not want to be classified any differently than her friends.Please help me with the pros and cons of these issues, and any other guidance youcan offer. This file includes information about gifted student placement. At the endof the file are links to Internet resources and Internet listservs (discussion groups)where you can obtain more specific information on the topic. There may be ERICdigests thatprovide information on related topics. You can read the full text of ERIC EC digestsunder our listing at the U.S. Department of Education, Office of Educational Research andImprovement. Enclosed are several citations from the ERIC database. These records are asample of the kind of information you can find in the ERIC database. For morecitations on your topic of interest, you may want to search the ERIC database yourself on theInternet. References with ED (ERIC Document) and EJ (ERIC Journal) identifiers are cited inthe ERIC database; for example, ED333123 or EJ333999. ERIC documents areavailable in microfiche collections at more than 825 locations worldwide (check yourlocal college or public library). They can also be ordered for a fee through the ERICDocument Reproduction Service (EDRS) at 1-800-443-ERIC. References with anEJ (ERIC Journal) number are available for a fee from the originating journal (checkwith your local college or public library), through interlibrary loan services, or fromarticle reproduction clearinghouses, such as UMI: 1-800-248-0360; or ISI:1-800-523-1850. The decision to enroll a child in a gifted program is not irreversible. If the placementdoesn't work out, the child can always go back to the regular education classroom. Thereverse is rarely true. If you opt to keep your child in the regular education classroom,and your child quickly becomes bored, transferring to the gifted classroom during thesame school year may not be possible. Research indicates the following: Gifted students benefit from learning together and should be placed with similar students in their areas of strength. It has been extremely difficult for regular education teachers to differentiate curriculumto meet the needs of gifted students in mixed ability classrooms. Many gifted students think and learn differently from their chronological age mates whoare not gifted. They tend to better understand, accept, and use their learningdifferences as assets when they are grouped together. When they are provided withconsistent appropriate academic challenge, they tend to be more comfortable withthemselves (and others). When cooperative learning has been used in the regular education classroom, giftedstudents often become tutors and learn less academic content. The other students maydepend on them to do most of the work, or do the work that is difficult, and therefore theregular education students also learn less academic content. Gifted students frequently know many of the concepts introduced in the regular education class and waste a lot of time. They often develop bad habits, such as constant daydreaming. Gifted students are more likely to socialize "normally" when they are with students who share their interests and learning style. This is most likely to occur with intellectual age mates, regardless of chronological age. ERIC descriptors (search terms) used: Gifted and Outcomes of Education ED387992 EC304347 Acceleration--A Viable Option for Gifted Children. White, Linda A. 30 Aug 1995; 36p. EDRS Price - MF01/PC02 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: REVIEW LITERATURE (070) Geographic Source: Canada; Ontario Journal Announcement: RIEMAR96 This review of the literature focuses on research findings concerning the long-term academic, social, and emotional effects of acceleration, as well as the results of non-acceleration, on gifted children. Access to accelerated programs in Canada and the United States was also investigated. The review led to the following conclusions: (1) academic outcomes of acceleration are positive; (2) no carefully executed research has been conducted that has found negative social and/or emotional outcomes of acceleration of gifted children; (3) gifted children who are not intellectually stimulated and challenged may become underachievers and not fulfill their potential; and (4) acceleration is not widely used in Canada or the United States. Especially noted is the widespread opposition to acceleration by educators despite research which clearly finds that their concerns are unfounded. (Contains 30 references.) (DB) Descriptors: Academic Achievement; *Academically Gifted; *Acceleration (Education); Access to Education; Age Grade Placement; Early Admission; *Educational Methods; Elementary Secondary Education; Emotional Development; Instructional Effectiveness; *Outcomes of Education; Social Development; Student Placement; Theory Practice Relationship; Underachievement ED386885 EC304276 Serving Gifted and Talented Students: A Resource for School Personnel. Genshaft, Judy L., Ed.; And Others 1995; 440p. ISBN: 0-89079-605-X Available From: Pro-Ed, 8700 Shoal Creek Blvd., Austin, TX 78757-6897 ($39). Document Not Available from EDRS. Language: English Document Type: BOOK (010); COLLECTION (020) Geographic Source: U.S.; Texas Journal Announcement: RIEFEB96 Target Audience: Practitioners This collection considers the personal and educational needs of the student who is gifted, with emphasis on the roles of support staff. It covers developmental perspectives; assessment, identification, and evaluation issues; educational services; personal, interpersonal, and cultural issues; intervention strategies; and gifted education issues. Chapters are as follows: "Gifted Education: Historical Perspectives and Current Concepts" (Mary Ruth Coleman and James J. Gallagher); "The Changing Developmental Needs of the Gifted: Birth to Maturity" (Elizabeth Maxwell); "Changing Conceptions of Intelligence and Their Impact upon the Concept of Giftedness: The Triarchic Theory of Intelligence" (Robert J. Sternberg); "Identifying High Ability/High Achievement Giftedness" (Marlene Bireley); "Identifying the Creatively Gifted" (Gary A. Davis); "Evaluating Instructional Outcomes for Gifted Students" (Carolyn M. Callahan); "The Educational Continuum and Delivery of Services" (John F. Feldhusen and Sidney M. Moon); "Developing Curricular Interventions for the Gifted" (Beverly N. Parke); "Encouraging Lifelong Learning through the Autonomous Learner Model" (George T. Betts and Michael J. Hoover); "Technological Innovations in the Education of Gifted and Talented Students" (Richard D. Howell); "Underachievement Syndrome in Gifted Students" (Sylvia B. Rimm); "The Special Characteristics and Needs of Gifted Students with Disabilities" (M. Bireley); "Highly Gifted Children" (Linda Kreger Silverman); "Impact of Family Patterns upon the Development of Giftedness" (S. Rimm); "Stress and the Gifted" (Judy L. Genshaft et al.); "Stress as a Function of Gender: Special Needs of Gifted Girls and Women" (Constance L. Hollinger); "Serving the Needs of Gifted Children from a Multicultural Perspective" (Deborah L. Plummer); "Family Consultation as an Approach to Providing Psychoeducational Services to Gifted Children" (Gerald Porter and Joel Meyers); "Counseling Academically Behaving Adolescents about Wellness" (Paul Michael Janos); "Counseling Gifted Young Women about Educational and Career Choices" (C. Hollinger); "Consultation Strategies with Gifted and Regular Educators: A Collaborative Approach" (Dawn P. Flanagan); "What Gifted Education Can Offer the Reform Movement: Talent Development" (Sally M. Reis); and "Building Advocacy and Public Support for Gifted Education" (Peggy Dettmer). (Individual chapters contain references.) (SW) Descriptors: *Ability Identification; Academic Achievement; Academically Gifted; Advocacy; Career Choice; Computer Oriented Programs; Consultation Programs; Creativity; *Curriculum Development; Delivery Systems; Educational Change; Educational Cooperation; *Educational Methods; Elementary Secondary Education; Ethnic Groups; Family Characteristics; Family Involvement; Females; *Gifted; Gifted Disabled; Independent Study; Intelligence; Intervention; Minority Groups; Outcomes of Education; School Counseling; Staff Role; Stress Variables; *Student Development; Student Evaluation; *Student Needs; Talent; Underachievement Identifiers: Autonomous Learner Model for Gifted and Talented EJ497619 EC610411 Follow-Up Insights on Rapid Educational Acceleration. Charlton, Jane C.; And Others Roeper Review, v17 n2 p123-30 Dec 1994 Special Issue: Affective Dimensions of Being Gifted. ISSN: 0278-3193 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); PROJECT DESCRIPTION (141) Journal Announcement: CIJJUN95 This article provides information about educational and career outcomes of 12 youths, identified in the Study of Mathematically Precocious Youth and Center for Talented Youth, who received rapid educational acceleration. Also, three young adults who were accelerated share their experiences, concluding that such advancement was optimal for them but may not be the ideal path for others. (JDD) Descriptors: *Acceleration (Education); Career Development; Elementary Secondary Education; *Gifted; Higher Education; *Mathematics; Mathematics Education; *Outcomes of Education; Personal Narratives Identifiers: *Extremely Gifted ED388019 EC304374 Qualitative Extension of the Learning Outcomes Study. Research Monograph 94110. Delcourt, Marcia A. B.; Evans, Karen National Research Center on the Gifted and Talented, Storrs, CT. Nov 1994 235p.; Executive Summary on p.ix-xxvi also published separately. Sponsoring Agency: Office of Educational Research and Improvement (ED), Washington, DC. Contract No: R206R00001 Available From: NRC/GT, University of Connecticut, 362 Fairfield Road, U-7, Storrs, CT 06269-2007. EDRS Price - MF01/PC10 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: RESEARCH REPORT (143); TEST, QUESTIONNAIRE (160) Geographic Source: U.S.; Connecticut Journal Announcement: RIEMAR96 This report describes an extension of the Learning Outcomes Study (a nationwide longitudinal investigation of 1,010 students just entering programs for gifted learners in grades 2 and 3) to investigate excellence within each of the four program types considered: within-class programs, pull-out programs, separate classes, and special schools. The qualitative extension focused on an "exemplary" model from each of the program types. Two program evaluation tools, the Program Profile Form and Program Satisfaction Survey (with versions for students, parents, teachers, and administrators), were created to document key program components. Program profiles included a description of each program's setting and general procedures (identification process, curricular options, staff selection, school demographics) and five criteria: leadership, atmosphere and environment, communication, curriculum and instruction, and attention to student needs. In addition, ways that all selected programs addressed the needs of diverse populations of students were addressed. Appendices provide additional information on program demographic information, program profiles, the interview questions used, the program satisfaction surveys, and other research aspects of the study. Executive Summary is also published separately. (Contains approximately 95 references.) (DB) Descriptors: Academic Achievement; *Delivery Systems; Demonstration Programs; *Educational Quality; *Gifted; *Grouping (Instructional Purposes); Longitudinal Studies; Mainstreaming; Outcomes of Education; Participant Satisfaction; Primary Education; Program Effectiveness; Program Evaluation; Qualitative Research; Special Classes; Special Schools; Standards; Student Placement; *Teaching Models ED377651 EC303579 Why Give "Gifts" to the Gifted? Investing in a National Resource. Schwartz, Lita Linzer 1994; 162p. ISBN: 0-80-39-6104-9 Available From: Corwin Press, Inc., 2455 Teller Rd., Thousand Oaks, CA 91320 (paperback: ISBN-0-8039-6104-9, $18; hardback: ISBN-0-8039-6103-0). EDRS Price - MF01 Plus Postage. PC Not Available from EDRS. Language: English Document Type: BOOK (010); POSITION PAPER (120); REVIEW LITERATURE(070) Geographic Source: U.S.; California Journal Announcement: RIEMAY95 Target Audience: Policymakers This book looks at gifted and talented students from a "national resource" point of view. The first chapter establishes the basic premise that gifted and talented children represent a significant resource to any nation and that it is profitable to the nation to invest in their development and education. Subsequent chapters describe types of giftedness, characteristics of gifted youth, underidentified gifted populations (and techniques for identifying them), and the role of adults in fostering giftedness and providing needed opportunities. One chapter is devoted to the special case of gifted females. One chapter addresses nine categories of options available for enhancing the educational experiences of gifted students and explains how these options can be modified and combined to meet the needs of a specific school district and its gifted students. A chapter on "follow-up" studies of gifted and talented students suggests certain commonalities in personal qualities among the "successful" gifted and talented as well as the kinds of activities that appear to promote achievement and maintain a positive self-concept. (Contains approximately 230 references.) (DB) Descriptors: Ability Identification; Delivery Systems; *Educational Needs; *Educational Policy; Elementary Secondary Education; Females; Followup Studies; *Gifted; Intervention; Outcomes of Education; Program Development; *Special Education; Student Characteristics; *Talent; Talent Identification EJ475965 EC607635 The Effects of the Elimination of Gifted and Talented Programs on Participating Students and Their Parents. Purcell, Jeanne H. Gifted Child Quarterly, v37 n4 p177-87 Fall 1993 ISSN: 0016-9862 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); RESEARCH REPORT (143) Journal Announcement: CIJMAY94 Interviews were conducted with 19 parents and mail surveys were received from 27 parents of students (grades 3-8) identified and served by a gifted program eliminated in 1990. Parents perceived that their children were experiencing a decline in energy, curiosity, and intrinsic motivation to achieve at high levels and were beginning to disengage from the traditional curriculum. (DB) Descriptors: Academic Achievement; Elementary Secondary Education; *Gifted; Interviews; *Outcomes of Education; *Parent Attitudes; *Program Termination; *Student Attitudes; Student Motivation; Surveys EJ469084 HE531678 Ability Grouping: A Tool for Educational Excellence. Gallagher, James J. College Board Review, n168 p21-27 Sum 1993 ISSN: 0010-0951 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: EVALUATIVE REPORT (142); POSITION PAPER (120); JOURNAL ARTICLE (080) Journal Announcement: CIJJAN94 It is argued that lack of sustained academic effort, not student grouping, is the major reason for differences in student performance. Ability grouping is seen as a useful tool, especially in accelerated programs for bright children, that should not be rejected in favor of approaches that ignore individual differences. (MSE) Descriptors: *Academic Ability; *Acceleration (Education); *Classification; Elementary Secondary Education; *Gifted; *Grouping (Instructional Purposes); *Homogeneous Grouping; Outcomes of Education EJ462533 EC605824 All Rivers Lead to the Sea: A Follow-Up Study of Gifted Young Adults. Noble, Kathleen D.; And Others Roeper Review, v15 n3 p124-30 Feb-Mar 1993 ISSN: 0278-3193 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); RESEARCH REPORT (143) Journal Announcement: CIJSEP93 Target Audience: Researchers This follow-up study of gifted students who had either entered the University of Washington before age 15 (n=61), qualified for early entrance but chose the normal high school path (n=36), or were nonaccelerated National Merit Scholarship finalists (n=27) found that early entrants entered graduate school in greater numbers than did the other groups. (Author/DB) Descriptors: *Acceleration (Education); Beliefs; *College Admission; *Early Admission; Followup Studies; *Gifted; Graduate Study; Graduate Surveys; High Achievement; Higher Education; Outcomes of Education; Participant Satisfaction; Secondary Education; Student Attitudes; *Student Development Identifiers: National Merit Scholarship Program; University of Washington ED357514 EC302056 Research in Progress: Development of Giftedness in the Multi-Age, Multi-AbilityPrimary School. Schack, Gina D. Feb 1993 23p.; Paper presented at Esther Katz Rosen Annual Symposium on the Psychological Development of Gifted Children (2nd, Lawrence, KS, February 28-29, 1992). EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: CONFERENCE PAPER (150); RESEARCH REPORT (143) Geographic Source: U.S.; Kentucky Journal Announcement: RIEOCT93 This research examines how a developmentally appropriate educational program in the early years can affect the development of gifted children. The qualitative research specifically focused on a multi-age, multi-ability setting with partial implementation of a whole language program, a systematic writing process and with some flexibility in grouping of students. Eleven teachers and approximately 260 students in an ungraded primary school were involved, with 3 first year and 30 second year students identified as gifted. The study found that gifted children followed a somewhat accelerated curriculum. Teachers felt that there were definite social benefits to integrating the gifted and nongifted students. The multi-age, multi-ability setting seemed to allow young students not identified as gifted to progress more rapidly than they might have in a traditional graded classroom, as they were exposed to higher level instruction. There was little evidence of the development of creative productivity or multiple intelligences other than linguistic and logical-mathematical. Interviews with teachers indicated their willingness to allow students to do above-grade level work and to use higher level materials with some children. Interview questions are provided in an appendix. (Contains 12 references.) (JDD) Descriptors: Curriculum; *Educational Methods; Elementary Schools; Elementary School Students; *Gifted; Grouping (Instructional Purposes); *Heterogeneous Grouping; Interpersonal Competence; *Multigraded Classes; *Outcomes of Education; Primary Education; Student Development; Teacher Attitudes; Whole Language Approach; Writing Processes ED358582 EC301258 NRC/GT: Six Year One Research Studies. Gubbins, E. Jean, Ed. National Research Center on the Gifted and Talented, Storrs, CT. NRC G/T Newsletter, p1-7 Mar 1992 Mar 1992; 9p. Sponsoring Agency: Office of Educational Research and Improvement (ED), Washington, DC. Available From: National Research Center on the Gifted and Talented, University of Connecticut, 362 Fairfield Rd., U-7, Storrs, CT 06269-2007. EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: SERIAL (022) Geographic Source: U.S.; Connecticut Journal Announcement: RIENOV93 Target Audience: Researchers; Practitioners This newsletter focuses on six Year 1 research projects associated with the National Research Center on the Gifted and Talented NRC/GT). The updates address: "Regular Classroom Practices With Gifted Students: Findings from the Classroom Practices Survey" (Francis X. Archambault, Jr. and others); "The Classroom Practices Study: Observational Findings" (Karen L. Westberg and others); "The Curriculum Compacting Study" (Sally M. Reis); "Investigations into Instruments and Designs Used in the Identification of Gifted Students and the Evaluation of Gifted Programs" (Carolyn M. Callahan and Paula Pizzat); "The Learning Outcomes Study" (Marcia A. B. Delcourt and Lori Bland); and "A Theory-Based Approach to Identification, Teaching, and Evaluation of Gifted" (Robert J. Sternberg and Pamela R. Clinkenbeard). Additional commentaries consider the impact of parents on gifted adolescents (Julie L. Sherman) and academic summer camp for gifted minority students (Richard Chandler). Also included are several book and journal reviews and abstracts of papers on: Structure of Intellect Tests and giftedness; longitudinal studies of minority groups; characteristics of exceptionally gifted boys; effects of radical acceleration; problem finding skills and creativity; case studies of disadvantaged gifted adolescents; and artistic development in middle childhood. (DB) Descriptors: Ability Identification; Academically Gifted; Classroom Techniques; *Educational Practices; Elementary Secondary Education; *Gifted; Mainstreaming; Minority Groups; Outcomes of Education; Parent Student Relationship; Program Evaluation; Research and Development; *Research Projects; Student Evaluation; Talent; Theory Practice Relationship Identifiers: *National Research Center Gifted and Talented EJ392215 EC220180 Evaluation of a Full-Time Self-Contained Class for Gifted Students. VanTassel-Baska, Joyce; And Others Gifted Child Quarterly, v33 n1 p7-10 Win 1989 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); PROJECT DESCRIPTION (141) Journal Announcement: CIJNOV89 An elementary-school self-contained gifted class was compared to a control group on a general test of cognitive ability. Program participants exhibited significantly higher gains than did controls, and at the end of the program, participants also rated the quality of their school life more highly than did controls. (Author/JDD) Descriptors: *Cognitive Development; Comparative Analysis; Elementary Education; *Gifted; Mainstreaming; *Outcomes of Education; Program Evaluation; *Quality of Life; Self Concept; *Special Classes; Special Programs; Student Attitudes EJ363446 EC201149 Accelerative Strategies: How Effective Are They for the Gifted? Brody, Linda E.; Benbow, Camilla Persson Gifted Child Quarterly, v31 n3 p105-10 Sum 1987 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); PROJECT DESCRIPTION (141) Journal Announcement: CIJAPR88 The long-term effects of various accelerative options were evaluated using a group of 510 students identified as highly gifted in junior high. Their academic achievements, extracurricular activities, goals and aspirations, and social and emotional adjustment were assessed after completing high school. No discernible negative effects of accelerative strategies were found. (Author/VW) Descriptors: *Academic Achievement; *Acceleration (Education); *Extracurricular Activities; *Gifted; Instructional Effectiveness; Longitudinal Studies; *Outcomes of Education; Secondary Education; *Student Educational Objectives ED291185 EC201952 Differences in Learning and Achieving in Self-Contained and Resource Room Programs for the Gifted. Kramer, Linda R. Apr 1987 24p.; Paper presented at the Annual Conference of the American Educational Research Association (Washington, D.C., April, 1987). The research was partially supported by a grant from the Kentucky Advisory Council for Gifted and Talented Education. For related document, see EC 201 951. EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: EVALUATIVE REPORT (142); CONFERENCE PAPER (150) Geographic Source: U.S.; Kentucky Journal Announcement: RIEJUL88 A study gathered quantitative and qualitative data on the cognitive and affective outcomes for gifted students (grades 3-6) in full- and part-time programs from three classrooms in each of two neighboring school districts, one urban and one rural. Results suggested that outcomes are affected by the goal structures of classrooms and that the instructional environment of a gifted classroom may be a more important variable than the amount of time students spend in a program. Differences in the full- and part-time classrooms operating in the two districts and their effects were examined. Qualitative analysis led to the proposition that cooperatively structured classrooms were more successful learning environments than competitive ones. Numerous examples and quotes drawn from the researcher's classroom observations are given. Illustrations provide floor plans, daily routines, and schedules of classroom activities for both the self-contained and pull-out classrooms in the two districts. (VW) Descriptors: *Classroom Environment; Competition; Cooperation; *Educational Objectives; Educational Philosophy; Elementary Education; *Gifted; *Intergroup Relations; Outcomes of Education; *Resource Room Programs; *Self Contained Classrooms; Special Classes; Teacher Attitudes; Teacher Student Relationship Internet Resources Internet Listservs Top of Page Back to ERIC Menu Back to CEC Home Page copyright © 1996 ERIC Clearinghouse on Disabilities and Gifted Education URL: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm WT02-B20-42IA001-000011-B023-34http://www.cec.sped.org:80/faq/gt-esl.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101074301 text/html 21051HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 07:43:08 GMTLast-modified: Tuesday, 10-Sep-96 14:13:00 GMTContent-length: 20858Content-type: text/html  GT-ESL-FAQ GT-ESL-FAQ (last updated July 16, 1996) THE ERIC CLEARINGHOUSE ON DISABILITIES AND GIFTEDEDUCATION (ERIC EC) The Council for Exceptional Children 1920Association Drive Reston, VA 20191 Toll Free: 1-800-328-0272 TTY: 703-264-9449 E-mail: ericec@cec.sped.org Internet: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm Do you have information on how teachers can nurture giftedness in children whose first language is not English? This file includes information about programming for gifted children who are limited in their English proficiency. At the end of this file are links to Internet resources and Internet listservs (discussion groups) where you can obtain more specific information on this topic. There may be an ERIC digest that provides further information on this topic. You can read the full text of ERIC EC digests under our listing at the U.S.Department of Education, Office of Educational Research and Improvement. Enclosed are several citations from the ERIC database. These records are a sample of the kind of information you can find in the ERIC database. For more citations on your topic of interest, you may want to search the ERIC database yourself on the Internet. References with ED (ERIC Document) and EJ (ERIC Journal) identifiers are cited in theERIC database; for example, ED333123 or EJ333999. ERIC documents are availablein microfiche collections at more than 825 locations worldwide (check your local college or public library). They can also be ordered for a fee through the ERIC Document Reproduction Service (EDRS) at 1-800-443-ERIC. References with an EJ (ERIC Journal) number are available for a fee from the originating journal (check with your local college or public library), through interlibrary loan services, or from articlereproduction clearinghouses, such as UMI: 1-800-248-0360; or ISI:1-800-523-1850. ERIC descriptors (search terms) used: Gifted and English (Second Language) or Limited English Speaking EJ505038 EC611217 Language Diversity and Giftedness: Working with Gifted English Language Learners. Kitano, Margie K.; Espinosa, Ruben Journal for the Education of the Gifted, v18 n3 p234-54 Spr 1995 ISSN: 0162-3532 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); REVIEW LITERATURE (070) Journal Announcement: CIJOCT95 This article summarizes the literature and suggests future directions concerning the education of gifted students with primary languages other than English. It addresses student characteristics, appropriate procedures for identification, service delivery, instructional methods, and community involvement. (DB) Descriptors: *Ability Identification; *Delivery Systems; Elementary Secondary Education; *English (Second Language); *Gifted; *Limited English Speaking; Program Development; School Community Relationship; Student Characteristics; Talent Identification; Teaching Methods EJ502878 EA530514 Serving the Underserved: Giftedness among Ethnic Minority and Disadvantaged. McIntosh, Stephanie School Administrator, v52 n4 p25-29 Apr 1995 ISSN: 0036-6439 Language: English Document Type: EVALUATIVE REPORT (142); JOURNAL ARTICLE (080) Journal Announcement: CIJSEP95 Properly serving the needs of ethnic minority and economically disadvantagedgifted youth requires early identification, enrichment programs, parentalinvolvement, and specialized teacher training. Primary teachers must be ableto identify children exhibiting gifted behaviors not showing up in testing. Profiles San Diego and New Jersey programs and outlines signs of giftedness. (MLH) Descriptors: *Cultural Differences; Elementary Education; *GiftedDisadvantaged; *Intervention; *Limited English Speaking; *Minority Groups;Parent Participation; Preschool Education; *Special Needs StudentsIdentifiers: California (San Diego); *Language Barriers; New Jersey (Newark) ED379814 EC303687 Addressing Cultural and Linguistic Diversity in Special Education: Issues and Trends. Garcia, Shernaz B., Ed. Council for Exceptional Children, Reston, VA. Div. for Culturally and Linguistically Diverse Exceptional Learners. 1994 66p. ISBN: 0-86586-258-3 Available From: Council for Exceptional Children, 1920 Association Dr., Reston, VA 22091-1589 (Stock No. D5086, $16; $11.20, members). EDRS Price - MF01/PC03 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: COLLECTION (020) Geographic Source: U.S.; Virginia Journal Announcement: RIEJUL95 This monograph presents four chapters on cultural and linguistic diversity in special education from the perspectives of three ethnic groups--African Americans, Asian/Pacific Islanders, and Mexican Americans, respectively. The first chapter is titled "Education Reform and Service Delivery to African-American Students," by Festus E. Obiakor and others. This chapter focuses on issues related to education reform as embodied in the General Education Initiative and service delivery to African-American students with disabilities. The second chapter is "Ecobehavioral Assessment: A New Methodology for Evaluating Instruction for Exceptional Culturally and Linguistically Diverse Students" (Carmen Arreaga-Mayer and others). This chapter reviews the current bilingual special education efficacy literature, offers a prototype ecobehavioral approach, and reports on a pilot study with 36 elementary students (in 26 classrooms) utilizing this approach. The third chapter is "Assessment of Asian and Pacific Islander Students for Gifted Programs" (Li-Rong Lilly Cheng and others). This chapter briefly describes the relevant cultural and ethnic groups, examines academic performance of Asian and Pacific Islanders in San Diego (California) as it relates to referral of this population to gifted programs, and draws implications for practitioners in the form of recommended multidisciplinary practices. The fourth chapter, "Nonstandardized Instruments for the Assessment of Mexican-American Children for Gifted/Talented Programs" (Jaime H. Garcia), discusses assessment strategies that provide qualitative data for the identification of gifted Mexican-American students. These strategies are grouped into four categories: student production, informant data, language and cognitive style data, and data organization systems. (Each chapter contains extensive references.) (DB) Descriptors: Ability Identification; *Asian Americans; *Black Students; Cultural Differences; Delivery Systems; Disabilities; Educational Change; Elementary Secondary Education; Ethnic Groups; Evaluation Methods; Gifted; Instructional Effectiveness; Limited English Speaking; *Mexican Americans; *Minority Groups; *Pacific Americans; Regular and Special Education Relationship;Special Education; *Student Evaluation Identifiers: African Americans; Diversity (Student); Ecobehavioral Analysis EJ489547 EC609483 Alfonzo: Portrait of a Gifted ESL Student. Lara, Susan Gifted Child Today Magazine, v17 n5 p32-34 Sep-Oct 1994 ISSN: 1076-2175 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); PROJECT DESCRIPTION (141) Journal Announcement: CIJJAN95 This article describes a Spanish-speaking gifted child with limited Englishproficiency. The case study describes behaviors indicating giftedness, theimportance of proper placement in school, home and cultural factors,identification of the culturally diverse student, and the development of asecond language. (DB) Descriptors: Ability Identification; Case Studies; Cultural Differences;Elementary Education; English (Second Language); *Gifted; *Gifted Disadvantaged;*Limited English Speaking; *Spanish Speaking; Student Placement EJ489546 EC609482 Students Who Don't Fit the Mold. Robisheaux, Jo Ann; Banbury, Mary M. Gifted Child Today Magazine, v17 n5 p28,31 Sep-Oct 1994 ISSN: 1076-2175 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); NON-CLASSROOM MATERIAL (055) Journal Announcement: CIJJAN95 Target Audience: Practitioners This article offers guidelines for the identification of giftedness amongstudents learning English as a Second Language. It recommends the use ofportfolio or case study procedures to identify student potential and offersguidelines for connecting practices in teaching English as a Second Languagewith strategies for teaching gifted students. (DB) Descriptors: *Ability Identification; Educational Strategies; ElementarySecondary Education; *English (Second Language); Evaluation Methods; *GiftedDisadvantaged; *Limited English Speaking; Student Evaluation; Teaching Methods EJ486476 EC609072 APOGEE: Equity in the Identification of Gifted and Talented Students. O'Tuel, Frances S. Gifted Child Quarterly, v38 n2 p75-79 1994 Special Issue: Javits Grant Projects. ISSN: 0016-9862 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); PROJECT DESCRIPTION (141) Journal Announcement: CIJNOV94 The Academic Programs for Gifted with Excellence and Equity (APOGEE) serves the top 25% of students in various categories, such as disadvantaged, minorities, underachievers, limited English speakers, and students with disabilities. Their teachers have been trained in implementing a student-centered talent development program emphasizing choices, group work, projects, and self-regulation. (Author/JDD) Descriptors: *Ability Identification; Demonstration Programs; Elementary Secondary Education; *Equal Education; *Gifted; Gifted Disabled; *Gifted Disadvantaged; Inservice Teacher Education; Limited English Speaking; Minority Group Children; Student Development; *Talent Development; Talent Identification;Underachievement ED358676 EC302375 Identifying and Serving Recent Immigrant Children Who Are Gifted. ERIC Digest#E520. Harris, Carole Ruth ERIC Clearinghouse on Disabilities and Gifted Education, Reston, VA. Jun 1993 3p. Sponsoring Agency: Office of Educational Research and Improvement (ED), Washington, DC. Contract No: RI88062007. Report No: EDO-EC-93-3 Available From: Council for Exceptional Children, Publication Sales, 1920Association Dr., Reston, VA 22901-1589 ($1 each, minimum order $5 prepaid). EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: ERIC PRODUCT (071); ERIC DIGESTS (SELECTED) (073) Geographic Source: U.S.; Virginia Journal Announcement: RIENOV93 Target Audience: Practitioners; Counselors This information sheet summarizes challenges and strategies for identifyingand serving gifted children who are recent immigrants. Both challenges andstrategies are identified for linguistic, cultural, economic, attitudinal,sociocultural, peer, cross-cultural, intergenerational, and school systemaspects. A total of 28 strategies are offered, including: provide enrichmentactivities to students perceived as "not ready" for gifted programs; explainthe concept of gifted programs to parents in their native language; consideraspirations of the immigrant group as well as parents' occupation andeducation; provide opportunities for a peer support counseling group; usevarious approaches to model conflict resolution; increase motivation forchildren to identify themselves as candidates for gifted programs; usenonverbal expressive arts to involve the family; and assess from theperspective of individual learning styles. (Includes 16 references.) (DB) Descriptors: *Ability Identification; Attitudes; *Cultural Differences;Cultural Influences; *Educational Methods; Elementary Secondary Education;Ethnic Groups; *Gifted; *Immigrants; *Limited English Speaking; Minority Groups;Peer Relationship; Social Integration; Student Educational Objectives; StudentPlacement Identifiers: ERIC Digests EJ474440 EC607524 Unmasking Young Children's Gifts. Leibowitz, Deborah G.; Starnes, Waveline T. Gifted Child Today (GCT), v16 n5 p28-32 Sep-Oct 1993 ISSN: 0892-9580 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); PROJECT DESCRIPTION (141) Journal Announcement: CIJAPR94 A Javits Grant Project of the Montgomery County (Maryland) Public Schools uncovers the strengths and gifts of traditionally underserved primary-level gifted children. The program design celebrates the multiple intelligences of children with economic disadvantage, limited English ability, or learning disabilities. (JDD) Descriptors: *Ability Identification; Economically Disadvantaged; *Educational Methods; *Gifted; Learning Disabilities; Limited English Speaking; Primary Education; *Program Development Identifiers: Montgomery County Public Schools MD; *Multiple Intelligences ED374594 EC303316 Javits Gifted and Talented Students Education Program: Grants ProjectsAbstracts, 1992-1993. Barnes, Elizabeth; Price, Kathy Office of Educational Research and Improvement (ED), Washington, DC. Programsfor the Improvement of Practice. Aug 1994 78p. Report No: PIP-94-1223 EDRS Price - MF01/PC04 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: DIRECTORY (132) Geographic Source: U.S.; District of Columbia Journal Announcement: RIEFEB95 Government: Federal This pamphlet describes grant projects funded in 1992 and 1993 under theJacob K. Javits Gifted and Talented Students Education Program. The 34projects are arranged by state; for each project, information provided includesthe grantee name and address, project director name and telephone number,target grade level, target population, grant period, funding level, and summaryof activities. Activities funded through this program include grants to assiststate and local education agencies, institutions of higher education, and otherpublic and private agencies and organizations to meet the needs of talented andgifted students; to create a national research center on gifted and talentededucation; and to highlight the needs and concerns of gifted/talented students. Projects receive priority if they serve youngsters who have limited Englishskills, are disabled, or are at risk of being unrecognized and underserved. Priority is also given to projects that improve services for talented studentsin an entire state or region. (JDD) Descriptors: Educationally Disadvantaged; Elementary Secondary Education;*Federal Programs; *Gifted; *Grants; Higher Education; *Program Descriptions;*Talent Identifiers: *Jacob K Javits Gifted Talented Stdnt Educ Act 1988 ED321485 EC231806 Meeting the Needs of Gifted and Talented Minority Language Students. ERICDigest #E480. Cohen, Linda M. Council for Exceptional Children, Reston, Va.; ERIC Clearinghouse onHandicapped and Gifted Children, Reston, Va. 1990 5p. Sponsoring Agency: Office of Educational Research and Improvement (ED),Washington, DC. Contract No: RI88062007 EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: ERIC PRODUCT (071); NON-CLASSROOM MATERIAL (055); ERICDIGESTS (SELECTED) (073) Geographic Source: U.S.; Virginia Journal Announcement: RIEDEC90 Target Audience: Practitioners This digest is adapted from Linda Cohen's publication, "Meeting the Needs ofGifted and Talented Minority Language Students." It explores the controversysurrounding the underrepresentation of minority language students in gifted andtalented programs and makes recommendations for more suitable assessmenttechniques and program models. Addressed are the following questions: (1) Whyare minority language students underrepresented in programs for gifted andtalented students? (2) What are some commonly used techniques for theidentification of gifted and talented minority language students? and (3) Whattypes of programs are available for gifted and talented students, and are theysuitable for minority language students who are selected to participate?Specifically described are enrichment programs, parent involvement programs,acceleration or honors programs, and mentor programs. The followingrecommendations are made: broaden the concept of giftedness; expand research ongiftedness and minority language students; employ more well-rounded assessmenttechniques; increase staff awareness of their potential for developing a giftedand talented program; explore various program models; and increase awareness ofdifferent ways giftedness may be manifested in different populations. Includes17 references. (DB) Descriptors: *Ability Identification; Acceleration (Education); CulturalDifferences; Elementary Secondary Education; Eligibility; Enrichment Activities;*Gifted; Gifted Disadvantaged; *Language Handicaps; *Limited English Speaking;Mentors; *Minority Groups; Parent Participation; Program Development; StudentEvaluation; Student Placement Identifiers: ERIC Digests ED340164 EC300814 Identifying and Serving Diverse Populations. Hiatt, Evelyn Levsky, Ed.; Covington, Jeanette, Ed. Texas Education Agency, Austin. Div. of Gifted/Talented Education. Update on Gifted Education, v1 n3 Fall 1991 37p. EDRS Price - MF01/PC02 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: SERIAL (022); NON-CLASSROOM MATERIAL (055) Geographic Source: U.S.; Texas Journal Announcement: RIEMAY92 Government: State Target Audience: Practitioners; Administrators This document is a "theme" issue of a quarterly serial publication. Itfocuses on identifying and serving gifted children from diverse populations. The first article, "Eliminating Four Barriers to the Identification of GiftedMinority Students" by Mary Frasier, notes that: (1) not every impoverished homeis illiterate; (2) limited opportunities for learning should not be assumed torestrict the child's achievement; (3) there are common mental traits ofgiftedness regardless of the child's background; and (4) giftedness maymanifest itself differently in different children. The second article, "GiftedLearning Disabled Students: Questions and Answers," by Anne J. Udall, answersquestions concerning the characteristics of such students, their prevalence,and the best ways to meet their curriculum needs. Next, Mary T. Kolesinski in"The Bilingual Gifted: Viable Strategies for Effective Programming" proposesstrategies for improving the identification process and teaching strategies toaddress the special needs of these students. In the fourth paper, "An Updateon the Javits Project: Identifying and Serving Disadvantaged Gifted Youth,"Evelyn L. Hiatt presents preliminary information on the Texas Student Portfolio(TSP), a measure designed to provide unbiased assessment of characteristicsassociated with gifted students, especially as they pertain to critical andcreative thinking. (The TSP is part of a 3-year project undertaken by theTexas Education Agency with funding from the Jacob K. Javits Gifted StudentsEducation Act of 1988. The project's purpose is to fulfill the grant'sobjective to investigate nontraditional approaches to identifying and servingunderrepresented populations in programs for the gifted.) Finally, Evelyn Hiattand Jeanette Covington respond to common questions on identifying and servingdiverse populations. (DB) Descriptors: *Ability Identification; Academically Gifted; *BilingualStudents; Curriculum Development; Disadvantaged Youth; Elementary SecondaryEducation; *Gifted; Intervention; Learning Disabilities; Low Income Groups;*Minority Groups; Program Development; Student Characteristics; *StudentEvaluation; Student Needs; Talent Identification; *Teaching Methods Internet Resources Internet Listservs Top of Page Back to ERIC Menu Back to CEC Home Page Copyright ©1996 ERIC Clearinghouse on Disabilities and Gifted Education URL: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm WT02-B20-43IA001-000011-B023-49http://www.cec.sped.org:80/faq/gt-kgt.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101074311 text/html 20630HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 07:43:19 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 09-Sep-96 21:46:00 GMTContent-length: 20438Content-type: text/html  NAME OF FILE, GT-Kgt-FAQ GT-Kgt-FAQ (last updated July 20, 1996) THE ERIC CLEARINGHOUSE ON DISABILITIES AND GIFTEDEDUCATION (ERIC EC) The Council for Exceptional Children 1920Association Drive Reston, VA 20191 Toll Free: 1-800-328-0272 TTY: 703-264-9449 E-mail: ericec@cec.sped.org Internet: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm How can the talents of young gifted children be assessed and nurtured? A variety of instruments and procedures are used to identify gifted students. The recognition and nurturing of giftedness in young children (K-3) is particularly challenging because school systems generally prefer to avoid labeling the children. Informal or formal identification may involve procedures such as teacher assessment of a child's problem solving ability, parental assessment of a child's abilities and interests, or the assessment of student products (portfolio assessment). When looking for instruments or procedures, it is important to keep in mind thatidentification should be linked to curriculum. If an instrument is used to identify talent,then school districts should be prepared to adapt curriculum to nurture and foster those identified talent areas. The National Research Center on the Gifted and Talented at the University of Virginia has a database of empirically sound identification instruments that can be used with a variety of populations. When contacting NRC/GT at UVA for information about identification instruments, it is suggested that you provide specific information about your school district and the populations you wish to assess. The University of Virginia Research Site Dr. Carolyn M. Callahan, Associate Director Curry School of Education The University of Virginia 405 Emmet Street Charlottesville, VA 22903 804/924-0791 This file includes information about young gifted children. At the end of this file are links to Internet resources and Internet listservs (discussion groups) where you can obtain more specific information on this topic. There may be an ERICdigest that provides further information on this topic. You can read the full text of ERIC EC digests under our listing at the U.S.Department of Education, Office of Educational Research and Improvement. Enclosed are several citations from the ERIC database. They are grouped in two categories: (1) recognizing giftedness and (2) nurturing giftedness. These records are a sample of the kind of information you can find in the ERIC database. For morecitations on your topic of interest, you may want to search the ERIC database yourself onthe Internet. References with ED (ERIC Document) and EJ (ERIC Journal) identifiers are cited inthe ERIC database; for example, ED333123 or EJ333999. ERIC documents areavailable in microfiche collections at more than 825 locations worldwide (check yourlocal college or public library). They can also be ordered for a fee through the ERICDocument Reproduction Service (EDRS) at 1-800-443-ERIC. References with anEJ (ERIC Journal) number are available for a fee from the originating journal (checkwith your local college or public library), through interlibrary loan services, or from articlereproduction clearinghouses, such as UMI: 1-800-248-0360; or ISI:1-800-523-1850. ERIC descriptors (search terms) used: Ability Identification and Gifted and Primary Education EJ496251 EC610126 Identifying Young, Potentially Gifted, Economically Disadvantaged Students. Borland, James H.; Wright, Lisa Gifted Child Quarterly, v38 n4 p164-71 Fall 1994 ISSN: 0016-9862 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); PROJECT DESCRIPTION (141) Journal Announcement: CIJMAY95 This paper describes procedures developed by Project Synergy, a federally fundedproject at Columbia University (New York) to identify economically disadvantaged,potentially gifted kindergarten students in urban schools. The procedures emphasizesite-appropriate methods, observation, dynamic assessment, and the concept of bestperformance. It deemphasizes use of standardized tests. (Author/DB) Descriptors: *Ability Identification; *Economically Disadvantaged; *Evaluation Methods;*Gifted; Kindergarten; Kindergarten Children; Primary Education; Student Evaluation;Urban Education Identifiers: Columbia University NY; Project SYNERGY EJ486477 EC609073 The Seven Plus Story: Developing Hidden Talent Among Students inSocioeconomically Disadvantaged Environments. Baldwin, Alexinia Young Gifted Child Quarterly, v38 n2 p80-84 1994Special Issue: Javits Grant Projects.ISSN: 0016-9862 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); PROJECT DESCRIPTION (141) Journal Announcement: CIJNOV94 The Javits 7+ Gifted and Talented Program (Community School District 18, Brooklyn,New York) was designed to provide an opportunity for socioeconomicallydisadvantaged children to receive intensive school-based activities that would preparethem for gifted education programs. Teachers assessed students using HowardGardner's concept of multiple intelligences and provided instruction for them using athematic approach. (Author/JDD) Descriptors: *Ability Identification;Demonstration Programs; *Economically Disadvantaged; *Gifted Disadvantaged;*Individualized Instruction; Intelligence; Intervention; Primary Education; SpecialPrograms; Student Development; * Student Evaluation; *Talent; Talent Development;Thematic Approach Identifiers: *Multiple Intelligences EJ486474 EC609070 Portfolio Assessment: A Key to Identifying Hidden Talents and Empowering Teachersof Young Children. Coleman, Laurence J. Gifted Child Quarterly, v38 n2 p65-69 1994Special Issue: Javits Grant Projects.ISSN: 0016-9862 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); PROJECT DESCRIPTION (141) Journal Announcement: CIJNOV94 Early Assessment for Exceptional Potential of Young Minority and/or EconomicallyDisadvantaged Students is a project which used portfolio assessment to identifyexceptional potential in primary-level children and develop instructional plans. Theproject determined universal identifiers of exceptional potential and taught teachers torecognize them by providing authentic examples of such behavior. (Author/JDD) Descriptors: *Ability Identification; Demonstration Programs; EconomicallyDisadvantaged; *Gifted; *Intervention; Minority Group Children; Models; *Portfolios(Background Materials); Primary Education; *Student Evaluation Identifiers:*Early Identification; *Portfolio Performance Appraisal Systems EJ479454 EC608014 Preliminary Findings of the Early Assessment for Exceptional Potential Project. Shaklee, Beverly Roeper Review, v16 n2 p105-09 Dec 1993ISSN: 0278-3193 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); RESEARCH REPORT (143) Journal Announcement: CIJJUL94 This article examines findings from a project to create and implement a model toassess exceptional potential in primary-level students. The article discusses theproject's impact on the first cohort of 33 classroom teachers' attitudes and behaviorstoward the identification of and programming for young minority and/or economicallydisadvantaged children of exceptional potential. (Author/JDD) Descriptors:*Ability Identification; *Academically Gifted; Attitude Change; Behavior Change;*Economically Disadvantaged; *Intervention; *Minority Groups; *Models; PrimaryEducation; Student Evaluation; Teacher Attitudes; Teacher Behavior Identifiers:*Early Identification ED344406 EC301135 Identification of Underserved Populations: Focus on Preschool and PrimaryChildren. Shaklee, Beverly D.; Hansford, Susan Mar 1992 7p.; In: Challenges in Gifted Education: Developing Potential and Investingin Knowledge for the 21st Century; see EC 301 131. EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: POSITION PAPER (120) Geographic Source: U.S.; Ohio Journal Announcement: RIESEP92 This analysis of underserved gifted preschool and primary children exploresthe identification of gifted children from the current perspective, examinesthe impact of current identification practices on underserved populations,outlines some promising practices for assessment, and summarizes implicationsfor educational development when serving underrepresented populations. It isconcluded that educators are now paying more attention to the needs ofunderserved populations with systematic research into issues of assessment,programmatic alternatives, curriculum integration, and evaluation. Stressed isthe need to apply research findings to modify practice at the local, regional,and state levels and to develop assessment approaches which examine bothperformance and potential. Portfolio assessment is seen as one alternativestrategy for identification of gifted children in underserved groups. Acontinuum of programmatic options is recommended based on identified studentstrengths. Changes in state and local funding procedures are suggested whichwould support a broad range of opportunities and services. (16 references)(DB) Descriptors: Ability Identification; Delivery Systems; Early ChildhoodEducation; *Educational Change; Educational Needs; Financial Support; *Gifted;*Portfolios (Background Materials); School Districts; State Aid; StudentEvaluation; Talent Identification Identifiers: *Portfolio Approach EJ474440 EC607524 Unmasking Young Children's Gifts. Leibowitz, Deborah G.; Starnes, Waveline T. Gifted Child Today (GCT), v16 n5 p28-32 Sep-Oct 1993ISSN: 0892-9580 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); PROJECT DESCRIPTION (141) Journal Announcement: CIJAPR94 A Javits Grant Project of the Montgomery County (Maryland) Public Schools uncoversthe strengths and gifts of traditionally underserved primary-level gifted children. Theprogram design celebrates the multiple intelligences of children with economicdisadvantage, limited English ability, or learning disabilities. (JDD) Descriptors:*Ability Identification; Economically Disadvantaged; *Educational Methods; *Gifted;Learning Disabilities; Limited English Speaking; Primary Education; *ProgramDevelopment Identifiers: Montgomery County Public Schools MD; *Multiple Intelligences ERIC descriptors (search terms) used: Gifted and Primary Education and Educational Methods or Educational Practices ED357514 EC302056 Research in Progress: Development of Giftedness in the Multi-Age, Multi-AbilityPrimary School. Schack, Gina D. Feb 1993; 23p.; Paper presented at Esther Katz Rosen Annual Symposium on thePsychological Development of Gifted Children (2nd, Lawrence, KS, February 28- 29,1992). EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: CONFERENCE PAPER (150); RESEARCH REPORT (143) Geographic Source: U.S.; Kentucky Journal Announcement: RIEOCT93 This research examines how a developmentally appropriate educational program inthe early years can affect the development of gifted children. The qualitative researchspecifically focused on a multi-age, multi-ability setting with partial implementation of awhole language program, a systematic writing process and with some flexibility ingrouping of students. Eleven teachers and approximately 260 students in an ungradedprimary school were involved, with 3 first year and 30 second year students identifiedas gifted. The study found that gifted children followed a somewhat acceleratedcurriculum. Teachers felt that there were definite social benefits to integrating thegifted and nongifted students. The multi-age, multi-ability setting seemed to allowyoung students not identified as gifted to progress more rapidly than they might havein a traditional graded classroom, as they were exposed to higher level instruction.There was little evidence of the development of creative productivity or multipleintelligences other than linguistic and logical- mathematical. Interviews with teachersindicated their willingness to allow students to do above-grade level work and to usehigher level materials with some children. Interview questions are provided in anappendix. (Contains 12 references.) (JDD) Descriptors: Curriculum; *Educational Methods; Elementary Schools; ElementarySchool Students; *Gifted; Grouping (Instructional Purposes); *HeterogeneousGrouping; Interpersonal Competence; *Multigraded Classes; *Outcomes of Education;Primary Education; Student Development; Teacher Attitudes; Whole LanguageApproach; Writing Processes ED351834 EC301661 Gifted Students and Whole Language: A Descriptive Study of Four Classrooms. Matthews, Marian K. Apr 199232p. Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the American EducationalResearch Association (San Francisco, CA, April 20-24, 1992). EDRS Price -MF01/PC02 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: RESEARCH REPORT (143); CONFERENCE PAPER (150) Geographic Source: U.S.; New Mexico Journal Announcement: RIEAPR93 Target Audience: Practitioners This descriptive study looked at the provision of differentiated language artsinstruction for gifted students by means of whole language instruction approaches inregular classes. Two classrooms in each of two elementary schools were identified asexemplary whole language classrooms and each contained several students identifiedfor school gifted programs. One classroom in each of grades 1, 2, 4, and 5 wasrepresented. Participant observation was conducted at least once per week forapproximately a semester. Additionally, interviews with the classroom teachers, theprincipals, the reading/language arts coordinators, the teachers of the gifted, and thetargeted students were conducted. The benefits of the whole language approach forthese students were analyzed in terms of: student choice of reading materials,responses to reading, and writing projects; use of time; social interaction; andappropriate teaching. Analysis indicated: all teachers and classrooms providedexamples of some exemplary practices but none provided all those componentsadvocated by either whole language experts or educators of the gifted; the classroomthat provided the most exemplary whole language practices also provided the mostdifferentiation of learning experiences for gifted students; and both students andteachers had difficulty articulating what appropriate challenges and differentiatedlanguage experience meant to them. It is concluded that, although whole languageinstruction is a positive approach, it does not preclude the need for differentiated giftedprogramming. (Contains 28 references.) (DB) Descriptors: *Educational Methods; Educational Practices; *Gifted; IntermediateGrades; *Language Arts; Participant Observation; Primary Education; *ReadingInstruction; Special Education; Student Attitudes; Student Development; TeacherAttitudes; *Whole Language Approach Identifiers: *Differentiated Curriculum (Gifted) ED321492 EC231813 Nurturing Giftedness in Young Children. ERIC Digest #E487. Roedell, Wendy C. Council for Exceptional Children, Reston, Va.; ERIC Clearinghouse onHandicapped and Gifted Children, Reston, Va. 1990 3p.Sponsoring Agency: Office of Educational Research and Improvement (ED),Washington, DC. Contract No: RI88062007 Report No: EDO-EC-90-6 EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: ERIC PRODUCT (071); NON-CLASSROOM MATERIAL (055); ERICDIGESTS (SELECTED) (073) Geographic Source: U.S.; Virginia Journal Announcement: RIEDEC90 Target Audience: Parents; PractitionersThe digest addresses ways that parents and educators can nurture giftednessin young children. Problems in appropriate school placement for young giftedchildren with uneven development are discussed and illustrated with examples. In selecting a program, parents need to look for a highly individualized programin which children are encouraged to progress at their own learning rate, withplanned opportunities for development of social, physical, and cognitive skillsin an informal classroom atmosphere. Parents also need to support the child'sneed for friendship with intellectually equal children. Includes six references. (DB) Descriptors: *Child Development; Cognitive Development; Developmental Stages;*Early Childhood Education; *Educational Needs; *Gifted; IndividualizedInstruction; Individual Needs; Interpersonal Relationship; Social Development;Young Children Identifiers: ERIC Digests ED372554 EC303186 Nurturing Social Emotional Development of Gifted Children. ERIC Digest E527. Webb, James T. Council for Exceptional Children, Reston, Va.; ERIC Clearinghouse on Disabilities and Gifted Education, Reston, VA. Jun 1994 3p. Sponsoring Agency: Office of Educational Research and Improvement (ED), Washington, DC. Contract No: RR93002005 Report No: EDO-EC-93-8 Available From: Council for Exceptional Children, 1920 Association Dr., Reston, VA 22091-1589 ($1 each, minimum order $5 prepaid). EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: ERIC PRODUCT (071); ERIC DIGESTS (SELECTED) (073) Geographic Source: U.S.; Virginia Journal Announcement: RIEDEC94 Target Audience: Teachers; Practitioners This brief information sheet summarizes the types of social-emotional problems common among gifted children and suggests preventive actions schools can take. A table lists problems associated with characteristic strengths of gifted children. Specific problems briefly addressed include: uneven development, peer relations, excessive self-criticism, perfectionism, avoidance of risk-taking, multipotentiality, the presence of disabilities, difficulties adjusting to the school culture and norms, relating to expectations of others, depression, and problems in peer and family relations. Educators are urged to: (1) reach out to parents, (2) focus on parents of young children, (3) educate and involve health care and other professionals, use educational flexibility, and establish parent discussion groups. (Contains 13 references.) (DB) Descriptors: Elementary Secondary Education; *Emotional Development; *Emotional Problems; *Gifted; Humanistic Education; Individual Development; Intervention; Mental Health; Personality Traits; Prevention; Self Concept; *Social Development; Student Adjustment EJ328085 EC181195 If I Can Read at a Fifth Grade Level...Why Can't I Tie My Shoes? Macaluso, Lila; Busche, Diane G/C/T, n41 p36-38 Nov-Dec 1985 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); PROJECT DESCRIPTION (141) Journal Announcement: CIJAPR86 A unit on "greeness" for young gifted children emphasized language development through encouragement of vocabulary and helped children accommodate their uneven development. (CL) Descriptors: *Child Development; *Gifted; *Preschool Education Internet Resources Internet Listservs Top of PageBack to ERIC MenuBack to CEC Home Page copyright © 1996 ERIC Clearinghouse on Disabilities and Gifted Education URL: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm WT02-B20-44IA001-000011-B023-66http://www.cec.sped.org:80/faq/gt-enric.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101074326 text/html 21855HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 07:43:29 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 09-Sep-96 21:38:00 GMTContent-length: 21663Content-type: text/html GT-Enrich-FAQ GT-enrichFAQ (last updated September 5, 1996) THE ERIC CLEARINGHOUSE ON DISABILITIES AND GIFTEDEDUCATION (ERIC EC) The Council for Exceptional Children 1920Association Drive Reston, VA 20191 Toll Free: 1-800-328-0272 TTY: 703-264-9449 E-mail: ericec@cec.sped.org Internet: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm Where can I find enrichment activities for students who are gifted? This file includes information about enrichment activities for children who are gifted. At the end of this file are links to Internet resources and Internet listservs (discussion groups) where you can obtain more specific information on this topic. There maybe ERIC digests that provide information on related topics. You can read the full text of ERIC EC digests under our listing at the U.S. Department of Education, Office of Educational Research and Improvement. Enclosed are several citations from the ERIC database. These records are asample of the kind of information you can find in the ERIC database. For morecitations on your topic of interest, you may want to search the ERIC database yourself on the Internet. References with ED (ERIC Document) and EJ (ERIC Journal) identifiers are cited inthe ERIC database; for example, ED333123 or EJ333999. ERIC documents areavailable in microfiche collections at more than 825 locations worldwide (check yourlocal college or public library). They can also be ordered for a fee through the ERICDocument Reproduction Service (EDRS) at 1-800-443-ERIC. References with anEJ (ERIC Journal) number are available for a fee from the originating journal (checkwith your local college or public library), through interlibrary loan services, or fromarticle reproduction clearinghouses, such as UMI: 1-800-248-0360; or ISI:1-800-523-1850. The field of gifted education has been, for many years, a laboratory for the development of creative educational enrichment activities. Critical thinking, problem-finding, and problem-solving activites, for example, were originated by professionals working in gifted education. Recently these creative activities have been used successfully in heterogeneous classrooms, and teachers have found that the activities are highly stimulating for general education populations. The abstracts included here are typical examples of activities that were designed for gifted students, and may also be useful for general education populations. In addition, the AskERIC Virtual Library provides a searchable database of lesson plans that were designed for gifted students and may also be appropriate for all students. ERIC descriptors (search terms) used: Gifted and Curriculum Enrichment or Enrichment Activities. EJ517853 EA531586 How to Identify and Develop Special Talents. Feldhusen, John F. Educational Leadership, v53 n5 p66-69 Feb 1996 ISSN: 0013-1784 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: EVALUATIVE REPORT (142); JOURNAL ARTICLE (080) Journal Announcement: CIJJUN96 Too often, gifted programs offer standard, all-purpose enrichment without regard to special talents. Talents are not usually fully developed in youngsters. Teachers can help develop children's talent by becoming talent scouts, structuring appropriate learning activities, praising talented behavior, helping kids set learning goals, locating helpful resources, and enlisting parents' support. (10 references) (MLH) Descriptors: Classroom Techniques; *Creativity; Elementary Secondary Education; *Enrichment Activities; *Gifted; *Student Centered Curriculum; *Talent Development; *Teacher Responsibility EJ508311 EC611712 Mathematics Enrichment for Talented Elementary Students. Lupkowski-Shoplik, Ann E.; Kuhnel, Alexis Gifted Child Today Magazine, v18 n4 p28-31,42 Jul-Aug 1995 ISSN: 1076-2175 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); PROJECT DESCRIPTION (141) Journal Announcement: CIJDEC95 Carnegie Mellon University's two-week summer enrichment program for mathematically gifted students in grades three through six is described, with attention to eligibility and student identification, a problem-solving emphasis, a typical day, staffing, instructional materials, and questioning techniques. The two enrichment courses involved probability and statistics and informal geometry. (SW) Descriptors: *Academically Gifted; *Curriculum Enrichment; Elementary Education; *Elementary School Mathematics; Enrichment Activities; *Mathematics Instruction; Program Development; Summer Programs Identifiers: *Carnegie Mellon University PA ED375598 EC303438 Differentiating the Core Curriculum and Instruction To Provide Advanced Learning Opportunities. California Association for the Gifted.; California State Dept. of Education, Sacramento. 1994; 35p. Sponsoring Agency: Office of Educational Research and Improvement (ED), Washington, DC. ISBN: 0-8011-1093-9 Available From: Bureau of Publications Sales Unit, California Department of Education, P.O. Box 721, Sacramento, CA 95812-0271 ($6.50 plus tax for California residents). EDRS Price - MF01/PC02 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: POSITION PAPER (120); NON-CLASSROOM MATERIAL (055) Geographic Source: U.S.; California Journal Announcement: RIEMAR95 Government: State A differentiated curriculum can provide the basis for discovering, serving, and nurturing academic talent across California's diverse student population. Differentiation provides tools to vary the curriculum or instruction so that students who have already mastered given material continue to progress and students who have a particular interest in an area can pursue it in greater depth or in a personalized way. Although aimed at gifted and talented youngsters, four principles of differentiation can be used to meet the needs of all students. These include acceleration, complexity, depth, and novelty. The responsibility for differentiation is one which all educators must share, at the classroom level and the school level. Educators must develop a new vision of excellence that depends on a fresh understanding of how the core curriculum can be differentiated to provide advanced learning opportunities. The education of the most able students, as with all students, is best developed in challenging contexts which shift the emphasis from the structure of the program to the quality of the curriculum. The core curriculum currently embodied in California's curriculum frameworks is often described as a "thinking curriculum" because it tries to engage students at all times in the search for meaning. In addition to differentiation at the classroom level, successful differentiation at the school level involves new service models, new roles for educators, shared resources, improved assessment practices, and ongoing staff development. (JDD) Descriptors: Acceleration (Education); *Curriculum Development; Educational Methods; Elementary Secondary Education; Enrichment Activities; *Gifted; Individualized Instruction; *Student Development; Student Needs; *Talent; *Teaching Models; Thinking Skills Identifiers: *California; *Differentiated Curriculum (Gifted) EJ472629 EC607067 Speaking and Listening: Key Components of a Complete Language Arts Program for the Gifted. Cramond, Bonnie Roeper Review, v16 n1 p44-48 Sep 1993 ISSN: 0278-3193 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); POSITION PAPER (120); NON-CLASSROOM MATERIAL (055) Journal Announcement: CIJMAR94 Target Audience: Practitioners Differentiated instruction in speaking and listening skills for gifted students might involve an expanded range of opportunity, faster paced instruction, replacement of basic skills instruction with more advanced activities, opportunities for self-selection, individualization, and personal evaluation. Activities that emphasize cognitive and affective development are encouraged. (DB) Descriptors: Acceleration (Education); Elementary Education; Enrichment Activities; *Gifted; Individualized Instruction; *Language Arts; *Listening Skills; *Speech Improvement; *Teaching Methods Identifiers: Differentiated Curriculum (Gifted) EJ462574 EC605901 Parenting the Gifted Young Scientist: Mrs. Wizard at Home. Karges-Bone, Linda Gifted Child Today (GCT), v16 n2 p55-59 Mar-Apr 1993 ISSN: 0892-9580 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); NON-CLASSROOM MATERIAL (055) Journal Announcement: CIJSEP93 Target Audience: Parents Suggestions are provided for encouraging and nurturing gifted young scientists (ages 4-10), such as subscribing to a science magazine, making science a natural part of family life, and linking sciences to the arts. Young children are characterized as perceiving their world through the acronym SCIENCE (Sensory, Classify, Inquisitive, Experiment, Nature, Creativity, Excitement). (JDD) Descriptors: *Child Rearing; Early Childhood Education; Enrichment Activities; Family Life; *Gifted; Parent Participation; *Parent Role; Parents as Teachers; *Science Education; Student Characteristics; Student Development EJ462563 EC605890 Kids Development Corporation. Davison, Betty Gifted Child Today (GCT), v16 n2 p2-6 Mar-Apr 1993 ISSN: 0892-9580 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); PROJECT DESCRIPTION (141) Journal Announcement: CIJSEP93 Kids Development Corporation is a simulation of economic life appropriate for gifted students in grades 4-11, in which students form a corporation; purchase land; learn about building construction, banking, and investing; create a logo; and develop a community. This article describes the program's goals and objectives, schedule of activities, and evaluation. (JDD) Descriptors: *Community Development; Economic Development; *Enrichment Activities; *Gifted; Interdisciplinary Approach; Intermediate Grades; Secondary Education; *Simulation; Thematic Approach; *Units of Study EJ457396 EC604939 A Crisis in Space--A Futuristic Simulation Using Creative Problem Solving. Clode, Linda Gifted Child Today (GCT), v15 n6 p52-53 Nov-Dec 1992 ISSN: 0892-9580 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); PROJECT DESCRIPTION (141) Journal Announcement: CIJJUN93 An enrichment program developed for sixth-grade gifted students combined creative problem solving with future studies in a way that would simulate real life crisis problem solving. The program involved forecasting problems of the future requiring evacuation of Earth, assuming roles on a spaceship, and simulating crises as the spaceship traveled to Titan. (JDD) Descriptors: Aerospace Education; Creative Development; Creativity; Crisis Intervention; *Enrichment Activities; *Futures (of Society); *Gifted; Intermediate Grades; *Problem Solving; *Simulation; *Space Exploration; Space Sciences EJ367978 SE542073 Problem Solving Tips for Teachers. Van de Walle, John A., Ed. Arithmetic Teacher, v35 n7 p32-33 Mar 1988 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); TEACHING GUIDE (052) Journal Announcement: CIJJUL88 Target Audience: Practitioners Suggests that problem-solving extensions are appropriate experiences for differentiating learning experiences for students with high abilities. The extensions fall into four major categories: pattern and generalization, new concepts and vocabulary, creativity, and making value judgments. (PK) Descriptors: *Concept Formation; Creativity; Elementary Education; *Elementary School Mathematics; Enrichment; *Enrichment Activities; Generalization; *Gifted; Mathematics Curriculum; Mathematics Education; *Mathematics Instruction; Problem Solving ED371559 EC303147 Helping the Scientifically Gifted. Pyryt, Michael C. Sep 1993 5p.; In: Nurturing Potential, Proceedings of the Society for the Advancement of Gifted Education Annual Conference; see EC 303 142. EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: CONFERENCE PAPER (150); NON-CLASSROOM MATERIAL (055) Geographic Source: Canada; Alberta Journal Announcement: RIENOV94 Target Audience: Practitioners This presentation summarizes effective strategies and programs for nurturing students who are gifted in science. A smorgasbord of educationally accelerative opportunities is recommended, to enhance students' potential for future development in science. These opportunities may include field trips, advanced placement courses, and science summer camps. Experiences that promote science achievement are described, such as simultaneous teaching of separate science subjects. Models for encouraging scientific development, such as early entrance to college and contests/competitions, are cited. Recommendations are offered for nurturing talent in science and technology. Recommendations relate to the topics of identification, science curriculum, and teachers/mentors. (Contains 15 references.) (JDD) Descriptors: Ability Identification; Academic Achievement; *Academically Gifted; Acceleration (Education); *Educational Methods; Elementary Secondary Education; *Enrichment Activities; Foreign Countries; Mentors; Science Curriculum; Science Education; *Student Development; Teaching Methods EJ370344 EC202345 Thinking Skills Instruction for All Classrooms. Schlichter, Carol L. Gifted Child Today (GCT), v11 n2 p24-28 Mar-Apr 1988 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: TEACHING GUIDE (052); JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); PROJECT DESCRIPTION (141) Journal Announcement: CIJSEP88 This updated 1987 article argues that teaching of thinking skills, common in gifted education, has wider value in regular school instructional programs. It describes programs which have implemented Talents Unlimited, a classroom-level, research-based model for teaching creative- and critical-thinking skills which encompasses productive thinking, decision making, planning, forecasting, and communication. (VW) Descriptors: *Cognitive Processes; Communication Skills; *Creative Thinking; *Critical Thinking; *Curriculum Enrichment; Decision Making; Elementary Secondary Education; *Gifted; Planning; Teaching Models Identifiers: *Talents Unlimited Program EJ370289 EA522218 An Overview of Talents Unlimited. Barbieri, Edmund L. Educational Leadership, v45 n7 p40 Apr 1988 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); PROJECT DESCRIPTION (141) Journal Announcement: CIJSEP88 Target Audience: Administrators; Practitioners "Talents Unlimited," a program developed in Mobile (Alabama) County Public Schools in 1971, nurtures students' abilities in five talent areas as the foundation for academic proficiency: productive thinking, communication, forecasting, decision making, and planning. (TE) Descriptors: Cognitive Development; *Cognitive Processes; *Critical Thinking; Educational Strategies; Intelligence; Learning Processes; *Learning Strategies; *Logical Thinking; *Problem Solving ENRICHMENT ACTIVITIES FOR MIDDLE SCHOOL STUDENTS ED330124 EC300094 Curriculum Development for Gifted and Talented Middle School Students. Monaco, Theresa M.; Goodner, Jane 1989; 34p. EDRS Price - MF01/PC02 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: PROJECT DESCRIPTION (141); NON-CLASSROOM MATERIAL (055) Geographic Source: U.S.; Texas Journal Announcement: RIEAUG91 Target Audience: Practitioners The paper describes a curriculum model developed for gifted and talented students in an integrated middle school program, as a cooperative effort between the College of Education at the University of Houston and a Houston middle school. The program includes identification procedures, curriculum practices, and evaluation techniques. The curriculum is intended to be both differentiated and interdisciplinary. The curriculum consists of subject matter in eight areas: math, science, social studies, language arts, music, art, computer technology, and Spanish. Teachers become teachers/advisors in the program and assist students in individual and group activities according to student interest and subject area proficiency. Results of the initial 5-year pilot phase and a refined pilot phase indicated that students developed independent study skills and decision-making strategies. Teaching teams developed 3-week study guides for each subject area and for interdisciplinary areas. These brief guides identify topics, subtopics, essential curriculum elements, a selection of activities, an evaluation process, and suggested references. Seven study guides are attached. (DB) Descriptors: Ability Identification; *Curriculum Development; Enrichment Activities; Evaluation Methods; *Gifted; *Independent Study; Interdisciplinary Approach; Intermediate Grades; Junior High Schools; *Learning Activities; Mainstreaming; *Middle Schools; Research Projects; Student Research; Study Skills; *Talent; Talent Identification; Units of Study ED302481 SO019572 Social Studies for Academically Talented Students: Grades 6-8, Middle School. Instructional Guide. Evansville-Vanderburgh School Corp., Ind. 1988; 201p. EDRS Price - MF01/PC09 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: TEACHING GUIDE (052) Geographic Source: U.S.; Indiana Journal Announcement: RIEMAY89 Target Audience: Teachers; Practitioners This social studies curriculum guide is designed to challenge academically talented middle school students, encourage them to acquire and use critical thinking skills, and recognize the importance of global awareness. Areas of study include Latin America and Canada for grade six, Europe, Asia, Africa, and Australia for grade seven, and U.S. history for grade eight. The instructional materials for each grade level include a map, course description and outline, goals, suggested time schedule, information sources and films, and suggested classroom activities. Additional resource materials include: (1) suggested instructional activities; (2) sources of free information about foreign countries; (3) addresses and phone numbers for foreign embassies; (4) a vocabulary list; (5) critical thinking skills and vocabulary for grade eight; (6) an explorers of the new world chart; (7) United States and world personalities, 1200-1881; (8) listings of U.S. presidents, Indiana governors, and Evansville (Indiana) mayors; and (9) U.S. history reference sources. (DJC) Descriptors: *Academically Gifted; Area Studies; Class Activities; *Curriculum Enrichment; Curriculum Guides; Global Approach; Instructional Materials; Intermediate Grades; Junior High Schools; Middle Schools; Resource Units; *Social Studies; *United States History; World History Identifiers: Africa; Asia; Australia; Canada; Europe; Latin America EJ345555 EC191210 Enriching the Mathematics Program for Middle School Gifted Students. Wolfle, Jane A. Roeper Review, v9 n2 p81-85 Nov 1986 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); REVIEW LITERATURE (070); NON-CLASSROOM MATERIAL (055) Journal Announcement: CIJAPR87 Target Audience: Teachers; Practitioners Mathematically gifted middle school students need both curriculum enrichment and acceleration. Suggested teaching strategies include using a combination of methods to accommodate individual differences, encouraging Math Club activities, evaluation of students' formal reasoning abilities, and scheduling math classes that group students at similar cognitive levels. (CB) Descriptors: *Curriculum Enrichment; *Educational Needs; *Gifted; Junior High Schools; *Mathematics Instruction; *Mathematics Skills; Middle Schools; *Student Characteristics; Talent Identification; Teaching Methods Internet Resources Internet Listservs Top of Page Back to ERIC Menu Back to CEC Home Page copyright © 1996 ERIC Clearinghouse on Disabilities and Gifted Education URL: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm WT02-B20-45IA001-000011-B023-80http://www.cec.sped.org:80/faq/gt-fund.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101074335 text/html 9844HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 07:43:44 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 12-Sep-96 21:38:00 GMTContent-length: 9651Content-type: text/html GT-Fund-FAQ GT-Fund-FAQ (last updated July 31, 1996) THE ERIC CLEARINGHOUSE ON DISABILITIES AND GIFTEDEDUCATION (ERIC EC) The Council for Exceptional Children 1920Association Drive Reston, VA 20191 Toll Free: 1-800-328-0272 TTY: 703-264-9449 E-mail: ericec@cec.sped.org Internet: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm Is there any federal funding available for program development in gifted education? Do you know of any federal funding available to individuals who have highly gifted children? This file includes information about funding gifted education. There may be ERIC digests that provide information on related topics. You can read the full text of ERIC EC digests under our listing at the U.S.Department of Education, Office of Educational Research and Improvement. Enclosed are several citations from the ERIC database. These records are a sample of the kind of information you can find in the ERIC database. For morecitations on your topic of interest, you may want to search the ERIC database yourself on the Internet. References with ED (ERIC Document) and EJ (ERIC Journal) identifiers are cited inthe ERIC database; for example, ED333123 or EJ333999. ERIC documents areavailable in microfiche collections at more than 825 locations worldwide (check yourlocal college or public library). They can also be ordered for a fee through the ERICDocument Reproduction Service (EDRS) at 1-800-443-ERIC. References with anEJ (ERIC Journal) number are available for a fee from the originating journal (checkwith your local college or public library), through interlibrary loan services, or fromarticle reproduction clearinghouses, such as UMI: 1-800-248-0360; or ISI:1-800-523-1850. Currently, the only federal funding earmarked for gifted education is available through application to the Jacob K. Javits Gifted and Talented Education Act of 1992. The Jacob K. Javits Gifted and Talented Students Education Program is designed to build nationwide capability in gifted and talented education and encourage rich and challenging curricula for all children. Funding that is not earmarked for gifted education may be used to benefit gifted students. Examples include Goals 2000 and some technology funds such as Challenge grants. To obtain written information on the Jacob K. Javits Gifted and Talented Students Education Program [OERI], or to request a list of projects that are currently funded, contact Javits Gifted and Talented Students Education Program, U.S. Department of Education, Office of Educational Research and Improvement, 555 New Jersey Avenue, NW, Washington, DC 20208-5645. You can obtain Internet grant information the office of the U. S. Secretary of Education.At the end of this file is a link to Internet resources where you can obtain more specific information on the Javits grant program. ERIC descriptors (search terms) used: Gifted and Federal Aid or Federal Legislation ED371526 EC303113 Education of the Gifted and Talented Reauthorization Fact Sheet. Boren, Susan Library of Congress, Washington, D.C. Congressional Research Service. 14 Feb 1994; 3p.; Report No: CRS-94-104-EPW EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: REVIEW LITERATURE (070) Geographic Source: U.S.; District of Columbia Journal Announcement: RIENOV94 Government: Federal Target Audience: Policymakers This fact sheet summarizes issues involved in the reauthorization of the Jacob K. Javits Gifted and Talented Students Education Act of 1988, Title IV-B, Elementary and Secondary Education Act. This Act provides grants for research and demonstration projects and training activities to meet the needs of gifted and talented students. The Javits program has served over 2 million gifted and talented students through 75 discretionary projects and also funds the National Center for Research and Development in the Education of Gifted and Talented Children and Youth. A Federal government report is cited indicating that only two cents of every $100 spent on K-12 education in 1990 supported special opportunities for gifted students, and recommending that the definition of "gifted" be broadened and that effective programs be expanded into regular school programs. Specific reauthorization issues addressed include: whether to focus on equal education or on excellence for the few; reauthorization of the National Center for Gifted Research; and continuation of discretionary grants for model projects serving only gifted and talented students. Specific appropriation figures for fiscal years 1989 through 1995 (proposed) are listed. (DB) Descriptors: Definitions; Demonstration Programs; Elementary Secondary Education; Expenditures; *Federal Aid; *Federal Legislation; *Gifted; Instructional Student Costs; Mainstreaming; Program Costs; Special Programs; *Talent Identifiers: *Elementary Secondary Education Act Title IV B; National Center for Res Dev Gifted Talented Child ED347766 EC301384 Programs and Practices in Gifted Education: Projects Funded by the Jacob K. Javits Gifted and Talented Students Education Act of 1988. Berger, Sandra L., Ed. Council for Exceptional Children, Reston, Va.; ERIC Clearinghouse on Handicapped and Gifted Children, Reston, Va. 1992; 228p. Sponsoring Agency: Office of Educational Research and Improvement (ED), Washington, DC. Contract No: RI88062007 ISBN: 0-86586-221-4 Available on diskette from: The Council for Exceptional Children, Publication Sales, 1920 Association Dr., Reston, VA 20191-1589 ($18.00, $12.60 members; stock no. R636). EDRS Price - MF01/PC10 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: ERIC PRODUCT (071); DIRECTORY (132) Geographic Source: U.S.; Virginia Journal Announcement: RIEDEC92 This directory resulted from a 1991 survey of 46 programs funded under the Jacob K. Javits Gifted and Talented Students Education Act of 1988. The projects are listed alphabetically by state, city, and name of project. Projects have been divided into two types: (1) those that provide direct services to children and (2) dissemination projects. Projects in each of these types are summarized in a matrix display listing state, grantee, name of program, type of district, age/grade, and target population characteristics. A discussion of the Javits Act covering purpose, eligibility, types of projects funded, and source of further information is also provided. Individual project descriptions comprise most of the document and contain sections providing (1) general information, (2) program description, (3) program implementation, and (4) program evaluation. Among information provided for most projects is the following: project director, address, funding period, telephone, goals of program, program description, type of district, target population, selection criteria, identification procedures, number of children served, number of people involved in program implementation, type of preservice or inservice training, key conditions for replicating the program, cost of replicating the program, availability of technical assistance, most effective features of program, most surprising or challenging features of program, planned followup activities, and evaluation plan. A final section lists project directors, locations, and telephone numbers. (DB) Descriptors: Delivery Systems; *Demonstration Programs; Elementary Secondary Education; Federal Aid; *Gifted; Grants; Information Dissemination; National Surveys; *Program Descriptions; Program Evaluation; Program Implementation; Research and Development; *Talent; Theory Practice Relationship Identifiers: *Jacob K Javits Gifted Talented Stdnt Educ Act 1988 EJ441228 Title: The Marland Report: Twenty Years Later. Journal: Journal for the Education of the Gifted; v15 n1 p31-43 Fall1991 Author: Harrington, Joseph; And Others Pub Date: 1991 Abstract: This report examines federal involvement in gifted education in the 20 years since the Marland report on needs of gifted and talented students. Noted is the passage, in 1988, of the Javits Bill which implemented the major recommendations ofthe Marland report including establishment of the Office of Gifted and Talented and training of teachers. (DB) Major Descriptors: Educational Legislation; Gifted; Government Role; Special Education; Talent; Other Descriptors: Educational History; Elementary Secondary Education; Federal Aid; Teacher Education; Major Identifiers: Hawkins Stafford Act 1988; Marland (Sidney P) Internet Resources Internet Listservs Top of Page Back to ERIC Menu Back to CEC Home Page Copyright ©1996 ERIC Clearinghouse on Disabilities and Gifted Education URL: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm WT02-B20-46IA001-000011-B023-92http://www.cec.sped.org:80/faq/gt-disab.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101074344 text/html 16467HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 07:43:52 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 09-Sep-96 21:37:00 GMTContent-length: 16275Content-type: text/html GT-Disab-FAQ GT-Disab-FAQ (last updated July 14, 1996) THE ERIC CLEARINGHOUSE ON DISABILITIES AND GIFTEDEDUCATION (ERIC EC) The Council for Exceptional Children 1920Association Drive Reston, VA 20191 Toll Free: 1-800-328-0272 TTY: 703-264-9449 E-mail: ericec@cec.sped.org Internet: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm Is it possible for a gifted child to have a disability, or a child with a disability tobe gifted? This file includes information about gifted children withdisabilities other than learning disabilities. At the end of this file are links to Internet resources and Internet listservs (discussion groups) where you can obtain more specific information on this topic. Information about gifted children and ADD and gifted children with learning disabilities is available in other FAQs. There may be an ERIC digest that provides further information on this topic. You can read the full text of ERIC EC digests under our listing at the U.S. Department of Education, Office of Educational Research and Improvement. Enclosed are several citations from the ERIC database. These records are asample of the kind of information you can find in the ERIC database. For morecitations on your topic of interest, you may want to search the ERIC database yourself onthe Internet. References with ED (ERIC Document) and EJ (ERIC Journal) identifiers are cited inthe ERIC database; for example, ED333123 or EJ333999. ERIC documents areavailable in microfiche collections at more than 825 locations worldwide (check yourlocal college or public library). They can also be ordered for a fee through the ERICDocument Reproduction Service (EDRS) at 1-800-443-ERIC. References with anEJ (ERIC Journal) number are available for a fee from the originating journal (checkwith your local college or public library), through interlibrary loan services, or fromarticle reproduction clearinghouses, such as UMI: 1-800-248-0360; or ISI:1-800-523-1850. ERIC descriptors (search terms) used: Gifted and Gifted Disabled EC613578 The Integration of a Very Able Pupil with Asperger Syndrome into a mainstream school. Barber, Christine British Journal of Special Education, v23 n1 p19-24 Mar 1996 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080) This case study describes the mainstreamed and accelerated educational program being provided to a 15 year old boy in England who is highly gifted and has Asperger syndrome, a condition with many autistic-like characteristics. The boy's special education program to develop his social, communication, and independence skills is highlighted. (DB). Descriptors: Gifted Disabled; Autism; Secondary Education; Acceleration (Education); Case Studies; Inclusive Schools; Interpersonal Competence; Communication Skills; Foreign Countries; Educational Methods. Identifiers: Asperger Syndrome; England EJ506629 EC611498 The Success of Three Gifted Deaf-Blind Students in Inclusive EducationalPrograms. Ingraham, C. L.; And Others Journal of Visual Impairment & Blindness, v89 n3 p257-61 May-Jun 1995 Specialissue: Deaf-Blindness.ISSN: 0145-482X Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); PROJECT DESCRIPTION (141);POSITION PAPER (120) Journal Announcement: CIJNOV95 Target Audience: Practitioners; Parents This article examines the challenges and successes experienced over four years bythree academically gifted students with deaf-blindness in inclusive educationalprograms, and presents recommendations about placement of students with similarneeds in inclusive programs. (Author/DB) Descriptors: *Academically Gifted;*Deaf Blind; Elementary Secondary Education; *Gifted Disabled; *Inclusive Schools;Mainstreaming; Social Integration; Student Experience; *Student Placement EJ503045 EC611120 Gifted Students with Hearing Impairments: Suggestions for Teachers. Rittenhouse, Robert K.; Blough, Lisa K. TEACHING Exceptional Children, v27 n4 p51-53 Sum 1995ISSN: 0040-0599 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); NON-CLASSROOM MATERIAL(055) Journal Announcement: CIJSEP95 Target Audience: Teachers; Practitioners These suggestions for teachers of gifted students with hearing impairments addressdefinitional dilemmas affecting this population and special screening and evaluationproblems. Guidance is given concerning choosing a "gifted" definition, selectingmeasures for identifying giftedness, and determining the reference group. Teachersare urged to look for unique talents in all their students. (DB) Descriptors:*Ability Identification; *Definitions; Elementary Secondary Education; *Gifted Disabled;*Hearing Impairments; Student Evaluation; *Talent Identification ED361943 EC302410 The School Experience for Gifted Students with Cerebral Palsy. Willard-Holt, Colleen Apr 1993; 12p.; Paper presented at the Annual Conference of the American Educational Research Association (Atlanta, GA, April 12-16, 1993). EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: CONFERENCE PAPER (150); RESEARCH REPORT (143) Geographic Source: U.S.; Indiana Journal Announcement: RIEFEB94 This paper presents a study of two intellectually gifted students (ages 6 and 14) who have cerebral palsy and are unable to communicate orally. Results of participant observation, interviews, and document analysis revealed that: (1) gifted students who have cerebral palsy and do not speak exhibit indicators of cognitive ability that are similar to those exhibited by nondisabled gifted students, though the expression and recognition of these indicators are inhibited by communication barriers; (2) classroom atmosphere, structures, and instructional activities differentially impact the intellectual development of gifted students with physical disabilities; (3) gifted students with physical disabilities are able, with some modifications, to integrate and succeed academically and socially in regular classrooms; and (4) many barriers must be overcome by gifted students with physical disabilities in order to reach their goals. The study demonstrates the importance of looking beyond the obvious external manifestations of intellectual talent and illustrates some unique behaviors that may appear given appropriate circumstances. (Contains 22 references.) (JDD) Descriptors: Ability Identification; Case Studies; *Cerebral Palsy; *CognitiveAbility; Communication Disorders; Communication Problems; Educational Experience; Elementary School Students; Elementary Secondary Education; *Gifted Disabled; *Intellectual Development; Mainstreaming; Performance Factors; Physical Disabilities; Secondary School Students EJ474435 EC607519 Gifted Children with Disabilities. Nielsen, M. Elizabeth; And Others Gifted Child Today (GCT), v16 n5 p9-12 Sep-Oct 1993ISSN: 0892-9580 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); PROJECT DESCRIPTION (141) Journal Announcement: CIJAPR94 The Twice-Exceptional Child Project is a collaborative project of the Albuquerque(New Mexico) Public School System and the University of New Mexico to servestudents who are gifted and have a mild-to-moderate handicapping condition. Thisarticle describes the project's training components, screening and identificationprocedures, curriculum, and technology interventions. (JDD) Descriptors: AbilityIdentification; Behavior Disorders; *College School Cooperation; CommunicationDisorders; Cooperative Programs; *Gifted Disabled; Learning Disabilities; *ProgramImplementation; Screening Tests; *Teacher Education Identifiers: New Mexico (Albuquerque); University of New Mexico EJ494759 EC609208 Serving the Gifted Dyslexic and Gifted at Risk. Clements, Cecilia; And Others Gifted Child Today (GCT), v17 n4 p12-14,16,17,36,37 Jul-Aug 1994 Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); PROJECT DESCRIPTION (141) Journal Announcement: CIJDEC94 This article proposes and describes a differentiated-integrated (D-I) approach toserving gifted students who are dyslexic or otherwise at risk. This interdisciplinaryintervention focuses on motivating students, assessing and teaching basic andaccelerated skills, and increasing generalization via applied and integrated activities.(DB) Descriptors: *Dyslexia; *Enrichment Activities; *Gifted Disabled; High Risk Students;Interdisciplinary Approach; *Remedial Instruction; Student Motivation; *ThematicApproach EJ486460 EC609056 The Autistic Savant: Recognizing and Serving the Gifted Student with Autism. Donnelly, Julie A.; Altman, Reuben Roeper Review, v16 n4 p252-56 Jun 1994ISSN: 0278-3193 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); REVIEW LITERATURE (070) Journal Announcement: CIJNOV94 This article focuses attention on the underserved population of gifted students withautism. The article examines savant abilities in the autistic population, needs of thegifted student with autism, similarities between the gifted autistic and other populations,and implications for treatment. (JDD) Descriptors: *Autism; ElementarySecondary Education; *Gifted Disabled; *Intervention; *Student Characteristics; StudentNeeds; Symptoms (Individual Disorders) Identifiers: *Autistic Savants EJ510034 EC612029 Savant Syndrome: Case Studies, Hypotheses, and Implications for SpecialEducation. Cheatham, Susan Klug; And Others Education and Training in Mental Retardation and Developmental Disabilities, v30 n3 p243-53 Sep 1995 ISSN: 0013-1237 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); REVIEW LITERATURE (070) Journal Announcement: CIJJAN96 The concept of savant syndrome, encompassing those individuals historicallyknown as "idiot savants," is reviewed. Case studies demonstrating specialabilities in the areas of calendar calculating, musical ability, artistictalent, memorization, mathematical skills, mechanical achievement, and finesensory discrimination are discussed, as well as proposed hypotheses to explainthe syndrome and implications for special education. (Author/DB) Descriptors: *Ability; Art; Educational Principles; Elementary SecondaryEducation; *Etiology; *Gifted Disabled; Mathematics; Mechanical Skills;Memorization; *Mental Retardation; Music; Sensory Experience; *Symptoms(Individual Disorders); *Talent; TheoriesIdentifiers: *Savant Syndrome EJ499301 EC610664 Specific Writing Disabilities in Intellectually Gifted Children. Yates, Cheryl M.;And Others Journal for the Education of the Gifted, v18 n2 p131-55 Win 1995 ISSN: 0162-3532 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); RESEARCH REPORT (143) Journal Announcement: CIJJUL95 Target Audience: Researchers This study compared 10 gifted and 10 average children in each elementary grade forhigher level cognitive writing processes and lower level transcription processes.Results indicated that gifted and average children differed in the higher level cognitiveprocesses but not in the lower level writing processes. Results have implications foridentifying writing-related learning disabilities in gifted students. (Author/DB) Descriptors: *Academically Gifted; *Cognitive Processes; Disability Identification;*Gifted Disabled; *Handwriting; *Learning Disabilities; Writing (Composition); *WritingDifficulties EJ499300 EC610663 Multiple Exceptionalities: A Case Study. Moon, Sidney M.; Dillon, Deborah R. Journal for the Education of the Gifted, v18 n2 p111-30 Win 1995 ISSN: 0162-3532 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); PROJECT DESCRIPTION (141) Journal Announcement: CIJJUL95 This case study reports on an 11-year-old boy with multiple exceptionalities. The childwas verbally gifted, learning disabled in mathematics, and health impaired. He hadreceived homebound instruction throughout his elementary school years. Qualitativeresearch methods were used to explore the subject's learning characteristics andeducational experiences. (Author/DB) Descriptors: Case Studies; EducationalBackground; Elementary Education; *Gifted Disabled; Homebound; *Home Instruction;*Individualized Instruction; *Learning Disabilities; Multiple Disabilities; QualitativeResearch; *Special Health Problems; Student Characteristics EJ497642 EC610440 The Career Success of an Adult with a Learning Disability: A PsychosocialStudy of Amnesic-Semantic Aphasia. Kershner, John; And Others Journal of Learning Disabilities, v28 n2 p121-26 Feb 1995 ISSN: 0022-2194 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); RESEARCH REPORT (143) Journal Announcement: CIJJUN95 This case study describes a 39-year-old intellectually gifted man withlearning disabilities who demonstrated symptoms of amnesic-semantic aphasia atage 13, leading to placement in a class for students with mental retardationand to dropping out of school. The man's remarkable behavioral and cognitiveadjustments led to a fulfilling life and successful business career. (DB) Descriptors: *Adaptive Behavior (of Disabled); Adjustment (to Environment);Adults; *Aphasia; Behavior Patterns; Case Studies; *Coping; *Gifted Disabled;*Learning Disabilities; Males; Personality Traits; SuccessIdentifiers: *Amnesic Semantic Aphasia ED355698 EC301928 The Gifted-Visually Handicapped Child: A Review of Literature. Lin, Shang-Ping; Sikka, Anjoo Nov 1992 28p.; Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the Mid-South Education Research Association (Knoxville, TN, November 1992). EDRS Price - MF01/PC02 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: REVIEW LITERATURE (070); CONFERENCE PAPER (150) Geographic Source: U.S.; Mississippi Journal Announcement: RIEAUG93 This literature review examines and integrates research addressing visual handicap and giftedness and provides suggestions for the identification and education of gifted students with visual handicaps. The review addresses definitions of visual handicap and giftedness, characteristics of the gifted visually handicapped child, the problem of underachievement, the importance of braille training, identification methods, special needs, model programs developed, and placement and curriculum. The review concludes with several suggestions and implications for identifying and serving gifted visually handicapped children. (Contains 36 references.) (PB) Descriptors: *Ability Identification; Assistive Devices (for Disabled); Braille; Educational Diagnosis; Elementary Secondary Education; *Gifted Disabled; Special Programs; *Student Characteristics; Student Evaluation; *Talent Identification; Teaching Methods; Underachievement; *Visual Impairments Internet Resources Internet Listservs Top of Page Back to ERIC Menu Back to CEC Home Page copyright © 1996 ERIC Clearinghouse on Disabilities and Gifted Education URL: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm WT02-B20-47IA001-000011-B023-101http://www.cec.sped.org:80/faq/gt-ld.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101074355 text/html 20529HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 07:44:05 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 09-Sep-96 21:48:00 GMTContent-length: 20337Content-type: text/html  NAME OF FILE, GT-LD-FAQ GT-LD-FAQ (last updated July 21, 1996) THE ERIC CLEARINGHOUSE ON DISABILITIES AND GIFTEDEDUCATION (ERIC EC) The Council for Exceptional Children 1920Association Drive Reston, VA 20191 Toll Free: 1-800-328-0272 TTY: 703-264-9449 E-mail: ericec@cec.sped.org Internet: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm My child has been very content in a gifted program for several years. This year he appears to be struggling, and his grades have fallen. It was suggested that he might have a learning disability that hasn't been a problem until this year. Is this possible, and how can I get more information? According to a 1992 Dept. of Education Office for Civil Rights survey,there are 24,241 people in the United States who are identified as beingboth learning disabled and gifted. Child Services for LD children are covered under PL94-142 and IDEA. However,those documents do not address giftedness, and there is no federal legislationthat addresses the rights and responsibilities of children who are both giftedand disabled. Some states do not "double label" twice exceptional children(gifted children with disabilities) and do not provide services under bothcodes. Services provided to GT children vary from state to state, and often vary amongschool districts within a state. To inquire about policies and regulations in your state, please contact your state Department of Education in your state's capitol. This file includes information about gifted students with learning disabilities. At the end of this file are links to Internet resources and Internet listservs (discussion groups) where you can obtain more specific information on this topic. Information about gifted children with disabilities other than learning disabilities is available in other FAQs. There is an ERIC digest that provides further information on this topic. You can read the full text of ERIC EC digests under our listing at the U.S.Department of Education, Office of Educational Research and Improvement. Enclosed are several citations from the ERIC database. These records are a sample of the kind of information you can find in the ERIC database. For morecitations on your topic of interest, you may want to search the ERIC database yourself onthe Internet. References with ED (ERIC Document) and EJ (ERIC Journal) identifiers are cited in the ERIC database; for example, ED333123 or EJ333999. ERIC documents are available in microfiche collections at more than 825 locations worldwide (check your local college or public library). They can also be ordered for a fee through the ERIC Document Reproduction Service (EDRS) at 1-800-443-ERIC. References with an EJ (ERIC Journal) number are available for a fee from the originating journal (check with your local college or public library), through interlibrary loan services, or from the article reproduction clearinghouses, such as UMI: 1-800-248-0360; or ISI: 1-800-523-1850. ERIC descriptors (search terms) used: Learning disabilities and gifted or gifted disabled Birely, Marlene Crossover Children: A Sourcebook for Helping Children Who Are Gifted andLearning Disabled, Second Edition A rich resource that provides specific strategies to help children who are gifted and learning disabled and/or ADD control impulsivity, increase attention, enhance memory, improve social skills, and develop a positive self concept. It also provides recommendations for academic interventions and enrichment activities. #P5121. 1995. 94 pp. ISBM 0-86586-264-8. Available from The Council for Exceptional Children, 1920 Association Drive,Reston, VA 22091 For information, 800-CEC-READ EJ510061 EC612056 Twice Exceptional: Gifted Children with Learning Disabilities and GiftedStudents with Learning Disabilities. Southern, W. Thomas; And Others LD Forum, v20 n2 p48-50 Win 1995 Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); POSITION PAPER (120) Journal Announcement: CIJJAN96 Target Audience: Practitioners This column offers two articles: one on problems in identifying students who are gifted and learning disabled and recommendations for working with this population; a second article describes a resource program for students in grades six through eight who are gifted and learning disabled, involving collaboration through weekly team meetings. (SW) Descriptors: *Ability Identification; Disability Identification; EducationalStrategies; Elementary Secondary Education; *Gifted Disabled; *LearningDisabilities; Middle Schools; *Resource Room Programs; Student Characteristics;Teamwork Identifiers: Teacher Collaboration ED388021 EC304376 Talents in Two Places: Case Studies of High Ability Students with LearningDisabilities Who Have Achieved. Research Monograph 95114. Reis, Sally M.; And Others National Research Center on the Gifted and Talented, Storrs, CT. Jan 1995156p.; Executive Summary on p.vii-xx also published separately. Sponsoring Agency: Office of Educational Research and Improvement (ED),Washington, DC.; Contract No: R206R00001 Available From: NRC/GT, University of Connecticut, 362 Fairfield Road, U-7,Storrs, CT 06269-2007. EDRS Price - MF01/PC07 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: RESEARCH REPORT (143); TEST, QUESTIONNAIRE (160) Geographic Source: U.S.; Connecticut Journal Announcement: RIEMAR96 Extensive interviews were conducted with 12 young adults with learning disabilities who were successful at the college level, as well as with their parents, along with a thorough review of available school records, in order to examine how well high-ability students with learning disabilities succeed in academic environments. Most of the participants had been identified as having a learning disability late in their academic careers, suggesting their high ability may have masked some manifestations of learning disability. Students' mixed academic achievements often hindered their inclusion in gifted education programs. Reports of positive school experiences primarily centered around individual teacher support. Students reported many negative school experiences such as social problems, difficulty with teachers, and frustration with certain academic areas. Parents often reported that school systems "did not know what to do" with their children. However, students recalled very positive out-of- school experiences which enabled them to survive and constructively adapt their negative school experiences, resulting in positive personal attitudes. Positive personal characteristics in this group included high motivation, a high level of "task commitment," perseverance, and endurance. A major finding was the positive impact of the services provided by the University of Connecticut Program for Students with Learning Disabilities. The important influence of a learning specialist at the college level emerged as a critical factor in the academic success of the students participating in the study. Executive Summary is also published separately. (Contains approximately 150 references.)(Author/DB) Descriptors: Academic Achievement; Case Studies; College Students; ElementarySecondary Education; *Gifted Disabled; *High Achievement; Higher Education;Interviews; *Learning Disabilities; Parent Attitudes; *Performance Factors; SelfEvaluation (Individuals); Student Attitudes; *Student Experience; StudentMotivation; Student Personnel Services; Student School Relationship; *Success;Young Adults Identifiers: University of Connecticut EJ506649 EC611518 State Identification Policies: Gifted Students from Special Populations. Coleman, Mary Ruth; Gallagher, James J. Roeper Review, v17 n4 p268-75 May-Jun 1995 ISSN: 0278-3193; Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); RESEARCH REPORT (143) Journal Announcement: CIJNOV95 Target Audience: Practitioners Results are presented of a national survey of state policies regarding identification of gifted students from special populations (culturally diverse families, economic disadvantagement, or gifted students with disabilities). Also considered is a followup study on the implementation of state policies in Ohio, Arkansas, and Texas. Future policy directions are recommended. (Author/SW) Descriptors: *Ability Identification; Cultural Differences; EconomicallyDisadvantaged; Elementary Secondary Education; Ethnic Groups; *Gifted Disabled;*Gifted Disadvantaged; Government School Relationship; Low Income Groups;*Minority Groups; *Public Policy; State Legislation; *State Programs Identifiers: Arkansas; Ohio; Texas EJ505159 EC611480 Metacognition and High Intellectual Ability: Insights from the Study ofLearning-Disabled Gifted Students. Hannah, C. Lynne; Shore, Bruce M. Gifted Child Quarterly, v39 n2 p95-109 Spr 1995 ISSN: 0016-9862; Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); RESEARCH REPORT (143) Journal Announcement: CIJOCT95 This study compared metacognitive performance of gifted, gifted learning- disabled, learning-disabled, and average males in grades 5 and 6 and grades 11 and 12. For metacognitive knowledge, skill on think-aloud error detection reading, and comprehension, the performance of gifted learning-disabled students resembled that of gifted students more than that of learning-disabled students. (SW) Descriptors: Academic Ability; Elementary Secondary Education; *Gifted;*Gifted Disabled; *Learning Disabilities; Males; *Metacognition; *ReadingComprehension Identifiers: Error Detection EJ494761 EC608838 Talent Development: Accommodating the Social and Emotional Needs of SecondaryGifted/Learning Disabled Students. Olenchak, F. Richard Journal of Secondary Gifted Education, v5 n3 p40-52 Spr 1994 ISSN: 1047-1885 Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); REVIEW LITERATURE (070); POSITIONPAPER (120) Journal Announcement: CIJAPR95 This discussion uses student cases and a review of the literature to advocate for the development of individual student talent as a philosophical basis for accommodating the social and emotional needs of gifted secondary students with learning disabilities. Descriptions of several educational innovations and reform efforts likely to enhance talent development are included. (Author/DB) Descriptors: Change Strategies; *Educational Change; Educational Needs; Educational Philosophy; *Gifted Disabled; Individualized Instruction; LearningDisabilities; Secondary Education; *Talent; *Talent Development EJ491124 EC609654 Gifted Students with Learning Disabilities: What Does the Research Say? Coben, Sharon S.; Vaughn, Sharon Learning Disabilities: A Multidisciplinary Journal, v5 n2 p87-94 Aug 1994 ISSN: 1046-6819 Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); REVIEW LITERATURE (070) Journal Announcement: CIJFEB95 A review of the literature on gifted students with learning disabilities concludes that the literature is presently unable to provide empirically based guidelines for identifying and serving children who are both gifted and learning disabled. Several key problems are discussed, including identification, characteristics, and intervention. (Author/DB) Descriptors: *Ability Identification; Disability Identification; ElementarySecondary Education; *Gifted Disabled; *Intervention; *Learning Disabilities;Student Characteristics ED373507 EC303276 The Gifted Learning Disabled Student. 1994; 241p.; ISBN: 1-881622-10-X Available From: Publications & Resources Coordination, CTY, The Johns HopkinsUniversity, 3400 N. Charles St., Baltimore, MD 21218 ($19). Document Not Available from EDRS. Language: English Document Type: COLLECTION (020); BOOK (010) Geographic Source: U.S.; Maryland Journal Announcement: RIEJAN95 This collection of articles on gifted learning disabled students begins with an explanation of the philosophy of the Center for Talented Youth at Johns Hopkins University (Maryland), a list of characteristics of gifted disabled students, and three definitions of learning disabilities. The following papers are then provided: "Gifted but Learning Disabled: A Puzzling Paradox" (Susan Baum); "What Are Specific Learning Disabilities?" (Larry B. Silver); "Issues in the Identification and Programming of the Gifted Learning Disabled Child" (Donna P. Suter and Joan S. Wolf); "Learning Disabilities and the Preschool Child" (National Joint Committee on Learning Disabilities); "How Does Your Screener Stack Up?" (Illinois Association for Supervision and Curriculum Development); "Specific Reading Disability in Four Historical Men" (P.G. Aaron et al.); "Treating Learning Disabilities" (Larry B. Silver); "Strategies for Mainstreamed Students" (Fern C. Moskowitz); "Gifted and Learning Disabled Students: Practical Considerations for Teachers" (Timothy J. Landrum); "The Gifted Learning Disabled Child: A Challenge and Some Suggestions" (Joyce N. French); "Case Studies" (Susan Baum et al.); "Teaching Test Taking Skills" (Rosalind W. Rothman and Jill Cohen); "Counseling Gifted Learning Disabled Students" (Paul R. Daniels); "Developing Self Esteem" (Sheri Searcy); "Getting Students Ready for College" (Carol Sullivan); "College and the Learning Disabled" (Margaret D. Meyer); "The College Option" (Barbara Scheiber and Jeanne Talpers); "Questions To Ask Yourself and the Schools" (Barbara Scheiber and Jeanne Talpers); "Living and Learning with Dyslexia" (Sarah L. Levine and Sally Osbourne); "Dyslexics at Brown: A Student Perspective" (Brown University); "Attention Deficit Disorder: Current Understanding" (Richard O. Elliot); "Attention Deficit Disorder: A Guide for Teachers" (Education Committee of C.H.A.D.D.); "John Adam Hartley: An ADD Story" (Donna Hartley); and "A Radical Evolutionary" (Lisa Libowitz). A listing of resources includes centers, associations, and organizations; a select sampling of schools; programs; publications; tests and publishers; and recommended reading. Some of the individual articles also contain references. (DB) Descriptors: *Ability Identification; Attention Deficit Disorders; ClassroomTechniques; College Bound Students; Counseling; Dyslexia; Elementary SecondaryEducation; *Gifted Disabled; Higher Education; Individual Needs; Intervention;*Learning Disabilities; Mainstreaming; Preschool Education; Self Concept; SelfEsteem; Student Characteristics; *Teaching Methods Identifiers: Johns Hopkins University Center Talented Youth MD ED321484 EC231805 Gifted but Learning Disabled: A Puzzling Paradox. ERIC Digest #E479. Baum, Susan Council for Exceptional Children, Reston, Va.; ERIC Clearinghouse onHandicapped and Gifted Children, Reston, Va. 1990 5p.; Sponsoring Agency: Office of Educational Research and Imp rovement (ED),Washington, DC.; Contract No: RI88062007 EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: ERIC PRODUCT (071); NON-CLASSROOM MATERIAL (055); ERICDIGESTS (SELECTED) (073) Geographic Source: U.S.; Virginia Journal Announcement: RIEDEC90 Target Audience: Practitioners This digest is derived from Susan Baum's "Being Gifted and Learning Disabled...From Definition to Practical Intervention." The learning disabled gifted are grouped into three categories: identified gifted students who have subtle learning disabilities, unidentified students whose gifts and disabilities may be masked by average achievement, and identified learning disabled students who are also gifted. Four general guidelines are offered to professionals in developing appropriate educational programs. They are: (1) focus attention on the development of the gift; (2) provide a nurturing environment that values individual differences; (3) encourage compensation strategies (five compensation strategies are suggested); and (4) encourage awareness of individual strengths and weaknesses. Stressed is the importance of such students learning to be their own advocates. Includes nine references, nine resources, and 14 suggestions for additional reading. (DB) Descriptors: Definitions; *Educational Needs; Elementary Secondary Education;*Gifted; *Gifted Disabled; *Handicap Identification; Intervention; *LearningDisabilities; Learning Strategies; Student Characteristics; Talent; *TalentIdentification Identifiers: ERIC Digests EJ474440 EC607524 Unmasking Young Children's Gifts. Leibowitz, Deborah G.; Starnes, Waveline T. Gifted Child Today (GCT), v16 n5 p28-32 Sep-Oct 1993 ISSN: 0892-9580 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); PROJECT DESCRIPTION (141) Journal Announcement: CIJAPR94 A Javits Grant Project of the Montgomery County (Maryland) Public Schools uncovers the strengths and gifts of traditionally underserved primary-level gifted children. The program design celebrates the multiple intelligences of children with economic disadvantage, limited English ability, or learning disabilities. (JDD) Descriptors: *Ability Identification; Economically Disadvantaged;*Educational Methods; *Gifted; Learning Disabilities; Limited English Speaking;Primary Education; *Program Development Identifiers: Montgomery County Public Schools MD; *Multiple Intelligences EJ494759 EC608836 Addressing Needs through Strengths: Five Instructional Practices for Use withGifted/Learning Disabled Students. Howard, Judith B. Journal of Secondary Gifted Education, v5 n3 p23-34 Spr 1994 ISSN: 1047-1885 Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); PROJECT DESCRIPTION (141) Journal Announcement: CIJAPR95 This article describes five instructional strategies for use with gifted students with learning disabilities: (1) use of computer technology; (2) mnemonic (memory enhancing) techniques; (3) graphic organizers; (4) the integrative strategy instruction model; and (5) seminar instruction. (DB) Descriptors: Advance Organizers; Classroom Techniques; Computer Uses inEducation; Discussion (Teaching Technique); Elementary Secondary Education;*Gifted Disabled; *Learning Disabilities; Learning Strategies; Mnemonics;Remedial Instruction; Seminars; *Teaching Methods Identifiers: *Graphic Organizers EJ402550 EC221930 Invisible Gifts, Invisible Handicaps. Silverman, Linda Kreger Roeper Review, v12 n1 p37-42 Sep 1989 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); PROJECT DESCRIPTION (141); NON-CLASSROOM MATERIAL (055) Journal Announcement: CIJJUN90 Target Audience: Teachers; Practitioners The paper compares characteristics of underachievers with characteristics of learning-disabled gifted children; describes results of clinical assessments of learning-disabled gifted children; offers guidelines for identifying such students; and discusses teaching strategies that can be used at school and home.(JDD) Descriptors: *Ability Identification; Educational Diagnosis; ElementarySecondary Education; *Gifted Disabled; *Handicap Identification; *StudentCharacteristics; *Teaching Methods; Underachievement Internet Resources Internet Listservs Top of Page Back to ERIC Menu Back to CEC Home Page Copyright ©1996 ERIC Clearinghouse on Disabilities and Gifted Education URL: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm WT02-B20-48IA001-000011-B023-122http://www.cec.sped.org:80/faq/gt-group.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101074407 text/html 19242HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 07:44:13 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 09-Sep-96 21:41:00 GMTContent-length: 19050Content-type: text/html  NAME OF FILE, GT-Grp-FAQ GT-Grp-FAQ (last updated July 9, 1996) THE ERIC CLEARINGHOUSE ON DISABILITIES AND GIFTEDEDUCATION (ERIC EC) The Council for Exceptional Children 1920Association Drive Reston, VA 20191 Toll Free: 1-800-328-0272 TTY: 703-264-9449 E-mail: ericec@cec.sped.org Internet: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm What does the research say about including gifted students in the regular education classroom? Specifically, are those elementary school programs that relyheavily on a pull-out vs. an inclusion-type program (homogeneous vs. heterogeneousgrouping) proving to be more or less successful? When attempts are made to evaluate the effect of a particular school environment, such as the resource room, or ability grouping, or a particular instructional method such as creative problem solving, the range and diversity of results is impressive. It is clear thatresource rooms work well sometimes, and not at all well at others. Theenrichment triad is a great success in some places and a disappointment inothers. Merely placing youngsters in a particular setting, or providing themwith a particular set of activities, does not necessarily lead to success. Itwould appear that merely grouping gifted students together without, at the sametime, changing the content and the instructional strategies, will not yield muchin the way of benefits. On the other hand, a well-constructed program thatbrings gifted students together and provides them with an intellectuallystimulating and important set of ideas, together with giving them practice touse their own ability to problem-find and problem-solve, seems to yield verytangible results (Gallagher, 1993). Changing the learning environment without changing the content of lessons seemsnonproductive and leads many gifted students to say that "school is boring."Further, much of the curriculum that is designed with gifted students in mind isdesigned on an "ad hoc" basis, without benefit of scope and sequence, and withlittle apparent justification. Regarding curriculum issues, please seeVanTassel-Baska, J. (1992) "Planning Effective Curriculum for Gifted Learners."Published by Love, Denver, CO. This file includes information about grouping practices in gifted education. At the end of this file are links to Internet resources and Internet listservs (discussion groups) where you can obtain more specific information on this topic. There may be an ERIC digest that provides further information on this topic. You can read the full text of ERIC EC digests under our listing at the U.S.Department of Education, Office of Educational Research and Improvement. Enclosed are several citations from the ERIC database. These records are asample of the kind of information you can find in the ERIC database. For morecitations on your topic of interest, you may want to search the ERIC database yourself onthe Internet. References with ED (ERIC Document) and EJ (ERIC Journal) identifiers are cited in theERIC database; for example, ED333123 or EJ333999. ERIC documents are availablein microfiche collections at more than 825 locations worldwide (check your local college or public library). They can also be ordered for a fee through the ERIC Document Reproduction Service (EDRS) at 1-800-443-ERIC. References with an EJ (ERIC Journal) number are available for a fee from the originating journal (check with your local college or public library), through interlibrary loan services, or from articlereproduction clearinghouses, such as UMI: 1-800-248-0360; or ISI:1-800-523-1850. ERIC descriptors (search terms) used: Gifted and Grouping (Instructional Purposes) or Ability Grouping EJ497629 EC610421 The Importance of Cluster Grouping. Coleman, Mary Ruth Gifted Child Today Magazine, v18 n1 p38-40 Jan-Feb 1995ISSN: 1076-2175 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); POSITION PAPER (120) Journal Announcement: CIJJUN95 Meeting the needs of gifted students within the regular classroom requiresappropriate uses of cluster grouping, where small groups of students withsimilar learning needs are assigned to a particular teacher; an extendedsupport system for the teacher; and educational differentiation to meet studentneeds. (JDD) Descriptors: *Cluster Grouping; Curriculum Development; *EducationalPractices; Elementary Secondary Education; *Gifted; Group Structure; *InclusiveSchools; Mainstreaming EJ461178 EC605409 Reflections on "The Research." Rogne, Paul O. Gifted Child Today (GCT), v16 n1 p8-14 Jan-Feb 1993 ISSN: 0892-9580 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); REVIEW LITERATURE (070) Journal Announcement: CIJAUG93 This article summarizes research findings on ability grouping in relation togifted students. Grouping variations (e.g., tracking, flexible grouping,multiage grouping, and magnet schools or teams) are distinguished. The articlealso considers assessment of gifted students with achievement tests, levelingeffects of heterogeneous groups, cooperative learning groups, and the climatefor gifted education. (DB) Descriptors: *Ability Grouping; *Academic Achievement; *Academically Gifted;Cooperative Learning; Educational Environment; Educational Research; ElementarySecondary Education; *Grouping (Instructional Purposes); InstructionalEffectiveness; Student Evaluation EJ469084 HE531678 Ability Grouping: A Tool for Educational Excellence. Gallagher, James J. College Board Review, n168 p21-27 Sum 1993 ISSN: 0010-0951 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: EVALUATIVE REPORT (142); POSITION PAPER (120); JOURNAL ARTICLE (080) Journal Announcement: CIJJAN94 It is argued that lack of sustained academic effort, not student grouping, isthe major reason for differences in student performance. Ability grouping isseen as a useful tool, especially in accelerated programs for bright children,that should not be rejected in favor of approaches that ignore individualdifferences. (MSE) Descriptors: *Academic Ability; *Acceleration (Education); *Classification;Elementary Secondary Education; *Gifted; *Grouping (Instructional Purposes);*Homogeneous Grouping; Outcomes of Education ED367095 EC302797 An Analysis of the Research on Ability Grouping. Kulik, James A. National Research Center on the Gifted and Talented, Storrs, CT. NRC/GT Newsletter, p8-9 Spr 1993 3p.; For a related document, see ED 350 777. Sponsoring Agency: Office of Educational Research and Improvement (ED),Washington, DC. EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: REVIEW LITERATURE (070); JOURNAL ARTICLE (080) Geographic Source: U.S.; Connecticut Journal Announcement: RIEJUL94 This research review summarizes two major sets of meta-analyses on five kindsof ability grouping programs: (1) XYZ classes (high, middle, and low classes);(2) cross-grade grouping; (3) within-class grouping; (4) accelerated classes;and (5) enriched classes. One group of meta analyses concluded that thestrongest benefits from grouping were found in programs in which there was agreat deal of adjustment of curriculum for highly talented learners. The othermeta-analysis did not find any strong positive benefits of grouping, but didnot examine grouping programs designed for highly talented students. Re-analysis of all studies included in both sets of meta-analyses confirmed thathigher aptitude students usually benefit academically from ability grouping.Benefits are in proportion to the amount of curriculum adjustment, with programsentailing acceleration of instruction resulting in the most gain onstandardized tests. Grouping was found to have less influence on the academicachievement of middle and lower aptitude students. Analysis of noncognitiveoutcomes suggests that the effects of grouping on self-esteem measuresfor all ability groups are small and may even be rather positive. Results arecontrasted with the conclusions of J. Oakes ("Keeping Track: How SchoolsStructure Inequality" (1985). The review concludes that American educationwould be harmed by the wholesale elimination of programs that group learnersfor instruction by ability. (DB) Descriptors: *Ability Grouping; Academic Ability; Academic Achievement;Curriculum; Educational Philosophy; Elementary Secondary Education; *EqualEducation; *Gifted; Grouping (Instructional Purposes); *Homogeneous Grouping;Meta Analysis; Research and Development; Self Esteem; *Talent; Theory PracticeRelationship EJ450021 EC603741 Educational Decision Making on Acceleration and Grouping. VanTassel-Baska, Joyce Gifted Child Quarterly, v36 n2 p68-72 Spr 1992 Special Issue: Challenging the Gifted: Grouping and Acceleration. Available from: UMI Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); REVIEW LITERATURE (070); POSITION PAPER (120) Journal Announcement: CIJJAN93Target Audience: Policymakers; Practitioners This article focuses on the importance of acceleration and grouping for giftedstudents in the context of school reform and recommends a set of decision-makingguidelines for each issue including flexibility in entrance and exitrequirements for courses, opportunities for telescoping and grade skipping,various forms of grouping, and independent learning options. (Author/DB) Descriptors: Academically Gifted; *Acceleration (Education); Decision Making;Educational Change; *Educational Policy; Elementary Secondary Education;Flexible Progression; *Gifted; *Homogeneous Grouping; Independent Study EJ422858 EA525353 Ability-Grouping Research Reviews: What Do They Say about Grouping and theGifted? Allan, Susan Demirsky Educational Leadership, v48 n6 p60-65 Mar 1991 Available from: UMI Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); EVALUATIVE REPORT (142) Journal Announcement: CIJJUL91 Provides a synthesis and a critique of Kulik and Kulik's metasynthesis andSlavin's best-evidence syntheses regarding ability grouping for giftedstudents. Although both studies address important issues, concerns such asteacher and parent attitudes to grouping and use of gifted students as rolemodels are ignored. Includes 22 references. (MLH) Descriptors: *Ability Grouping; Elementary Secondary Education; *Gifted;*Methods Research; *Research Problems; *Special Education ED345392 EC301151 The Effect of Ability Grouping of Gifted Elementary Students, Combined withInstruction Modified for Level and Rate of Learning on Student Achievement: AReview of the Literature. Balzer, Charlene [1991 10p. Document Type: REVIEW LITERATURE (070) Journal Announcement: RIEOCT92 This review of the literature summarizes findings on instructional groupingissues and academic achievement of gifted elementary students. The reviewaddresses problems of using standardized tests to evaluate instructionaleffectiveness of grouping arrangements, distinctions between providing thesame curriculum and a differentiated curriculum to gifted groups, and groupingwithin the heterogeneous class or in self-contained classes. It is concludedthat research evidence strongly supports grouping of students by ability for atleast the curriculum areas of reading and mathematics. In addition, there isalso evidence that once students are grouped by ability, the level ofinstruction and pace of learning must be adapted in order to gain the maximumbenefit for the student. (20 references) (DB) Descriptors: *Ability Grouping; *Academic Achievement; *Academically Gifted;Elementary Education; *Grouping (Instructional Purposes); HeterogeneousGrouping; Homogeneous Grouping; *Instructional Effectiveness; MathematicsInstruction; Reading Instruction; Standardized Tests; *Teaching Methods EJ414904 EC231468 Ability Grouping: Don't Throw Out the Baby with the Bath Water. Cocking, Denice J. Gifted Child Today (GCT), v13 n3 p13-15 May-Jun 1990 Report No: ISSN-0892-9580 Available from: UMI Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); REVIEW LITERATURE (070) Journal Announcement: CIJFEB91 Target Audience: Practitioners This article discusses arguments for and against ability grouping as reflectedin the literature and research work. Such tracking problems as segregation,stigma, and elitism are discussed, as are between-class vs. within-classgrouping strategies and specifically designed programs for the gifted. (PB) Descriptors: Academically Gifted; Achievement; *Classes (Groups of Students);Elementary Secondary Education; *Gifted; *Grouping (Instructional Purposes);*Homogeneous Grouping; Labeling (of Persons); Special Education; StudentPlacement EJ422860 EA525355 Findings on Grouping Are Often Distorted: Response to Allan. Kulik, James A. Educational Leadership, v48 n6 p67 Mar 1991 Available from: UMI Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); EVALUATIVE REPORT (142); POSITION PAPER(120) Journal Announcement: CIJJUL91 Agrees with Susan Allan's article in the same "Educational Leadership" issuethat ability grouping research is often misinterpreted--to the disservice ofstudents. Reviewers should distinguish among three types of programs thatdiffer according to curricular adjustment and acceleration effects. Blanketcondemnation of all three types is unwarranted. Includes three references.(MLH) Descriptors: *Ability Grouping; Elementary Secondary Education; *Gifted;*Politics of Education; *Research Problems; *Student Placement ED343329 EC301013The Relationship of Grouping Practices to the Education of the Gifted andTalented Learner: Research-Based Decision Making Series. Rogers, Karen B. National Research Center on the Gifted and Talented, Storrs, CT. Oct 1991 99p.; For an executive summary, see EC 301 014. Sponsoring Agency: Office of Educational Research and Improvement (ED), Washington, DC. ContractNo.: R206R00001 Available from: Dissemination Coordinator, The National Research Center on theGifted and Talented, The University of Connecticut, 362 Fairfield Road, U-7,Storrs, CT 06269-2007 ($12.00, includes executive summary, order no. 9101). Document Type: RESEARCH REPORT (143) Journal Announcement: RIEAUG92 Target Audience: Practitioners; Administrators Thirteen research syntheses were analyzed to determine the academic, social, andpsychological effects upon learners who are gifted and talented of threegrouping practices: (1) ability grouping for enrichment; (2) mixed abilitycooperative grouping for regular instruction; and (3) grouping foracceleration. It was concluded that the research showed strong, consistentsupport for the academic effects of most forms of ability grouping forenrichment and acceleration, but that the research is scant and weak concerningthe socialization and psychological adjustment effects of these practices.Claims for the academic superiority of mixed ability grouping or for wholegroup instructional practices were not substantiated for gifted and talentedlearners. Other conclusions indicated that: academic outcomes of abilitygrouping vary substantially from effects reported for average and low abilitylearners; full time, pullout, and within-class grouping can all producesubstantial academic gains; and there is little impact on self-esteem and amoderate gain in attitude toward subject in full time ability grouping. Aseries of guidelines for practices is included. Appendices chart themeta-evaluation of the research syntheses and the research-supportedconclusions concerning grouping issues. (45 references) (DB) Descriptors: *Ability Grouping; Academic Achievement; Academically Gifted ;Acceleration (Education); Cooperative Learning; Elementary Secondary Education;Enrichment; *Gifted; *Grouping (Instructional Purposes); Heterogeneous Grouping;*Instructional Effectiveness; *Meta Analysis; Self Esteem; Social Development;Talent ED327047 EC232699 Ability Grouping for Gifted Learners as It Relates to School Reform andRestructuring. Schatz, Ellie Feb 1990 10p. EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: REVIEW LITERATURE (070) Geographic Source: U.S.; Wisconsin Journal Announcement: RIEMAY91 This monograph uses a question-answer format to address issues concerned withmeeting the needs of gifted students as Wisconsin schools restructure and changegrouping practices as part of raising standards of learning for all students.Among 12 questions considered are the following: (1) Aren't some of theprinciples of middle level education, cooperative learning and whole classinstruction in reading harmful from the standpoint of providing appropriateprograms to gifted students? (2) Isn't acceleration a necessary component ofgifted education but contradictory to the middle level philosophy? (3) If oneviews middle level education as anti-tracking and anti-ability grouping, thenhow is grouping at the middle of the pyramid ever acceptable? (4) "Doesn'tparticipation in Midwest Talent Search promote labeling and an "earlier isbetter" approach to gifted education? (5) Don't research reports and decliningtest scores clearly support as little ability grouping as possible at all levelsof education? (6) Won't cooperative learning increase boredom in gifted studentsand hold them back? (7) How can young gifted readers be challenged by wholeclass instruction in reading? and (8) How can we be sure school districts areasking the right questions about gifted education as these strategies areimplemented? Includes 24 references. (DB) Descriptors: Acceleration (Education); *Cooperative Learning; EducationalMethods; Educational Philosophy; Elementary Secondary Education; *Gifted;*Grouping Internet Resources Internet Listservs Top of Page Back to ERIC Menu Back to CEC Home Page copyright © 1996 ERIC Clearinghouse on Disabilities and Gifted Education URL: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm WT02-B20-49IA001-000011-B023-142http://www.cec.sped.org:80/faq/gtmodels.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101074419 text/html 42984HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 07:44:24 GMTLast-modified: Tuesday, 10-Sep-96 14:03:00 GMTContent-length: 42791Content-type: text/html GT-Models-FAQ GT-Models-FAQ (last updated July 16, 1996) THE ERIC CLEARINGHOUSE ON DISABILITIES AND GIFTEDEDUCATION (ERIC EC) The Council for Exceptional Children 1920Association Drive Reston, VA 20191 Toll Free: 1-800-328-0272 TTY: 703-264-9449 E-mail: ericec@cec.sped.org Internet: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm Is there a listing of what are considered to be the *best practices* or models for teaching the gifted? A list of best practices does not exist at this time. When attempts aremade to evaluate the impact of a particular school environment, such as the resourceroom (Vaughn, Feldhusen, & Asher, 1991), or ability grouping, or a particularinstructional method such as creative problem solving, the range and diversity of resultsis impressive. It is clear that resource rooms work well sometimes, and not at all well atothers. The enrichment triad is a great success in some places and a disappointment inothers. Merely placing youngsters in a particular setting, or providing them with aparticular set of activities, does not necessarily lead to success. On the other hand, a well-constructed program that brings gifted studentstogether and provides them with an intellectually stimulating and important setof ideas, together with giving them practice to use their own ability toproblem-find and problem-solve, seems to yield very tangible results (Gallagher,1993). Changing the learning environment without changing the content of lessons seemsnonproductive and leads many gifted students to say that "school is boring."Further, much of the curriculum that is designed with gifted students in mind isdesigned on an "ad hoc" basis, without benefit of scope and sequence, and withlittle apparent justification. Regarding curriculum issues, please seeVanTassel-Baska, J. (1992) "Planning Effective Curriculum for Gifted Learners." Published by Love, Denver, CO. This file includes information about some models used in heterogeneous as well ashomogeneous classrooms. At the end of the file are links to Internet resources andInternet listservs (discussion groups) where you can obtain more specific information onthe topic. There may be an ERIC digest that provides further information on this topic. You can read the full text of ERIC EC digests under our listing at the U.S.Department of Education, Office of Educational Research and Improvement. Enclosed are several citations from the ERIC database. These records are asample of the kind of information you can find in the ERIC database. For morecitations on your topic of interest, you may want to search the ERIC database yourself on the Internet. References with ED (ERIC Document) and EJ (ERIC Journal) identifiers are cited in theERIC database; for example, ED333123 or EJ333999. ERIC documents are availablein microfiche collections at more than 825 locations worldwide (check your local collegeor public library). They can also be ordered for a fee through the ERIC DocumentReproduction Service (EDRS) at 1-800-443-ERIC. References with an EJ (ERICJournal) number are available for a fee from the originating journal (check with yourlocal college or public library), through interlibrary loan services, or from articlereproduction clearinghouses, such as UMI: 1-800-248-0360; or ISI:1-800-523-1850. ERIC descriptors (search terms) used: Gifted and Teaching Models or ProgramDescriptions or Delivery Systems GENERAL INFORMATION ED385016 EC304013 Teaching Models in Education of the Gifted. Second Edition. Maker, C. June; Nielson, Aleene B. 1995; 493p. ISBN: 0-89079-609-2 Available From: Pro-ed, 8700 Shoal Creek Blvd., Austin, TX 78757-6897 ($39). Document Not Available from EDRS. Language: English Document Type: BOOK (010); REVIEW LITERATURE (070) Geographic Source: U.S.; Texas Journal Announcement: RIEDEC95 Target Audience: Teachers; Practitioners This book provides a comprehensive review of teaching-learning models used inthe development and implementation of a curriculum for gifted students. Themodels described were selected for their demonstrated or potential success withgifted children and their widespread use. For each model, the following typesof information are provided: assumptions underlying the model, elements of themodel, modification of the basic curriculum, modifying the approach, modeldevelopment, research on effectiveness, advantages and disadvantages, andreferences. Following an introductory chapter, nine chapters cover thefollowing models: (1) George Betts--the autonomous learner model; (2) BenjaminBloom and David Krathwohl--the cognitive and affective taxonomies; (3) JeromeBruner--the basic structure of a discipline; (4) Sidney Parnes--creativeproblem solving; (5) Joseph S. Renzulli--the enrichment triad; (6) Shlomo andYael Sharan--group investigations; (7) Hilda Taba--teaching strategies program;(8) Calvin Taylor--multiple talent approach; and (9) Donald J. Treffinger--self-directed learning. In addition, five other approaches are briefly described:J. P. Guilford--the structure of intellect; Lawrence Kohlberg--discussions ofmoral dilemmas; Frank E. Williams--teaching strategies for thinking andfeeling; problem-based learning; and thinking actively in a social context. Thefinal chapter offers guidelines for developing a comprehensive approach togifted education curricula. (Individual chapters contain references.) (DB) Descriptors: Cognitive Processes; Cooperative Learning; *CurriculumDevelopment; Curriculum Enrichment; *Educational Principles; EducationalPsychology; Elementary Secondary Education; *Gifted; Independent Study;Instructional Effectiveness; Learning Processes; Problem Solving; *Teaching Models;Thinking Skills Identifiers: Autonomous Learner Model for Gifted and Talented; BloomsTaxonomy; Enrichment Triad Model; Multiple Talent Approach to Teaching ED347766 EC301384 Programs and Practices in Gifted Education: Projects Funded by the Jacob K.Javits Gifted and Talented Students Education Act of 1988. Berger, Sandra L., Ed. Council for Exceptional Children, Reston, Va.; ERIC Clearinghouse onHandicapped and Gifted Children, Reston, Va. 1992; 228p. Sponsoring Agency: Office of Educational Research and Improvement(ED), Washington, DC. Contract No: RI88062007 ISBN: 0-86586-221-4 Available From: Council for Exceptional Children, Publication Sales, 1920Association Dr., Reston, VA 22091-1589 ($18.00, $12.60 members; stock no.R636). EDRS Price - MF01/PC10 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: ERIC PRODUCT (071); DIRECTORY (132) Geographic Source: U.S.; Virginia Journal Announcement: RIEDEC92 This directory resulted from a 1991 survey of 46 programs funded under theJacob K. Javits Gifted and Talented Students Education Act of 1988. Theprojects are listed alphabetically by state, city, and name of project.Projects have been divided into two types: (1) those that provide directservices to children and (2) dissemination projects. Projects in each of thesetypes are summarized in a matrix display listing state, grantee, name ofprogram, type of district, age/grade, and target population characteristics. Adiscussion of the Javits Act covering purpose, eligibility, types of projectsfunded, and source of further information is also provided. Individual projectdescriptions comprise most of the document and contain sections providing (1)general information, (2) program description, (3) program implementation, and(4) program evaluation. Among information provided for most projects is thefollowing: project director, address, funding period, telephone, goals ofprogram, program description, type of district, target population, selectioncriteria, identification procedures, number of children served, number ofpeople involved in program implementation, type of preservice or inservicetraining, key conditions for replicating the program, cost of replicating theprogram, availability of technical assistance, most effective features ofprogram, most surprising or challenging features of program, planned followupactivities, and evaluation plan. A final section lists project directors,locations, and telephone numbers. (DB) Descriptors: Delivery Systems; *Demonstration Programs; Elementary SecondaryEducation; Federal Aid; *Gifted; Grants; Information Dissemination; NationalSurveys; *Program Descriptions; Program Evaluation; Program Implementation;Research and Development; *Talent; Theory Practice Relationship Identifiers: *Jacob K Javits Gifted Talented Stdnt Educ Act 1988 ED329047 EC300039 What Happens to Students in Gifted Programs? The Learning Outcomes Study atthe University of Virginia. Cornell, Dewey G.; And Others Nov 1990; 14p.; Produced under the auspices of the National Research Center on theGifted and Talented. Paper presented at the Annual Convention of the NationalAssociation for Gifted Children (40th, Little Rock, AR). EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: PROJECT DESCRIPTION (141); RESEARCH REPORT (143) Geographic Source: U.S.; Virginia Journal Announcement: RIEJUL91 This paper introduces the Learning Outcomes Study at the University ofVirginia, an ongoing 2-year investigation of over 1,000 elementary schoolchildren who entered one of 16 different gifted programs (or no program) in thefall of 1990. The study will compare effects of four examples each of fourtypes of program delivery arrangements: (1) within-classroom (or mainstreamtype); (2) pull-out programs; (3) separate classes or ability tracking; (4) andspecial schools. Special comparisons will be made of program effects onminority and disadvantaged students. Information will also be collected oneach program's curriculum, teaching methods and goals, as well as thebackground and training of program teachers, and student identificationcriteria. Students will be assessed four times: at the time of entry into aformal gifted program, at the end of their first year in the program, and atthe beginning and end of their second year. Multiple outcome measures willassess student achievement, attitudes, and adjustment. Additional questionspossibly examined include the relationship between self-concept and intrinsicmotivation; whether these two concepts have a differential impact onachievement; and the behavioral adjustment of high achieving students. (18references) (DB) Descriptors: Academic Achievement; *Academically Gifted; *Delivery Systems;Disadvantaged Youth; Elementary Education; Minority Groups; *Outcomes ofEducation; *Program Effectiveness; Self Concept; Student Adjustment; *StudentAttitudes; Student Educational Objectives; Student Motivation EJ457384 EC604927 Ideas with Impact: Consultant Teacher. Robinson, Ann, Ed.; Ringlaben, Ravic Journal for the Education of the Gifted, v16 n1 p83-87 Fall 1992 ISSN: 0162-3532 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); BIBLIOGRAPHY (131); REVIEWLITERATURE (070) Journal Announcement: CIJJUN93 Target Audience: Practitioners This article briefly describes the consultant teacher model for providingspecial educational services to gifted and talented students. Summaries offive recommended print resources about the consultant teacher model areincluded. (DB) Descriptors: *Consultants; Consultation Programs; *Delivery Systems; ElementarySecondary Education; *Gifted; *Models; *Resource Teachers; SpecialEducation; *Talent ED350816 EC301644 Planning Effective Curriculum for Gifted Learners. Van Tassel-Baska, Joyce 1992; 402p. ISBN: 0-89108-218-2 Available From: Love Publishing Co., 1777 S. Bellaire St., Denver, CO 80222($24.95). Document Not Available from EDRS. Language: English Document Type: BOOK (010); NON-CLASSROOM MATERIAL (055) Geographic Source: U.S.; Virginia Journal Announcement: RIEMAR93 Target Audience: Students; Practitioners This book on effective curriculum for gifted students begins with anintroduction that discusses gifted education's use of the special educationmodel and implications of current educational reform. Part 1, "General Issuesin the Design and Development of Appropriate Curricula for the Gifted," thenexplores scope and sequence in curricula for the gifted, correspondence betweengifted learner characteristics and curricula, philosophy and goals for a giftedprogram, gifted learner outcomes, teaching-learning activities and resources,instructional strategies and management techniques, assessing and evaluatingcurricula, and implementing a curriculum for gifted learners. Part 2,"Specific Considerations in Planning Curricula for Special Populations ofGifted Learners," notes such special populations as disadvantaged gifted,underachievers, gifted girls, and gifted students with disabilities. This partthen examines methods of identifying and nurturing disadvantaged giftedstudents and learning-disabled gifted students, and offers an individualizedplan for a learning-disabled gifted female. Part 2 also contains four chapterswritten by other authors: "A Perspective on Curriculum Development for GiftedLearners" (Gail McEachron-Hirsch); "Curricula for Exceptional Children: ASpecial Education Perspective" (Virginia Laycock); "Gifted Children withSpecific Learning Disabilities" (Lori Korinek); and "Bridging Family andSchool: A School Psychologist Perspective" (Agnes Donovan). The appendixcontains sample curriculum units, as follows: tessellations unit (fifth grade),marvelous machines (fifth grade), the unexpected (eighth grade), exponentialand logarithmic functions (high school), a scientist's history of the world(fourth to sixth grades), and investigating weather folklore (fourth grade). (JDD) Descriptors: Ability Identification; *Curriculum Development; CurriculumEvaluation; Educational Change; Educational Objectives; Educational Philosophy;Elementary Secondary Education; Females; *Gifted; Gifted Disabled; GiftedDisadvantaged; *Intervention; Learning Disabilities; Models; StudentCharacteristics; *Student Educational Objectives; *Teaching Methods;Underachievement; Units of Study EJ497601 EC610312 On Developing Gifts and Talents: The Laureate Learning Cycle. Stewart, Emily D. Journal of Secondary Gifted Education, v6 n1 p7-18 Fall 1994 ISSN: 1047-1885 Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); PROJECT DESCRIPTION (141) Journal Announcement: CIJJUN95 After a discussion of the creativity often found in those outside themainstream, this article describes the five stages of the Laureate learningcycle model of talent development: romance, inquiry, involvement, expansion,and insight. The importance of individual ownership of the learning process isemphasized. (DB) Descriptors: Creative Development; *Creativity; Discovery Processes; ElementarySecondary Education; *Gifted; Intellectual Development; *LearningProcesses; *Models; Student Development; Student Motivation; *TalentDevelopment; Teaching Models Identifiers: *Laureate Learning Cycle ED354706 EC301891 Developing a Scope and Sequence in Science for High Ability Learners K-8. Developing Science Curriculum for High Ability Learners K-8. Draft. Sher, Beverly; And Others College of William and Mary, Williamsburg, Va. School of Education. 1992; 47p. Sponsoring Agency: Department of Education, Washington, DC. Available From: College of William and Mary, Center for Gifted Education,P.O. Box 8795, Williamsburg, VA 23187-8795 ($5). EDRS Price - MF01 Plus Postage. PC Not Available from EDRS. Language: English Document Type: TEACHING GUIDE (052) Geographic Source: U.S.; Virginia Journal Announcement: RIEJUL93 Target Audience: Teachers; Practitioners This monograph describes the development of a scope and sequence model forscience education specifically intended for use with gifted students in gradesK-8. Introductory material notes the rationale and purpose of the model aswell as its functions such as providing a scaffolding linking educationalconcepts with the technology of school curriculum. The three stages of the 21-month project are outlined. Instructional emphases of the curriculum are: (1)scientific habits of mind; (2) critical/productive thinking skills; and (3)metacognitive skills. Ways to further differentiate the curriculum aresuggested, such as varying the level of the outcome and varying thesophistication of the content. Desired outcomes are grouped into genericconcept outcomes and scientific process outcomes with associated assessmentindicators. Specific outcomes are listed by approximate grade level forconcepts; content applications (in biology, earth science, physical science);interdisciplinary applications (social systems, number systems, cities assystems, language, political systems, economic systems); the scientificprocess; problem-based learning; technology (computer, camera, and calculatorskills); scientific habits of mind (stressing curiosity, creativity,objectivity, openness to new ideas, and skepticism); critical/productivethinking skills; and metacognitive strategies (planning, monitoring, assessing).Guidelines for using the model for unit development are also offered. (DB) Descriptors: *Academically Gifted; Critical Thinking; *Curriculum Development;Elementary Education; *Elementary School Science; Elementary School Students;Enrichment Activities; Metacognition; Models; Productive Thinking; ProgramDevelopment; *Science Education; Scientific Methodology; *Student EducationalObjectives; Teaching Methods; Technology Identifiers: *Scope and Sequence ED355313 UD029081 Changing Schools for Urban Students: The School Development Program,Accelerated Schools, and Success for All. Trends and Issues No. 18. Ascher, Carol ERIC Clearinghouse on Urban Education, New York, N.Y. Feb 1993 46p.; Sponsoring Agency: Office of Educational Research and Improvement (ED),Washington, DC. Contract No: RI88062013 Available From: ERIC Clearinghouse on Urban Education, Teachers College, Box40, Columbia University, New York, NY 10027. EDRS Price - MF01/PC02 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: ERIC PRODUCT (071) Geographic Source: U.S.; New York Journal Announcement: RIEJUL93 This paper highlights three models for implementing local restructuring ofschools: James Comer's School Development Program; Robert Slavin's Success forAll; and Henry Levin's Accelerated Schools. These have been among the morepopular models for restructuring schools in poor, predominantly minorityneighborhoods with traditionally low-achieving students. Separate sectionsdescribe and analyze each of these programs individually. Further sectionsaddress important issues and themes common to all the programs. One of thesesections discusses evaluation and assessment issues of both programs andstudents. A further section looks at the three models from the viewpoint oftraditional assessments. A discussion of what causes improvements in learningnotes that: Comer's model is based on healing conflicts and creating an ethosthat fosters identification and bonding and a community of trust; Slavin's modelis more heavily cognitive; and Levin's format calls for active, intelligentparticipation of all members. Final sections review resources and costs for thevarious programs, and efforts at replication. An author bibliography isincluded. Descriptors: Academic Achievement; Disadvantaged Youth; EducationalAssessment; *Educational Change; Educational Finance; Educational Improvement;Elementary Secondary Education; Minority Group Children; Models; *SchoolRestructuring; *Urban Schools; Urban Youth Identifiers: Accelerated Schools; *Reform Efforts; School Development Program;Success for All Program ACCELERATED SCHOOLS PROJECT ED334313 UD028131 Accelerating the Progress of ALL Students. Rockefeller Institute SpecialReport, Number 31. Levin, Henry M. State Univ. of New York, Albany. Nelson A. Rockefeller Inst. of Government. 1991; 37p.; Paper presented at the Nelson A. Rockefeller Institute of Government Educational Policy Seminar (8th, Albany, NY, November 8, 1990). EDRS Price - MF01 Plus Postage. PC Not Available from EDRS. Language: English Document Type: CONFERENCE PROCEEDINGS (021); POSITION PAPER(120) Geographic Source: U.S.; New York Journal Announcement: RIENOV91 The Accelerated School Program is designed to improve the education ofdisadvantaged students by using "acceleration" techniques used with gifted andtalented students. The goal is to speed up the learning of at-risk students sothey will be able to perform at grade level by the end of elementary school. Central to the strategy is the placement of curriculum and instructionaldecisions in the hands of the instructional staff, requiring a completerestructuring of the traditional school organization. The emphasis on localresponsibility for educational outcomes requires an appropriate decision-structure built around the school's unity of purpose. The school must alsodevelop the capacity to identify challenges, to understand these challenges,and to implement and evaluate solutions. Fifty schools nationwide have begunthe six-year process needed to implement the accelerated school program. Costestimates average about $1,000 per pupil per year. Although many issuesregarding curriculum development, changing staff roles, and developing parentparticipation will require further exploration, the Accelerated Schools Modeloffers hope for closing the educational gap between America and othercountries, and between the disadvantaged and the advantaged. Comments by T. P.Fitzgerald, Frances Kemmerer, and Steven D. Gold and a response by thepresenter are included. (FMW) Descriptors: *Acceleration (Education); *Educational Finance; EducationalInnovation; Elementary Education; *High Risk Students; *School Based Management;*School Restructuring; Time on Task Identifiers: *Accelerated Schools Movement THE SCHOOLWIDE ENRICHMENT MODEL EJ481553 EC608471 Research Related to the Schoolwide Enrichment Triad Model. Renzulli, Joseph S.; Reis, Sally M. Gifted Child Quarterly, v38 n1 p7-20 Win 1994 ISSN: 0016-9862 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); REVIEW LITERATURE (070) Journal Announcement: CIJAUG94 Target Audience: Researchers; Practitioners This article reviews research on the Schoolwide Enrichment Triad Model, whichcombines the previously developed Enrichment Triad and Revolving DoorIdentification Models of gifted education. Research reviewed addresses: modeleffectiveness, creative productivity, personal and social development,underserved populations, self-efficacy, curricular framework, learning styles,and longitudinal studies. (DB) Descriptors: Ability Identification; Cognitive Style; Creativity; *CurriculumDevelopment; Elementary Secondary Education; *Enrichment Activities; *Gifted; *Instructional Effectiveness; Longitudinal Studies; Productivity; Self Efficacy;Student Development; *Teaching Models Identifiers: Enrichment Triad Model; Revolving Door Identification Model; *Schoolwide Enrichment Triad Model EJ496249 EC610124 New Directions for the Schoolwide Enrichment Model. Renzulli, Joseph S. Gifted Education International, v10 n1 p33-36 1994 ISSN: 0261-4294 Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); POSITION PAPER (120) Journal Announcement: CIJMAY95 This article considers how the Schoolwide Enrichment Model, originallydeveloped for gifted and talented students, can be applied as part of acomprehensive plan for total school improvement. Modifications to existingcurriculum content and skill development are suggested to help all studentsrealize their full potential. (Author/DB) Descriptors: Curriculum Development; Elementary Secondary Education; *Enrichment Activities; *Gifted; *Instructional Improvement; *Models; StudentDevelopment; Student Educational Objectives; *Talent Identifiers: *Schoolwide Enrichment Model MULTIPLE INTELLIGENCES (MI) THEORY EJ477518 EA529022 Teaching for Understanding--Within and across Disciplines. Gardner, Howard; Boix-Mansilla, Veronica Educational Leadership, v51 n5 p14-18 Feb 1994 ISSN: 0013-1784 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: EVALUATIVE REPORT (142); JOURNAL ARTICLE (080) Journal Announcement: CIJJUN94 The four-part Teaching for Understanding framework covers the full range ofintellectual disciplines. Different disciplines call upon different analyticstyles, problem-solving approaches, and findings, temperaments, andintelligences. This article explores stages of student development, rangingfrom intuitive, common-sense theories about the world to development ofdisciplinary thinking and movement toward interdisciplinary, transdisciplinary,and personal knowledge. (MLH) Descriptors: *Comprehension; Elementary Secondary Education; *IntellectualDisciplines; *Interdisciplinary Approach; *Knowledge Level; *Theory PracticeRelationship Identifiers: *Continuous Assessment; Multiple Intelligences; *Teaching forUnderstanding ED368451 PS022055 The Unschooled Mind: How Children Think & How Schools Should Teach. Gardner, Howard 1991; 303p. ISBN: 0-465-08896-1 Available From: Basic Books, 10 E. 53rd Street, New York, NY 10022 (paperback: ISBN-0-465-08896-1, $13; clothbound: ISBN-0-465-08895-3). Document Not Available from EDRS. Language: English Document Type: POSITION PAPER (120); BOOK (010) Geographic Source: U.S.; New York Journal Announcement: RIEAUG94 Examining the question, "Why are children not mastering what they ought to belearning in school?," this book merges cognitive science with educationalagenda to show how incompatible children's minds and natural patterns oflearning are to current educational materials, practices, and institutions,making a case for restructuring the schools. The chapters in the book aredivided into three parts. The first part examines the characteristics of the"natural" learner. The second part explores the characteristics of educationalinstitutions, and the third part presents a reconceptualization of educationfor the purpose of understanding. The chapters are: (1) "Conceptualizing theDevelopment of the Mind"; (2) "Initial Learnings: Constraints andPossibilities"; (3) "Knowing the World through Symbols"; (4) "The Worlds of thePreschooler: The Emergence of Intuitive Understandings"; (5) "The Values andTraditions of Education"; (6) "The Institution Called School"; (7) TheDifficulties Posed by School: Misconceptions in the Sciences"; (8) MoreDifficulties Posed by School: Stereotypes in the Social Sciences and theHumanities"; (9) "The Search for Solutions: Dead Ends and Promising Means";(10) "Education for Understanding during the Early Years"; (11) "Education forUnderstanding during the Adolescent Years"; and (12) "Toward National andGlobal Understandings." (HTH) Descriptors: Academic Achievement; Cognitive Development; *Cognitive Style;*Educational Change; *Educational Needs; Educational Objectives; EducationalPractices; Educational Quality; *Elementary Secondary Education; HumanitiesInstruction; Instructional Materials; Learning Processes; *Learning Theories;*School Restructuring; Science Instruction; Social Sciences Identifiers: Reform Strategies EJ405189 EA524328 A School for All Intelligences. Blythe, Tina; Gardner, Howard Educational Leadership, v47 n7 p33-37 Apr 1990 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); PROJECT DESCRIPTION (141); EVALUATIVE REPORT (142) Journal Announcement: CIJAUG90 The Harvard Project Zero research group has been examining the curriculumcontent issue through the lens of the multiple intelligences (MI) theory, whichemphasizes humans' highly varied capacities. This article describes the MItheory, some related research projects, and the theory's implications forelementary and secondary education. Includes 11 references. (MLH) Descriptors: *Apprenticeships; *Change Strategies; *Community Relations;Elementary Secondary Education; *Intelligence; *Nontraditional Education Identifiers: Harvard Project Zero; *Indiana (Indianapolis); *MultipleIntelligences NATIONAL DIFFUSION NETWORK MODELS ED381535 SP035928 EPTW: Educational Programs That Work. The Catalogue of the National DiffusionNetwork (NDN). 21st Edition. Lang, Gay, Ed. National Dissemination Association, Tucson, AZ.; Office of EducationalResearch and Improvement (ED), Washington, DC. National Diffusion Network.; Sopris West, Inc., Longmont, CO. 1995 338p. ISBN: 1-57035-038-8 Available From: Sopris West, 1140 Boston Ave., Longmont, CO 80501 ($14.95,plus $3.50 handling and shipping for first copy, $1.50 each additional copy). EDRS Price - MF01 Plus Postage. PC Not Available from EDRS. Language: English Document Type: DIRECTORY (132) Geographic Source: U.S.; Colorado Journal Announcement: RIEAUG95 Target Audience: Teachers; Administrators; Practitioners This volume is a catalogue of exemplary educational programs and includescurrent descriptions of most programs described in previous editions as well asnew programs approved for national dissemination since publication of the lastedition in 1994. In particular the volume describes programs approved by theJoint Dissemination Review Panel and the Program Effectiveness Panel afterexamination of objective evidence of effectiveness submitted by the developerof the program. Active programs are divided into 15 sections and then arrangedalphabetically by program title. The sections are: Preservice/InserviceTraining; Organizational Reform; Dropout Prevention/Alternative Programs;Reading/Writing; Humanities; Mathematics; Science/Technology; Social Sciences;Health/Physical Education; Multidisciplinary/Cognitive Skills; EarlyChildhood/Parent Involvement; Special Education; Gifted/Talented; SpecialPopulations: Adult/Higher/Migrant Education; Career/Vocational Education. Eachdescription covers audience, description, evidence of effectiveness,requirements, costs, services, and the name, address and telephone number of acontact person. Educational Resources Information Center (ERIC) descriptorsare assigned to all active programs for help in locating programs that focus ona given area or content. Includes an index of programs by state, an index ofERIC descriptors, an alphabetical index of programs by title, and a list ofprograms new to this edition. (JB) Descriptors: Adult Education; Career Education; *Demonstration Programs;Dropout Prevention; Early Childhood Education; Elementary Secondary Education;Gifted; Health Education; Higher Education; Humanities; Inservice TeacherEducation; Interdisciplinary Approach; Mathematics Education; Migrant Education;Parent Participation; Physical Education; Preservice Teacher Education;*Program Descriptions; *Program Effectiveness; Reading Programs; ScienceEducation; Social Sciences; Special Education; Technology Education; ThinkingSkills; Vocational Education; Writing (Composition) Identifiers: *National Diffusion Network Programs PURDUE SECONDARY MODEL EJ486444 EC609040 Middle School Seminars: The Purdue Three-Stage Model Provides ExcitingOpportunities for Pull-Out Programs. Nidiffer, Linda G.; Moon, Sidney M. Gifted Child Today Magazine, v17 n2 p24-27,39,40 Mar-Apr 1994 ISSN: 0892-9580 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); PROJECT DESCRIPTION (141) Journal Announcement: CIJNOV94 The Purdue Three-Stage Model was applied in a seminar program forintellectually talented middle school students, with the goals of achievingmaximum competence; stimulating curiosity and interest; and developing creativeand critical thinking, problem-solving ability, independence, and self-direction. The article offers information on student identification, programformat, curriculum, courses, program evaluation, and student evaluation. (JDD) Descriptors: *Academically Gifted; Creative Thinking; Critical Thinking;*Curriculum; *Enrichment Activities; Intermediate Grades; Junior High Schools;Middle Schools; Problem Solving; *Program Development; Seminars; SpecialEducation; Stimulation; *Teaching Models Identifiers: *Purdue Three Stage Model EJ481557 EC608475 Long-Term Effects of an Enrichment Program Based on the Purdue Three-StageModel. Moon, Sidney M.; And Others Gifted Child Quarterly, v38 n1 p38-48 Win 1994 ISSN: 0016-9862 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); EVALUATIVE REPORT (142); RESEARCH REPORT (143) Journal Announcement: CIJAUG94 This retrospective study evaluated an elementary pull-out program based onthe Purdue Three-Stage Model. Perceptions of students and families when thestudents were seniors in high school indicated the program was seen as having along-term positive impact on the cognitive, affective, and social developmentof most participating students. (Author/DB) Descriptors: Elementary Education; Followup Studies; *Gifted; High Schools;Individual Development; Models; *Participant Satisfaction; *ProgramEffectiveness; Program Evaluation; *Resource Room Programs; *Student Attitudes;Student Development Identifiers: *Purdue Three Stage Model EJ465450 EC606221 Secondary Applications of the Purdue Three Stage Model. Moon, Sidney M.; And Others Gifted Child Today (GCT), v16 n3 p2-9 May-Jun 1993 ISSN: 0892-9580 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); NON-CLASSROOM MATERIAL(055) Journal Announcement: CIJNOV93 Target Audience: Practitioners This article suggests ways that the Purdue Three-Stage Model, which nurturescognitive skills of highly able students, can be applied at the secondary level.The article examines the structure of secondary schools; characteristics ofgifted adolescents; program design; and three specific applications in HonorsEnglish, middle school seminars, and science research. (JDD) Descriptors: *Cognitive Development; *Curriculum Development; EnglishInstruction; *Enrichment Activities; *Gifted; Honors Curriculum; Middle Schools;Program Development; Scientific Research; Secondary Education; Seminars;Student Characteristics; Student Research; Teaching Methods; *Teaching Models;*Thinking Skills Identifiers: *Purdue Three Stage Model RESOURCE CENTERS EJ503147 EC611229 Resource Centers for Gifted Education. Clark, Linda R.; And Others Gifted Child Today Magazine, v18 n3 p32-36,38-39 May-Jun 1995 ISSN: 1076-2175 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); PROJECT DESCRIPTION (141) Journal Announcement: CIJSEP95 Shared Information Services is a state-operated network of four resourcecenters for gifted education in Indiana. The network provides support in theareas of program development, teacher education, classroom teaching resources,and program evaluation. A variety of library and technical assistance servicesis provided to teachers and others by each center. (DB) Descriptors: Demonstration Programs; Educational Development; ElementarySecondary Education; *Gifted; Information Centers; *Information Networks;Models; *Resource Centers; *Shared Resources and Services; *State Programs Identifiers: *Indiana EJ429985 EC601048 Meta-Analyses and Review of Research on Pull-Out Programs in GiftedEducation. Vaughn, Vicki L.; And Others Gifted Child Quarterly, v35 n2 p92-98 Spr 1991 ISSN: 0016-9862 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); REVIEW LITERATURE (070); RESEARCH REPORT (143) Journal Announcement: CIJDEC91 A meta-analysis was conducted on nine experimental studies dealing with pull-out programs for gifted students in grades one through nine. Results indicatethat pull-out programs in gifted education have significant positive effects onachievement, critical thinking, and creativity, but not on student self-concept.(Author/JDD) Descriptors: *Academic Achievement; Creativity; *Critical Thinking;Elementary Secondary Education; *Gifted; Meta Analysis; *Program Effectiveness;Resource Room Programs; Self Concept Identifiers: *Pullout Programs STRUCTURE OF THE INTELLECT MODEL ED297542 EC210393 Applying the S.O.I. Model to Curriculum Development. Brown, Marilyn A. Feb 1988 15p.; Paper presented at the Annual Conference of the California Associationfor the Gifted (26th, Santa Clara, CA, February 5-7, 1988). EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: EVALUATIVE REPORT (142); CONFERENCE PAPER (150) Geographic Source: U.S.; California Journal Announcement: RIEJAN89 The article discusses the use of the Structure of Intellect (SOI) model as abasis for developing thinking abilities in a variety of curriculum areas: (1)the integration of subject matter areas and SOI operations; (2) thematiclessons that sequence specific cells of the SOI model; (3) directed teachinglessons to develop student awareness of their own thinking processes; (4)strategies that foster student attitudes conducive to the use of divergentthinking; and (5) application of SOI-based thinking abilities to problemsolving. Sample curriculum activities are included as illustrations. (Author/JW) Descriptors: Cognitive Development; *Cognitive Processes; Critical Thinking;*Curriculum Development; Divergent Thinking; Elementary Secondary Education;*Gifted; Learning Processes; Models; Problem Solving; *Teaching Methods Identifiers: *Structure of Intellect TALENTS UNLIMITED EJ370344 EC202345 Thinking Skills Instruction for All Classrooms. Schlichter, Carol L. Gifted Child Today (GCT), v11 n2 p24-28 Mar-Apr 1988 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: TEACHING GUIDE (052); JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); PROJECTDESCRIPTION (141) Journal Announcement: CIJSEP88 This updated 1987 article argues that teaching of thinking skills, common ingifted education, has wider value in regular school instructional programs. Itdescribes programs which have implemented Talents Unlimited, a classroom-level,research-based model for teaching creative- and critical-thinking skills whichencompasses productive thinking, decision making, planning, forecasting, andcommunication. (VW) Descriptors: *Cognitive Processes; Communication Skills; *Creative Thinking;*Critical Thinking; *Curriculum Enrichment; Decision Making; ElementarySecondary Education; *Gifted; Planning; Teaching Models Identifiers: *Talents Unlimited Program TRIARCHIC MODEL EJ506647 EC611516 The Triarchic Model Applied to Identifying, Teaching, and Assessing Gifted Children. Sternberg, Robert J.; Clinkenbeard, Pamela R. Roeper Review, v17 n4 p255-60 May-Jun 1995 ISSN: 0278-3193 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); NON-CLASSROOM MATERIAL (055); PROJECT DESCRIPTION (141) Journal Announcement: CIJNOV95 Target Audience: Practitioners A triarchic model for identifying, teaching, and assessing children who aregifted is presented. The model involves three abilities: memory-analytic,creative-synthetic, and practical-contextual. Results are presented of theYale Summer Psychology pilot project that is based on this model. Expandingthe model to other fields beyond psychology is also addressed. (SW) Descriptors: *Ability Identification; Cognitive Processes; EducationalStrategies; Elementary Secondary Education; *Gifted; *Models; Psychology;*Student Evaluation; Talent Identification; *Teaching Methods; Theories; ThinkingSkills WALDORF EDUCATION EJ470807 EC607051 Waldorf Education as a Program for Gifted Students. Hutchingson, Robert; Hutchingson, June Journal for the Education of the Gifted, v16 n4 p400-19 Sum 1993 ISSN: 0162-3532 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); RESEARCH REPORT (143); POSITIONPAPER (120) Journal Announcement: CIJFEB94 This article addresses principles of Waldorf education and theirapplicability to the education of gifted students. The Waldorf curriculumemphasizes creativity in partnership with academics. Efficacy evidence for theWaldorf approach from Germany is offered as are results from a pilot study inToronto in which Waldorf principles were used with gifted students. (DB) Descriptors: Creative Development; Creativity; Demonstration Programs;*Educational Methods; *Educational Philosophy; Elementary Secondary Education;*Gifted; Instructional Effectiveness Identifiers: Ontario (Toronto); *Waldorf Educational Theory Internet Resources Internet Listservs Top of Page Back to ERIC Menu Back to CEC Home Page Copyright ©1996 ERIC Clearinghouse on Disabilities and Gifted Education URL: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm WT02-B20-50IA001-000011-B023-157http://www.cec.sped.org:80/faq/gt-prog.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101074431 text/html 35151HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 07:44:38 GMTLast-modified: Tuesday, 10-Sep-96 14:02:00 GMTContent-length: 34958Content-type: text/html  GT-Prog-FAQ GT-Prog-FAQ (last updated July 21, 1996) THE ERIC CLEARINGHOUSE ON DISABILITIES AND GIFTEDEDUCATION (ERIC EC) The Council for Exceptional Children 1920Association Drive Reston, VA 20191 Toll Free: 1-800-328-0272 TTY: 703-264-9449 E-mail: ericec@cec.sped.org Internet: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm My school system is planning to develop a gifted program. What resourcesare available? The first step in planning a program for gifted students is tocontact your State Department of Education andspeak with the person responsible for gifted education. Find out if yourstate has written material on state policies or regulations that affecteducation for students who are gifted. In program planning, there are many issues to be considered. One primary issue is curriculum--deciding what students should know, matched with the characteristics and ability of the students. Most instructional models are insufficient to address this issue because they must be massaged into lock-step time constraints. Therefore, many schools use a combination of models that provide structure, and then look closely at their own curriculum. Selected curriculum resourcesare enclosed in this document. The following documents are useful for program planning: GT-Group.htm URL: http://www.cec.sped.org/faq/gt-group.htm National Research Center on Gifted and Talented at the University ofConnecticut URL: http://www.ucc.uconn.edu/~wwwgt/nrcgt.html National Research Center on Gifted and Talented at the University ofVirginia URL: http://curry.edschool.virginia.edu/curry/dept/edes/gifteded/NRC Multiple Intelligences (MI) Theory URL: http://k12.cnidr.org:90/edref.mi.intro.html This file includes information about planning a gifted program. At the end of the filesare links to Internet resources and Internet listservs (discussion groups) where you canobtain more specific information on the topic. There is an ERIC digest that providesfurther information on this topic. You can read the full text of ERIC EC digests underour listing at the U.S.Department of Education, Office of Educational Research and Improvement. Enclosed are several citations from the ERIC database. These records are a sample of the kind of information you can find in the ERIC database. For morecitations on your topic of interest, you may want to search the ERIC database yourself onthe Internet. References with ED (ERIC Document) and EJ (ERIC Journal) identifiers are cited in the ERIC database; for example, ED333123 or EJ333999. ERIC documents are available in microfiche collections at more than 825 locations worldwide (check your local college or public library). They can also be ordered for a fee through the ERIC Document Reproduction Service (EDRS) at 1-800-443-ERIC. References with an EJ (ERIC Journal) number are available for a fee from the originating journal (check with your local college or public library), through interlibrary loan services, or from the article reproduction clearinghouses, such as UMI: 1-800-248-0360; or ISI: 1-800-523-1850. ERIC descriptors (search terms) used: Gifted and Program Development or CurriculumDesign or Curriculum Development or Educational Change CURRICULUM RESOURCES: Two federally-funded K-8 curriculum projects provideresources in science and language arts. ED380948 EC303822 A Curriculum Framework in Language Arts for High Ability Learners K-8. Van Tassel-Baska, Joyce; And Others College of William and Mary, Williamsburg, Va. School of Education.; Washington-Warren-Hamilton-Essex Counties Board of Cooperative Educational Services, Hudson Falls, NY. Southern Adirondack Educational Center. 1994 69p. Sponsoring Agency: Department of Education, Washington, DC. Available From: College of William & Mary, School of Education, Center for Gifted Education, 232 Jamestown Rd., Williamsburg, VA 23185 ($10 plus 10% shipping and handling). EDRS Price - MF01/PC03 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: NON-CLASSROOM MATERIAL (055); TEST, QUESTIONNAIRE(160); BIBLIOGRAPHY (131) Geographic Source: U.S.; Virginia Journal Announcement: RIEAUG95 Target Audience: Practitioners This curriculum framework provides a model for developing appropriate and meaningful language arts curricula for high ability learners in kindergarten through grade 8. It is intended as a guide to making decisions about traditional curricular emphases within the language arts areas of reading, writing, speaking, and listening, as well as nontraditional areas like thinking, multiculturalism, and technology. The curriculum development guide discusses: issues in developing learner outcomes; current language arts learning objectives specified by state guides; learner outcomes in the concept, content, and process dimensions; and interdisciplinary applications through project work. Four goals are presented, each accompanied by learner outcomes and archetypal activities for high ability students in language arts. The goals include: to develop analytical and interpretative skills in literature, to develop persuasive writing skills, to develop linguistic competency, and to develop listening/oral communication skills. Several performance assessment protocols for language arts are provided. An annotated list of 37 exemplary resources for teaching language arts to high ability learners concludes the guide. (JDD) Descriptors: *Curriculum Design; Elementary Education; Evaluation Methods; *Gifted; *Language Arts; Listening Skills; Multicultural Education; Reading Instruction; Speech Communication; Speech Skills; State Standards; *Student Educational Objectives; *Student Evaluation; *Teaching Models; Technological Advancement; Thinking Skills; Writing Instruction Identifiers: *Performance Based Evaluation EJ474444 EC607528 Scientific Experimentation. Van Tassel-Baska, Joyce; And Others Gifted Child Today (GCT), v16 n5 p42-46 Sep-Oct 1993 ISSN: 0892-9580 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); PROJECT DESCRIPTION (141) Journal Announcement: CIJAPR94 A project to develop science curricula for high-ability learners in grades K-8 reviewed curriculum materials and developed criteria for assessing curriculum materials, science concept papers, a scope and sequence model, and exemplary curriculum units. The curriculum centered on the role of students as investigators. Implications of the project are discussed. (JDD) Descriptors: *Curriculum Development; Curriculum Evaluation; *Elementary School Science; Elementary Secondary Education; Experiential Learning; *Gifted; Investigations; Models; *Science Curriculum ED354709 EC301894 A Conceptual Overview of Science Education for High Ability Learners. Developing Science Curriculum for High Ability Learners K-8. VanTassel-Baska, Joyce; And Others College of William and Mary, Williamsburg, Va. School of Education. 1992 30p. Sponsoring Agency: Department of Education, Washington, DC. Available From: College of William and Mary, Center for Gifted Education, P.O. Box 8795, Williamsburg, VA 23187-8795 ($4). EDRS Price - MF01 Plus Postage. PC Not Available from EDRS. Language: English Document Type: POSITION PAPER (120); REVIEW LITERATURE (070) Geographic Source: U.S.; Virginia Journal Announcement: RIEJUL93 This concept paper outlines the rationale for a project on the development of science curriculum for K-8 high ability learners. The rationale was developed through a synthesis of major recommendations from national science reform reports and from a review of the literature on effective science curriculum for high ability learners. The paper begins with a summary of the background research, with emphasis on six key curriculum components: (1) developing an understanding of scientific concepts; (2) developing scientific inquiry skills; (3) developing a knowledge base in science areas; (4) developing interdisciplinary connections; (5) developing problem-based learning approaches; and (6) developing scientific habits of mind. Then major project objectives are outlined. These include: review of promising science curriculum materials for high ability learners; development of papers on key science concepts; development of a curriculum scope and sequence model; conducting a summer institute on teaching science to gifted learners; development of a set of exemplary science curriculum units; field testing of newly developed curriculum; and generation of scholarly publications. A glossary defines key terms and an appendix provides a synthesis of science report recommendations. (Contains 59 references.) (DB) Descriptors: *Academically Gifted; *Curriculum Development; Curriculum Evaluation; Demonstration Programs; Educational Change; Elementary Education; *Elementary School Science; Elementary School Students; Inquiry; Interdisciplinary Approach; *Science Curriculum; Scientific Attitudes; *Scientific Concepts; *Student Educational Objectives; Units of Study SELECTED ERIC CITATIONS ON PROGRAM PLANNING ED384976 EA026869 Case Studies of Promising Change Schools. VanTassel-Baska, Joyce; And Others Apr 1995 23p.; Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the American Educational Research Association (San Francisco, CA, April 18-22, 1995). EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: CONFERENCE PAPER (150); RESEARCH REPORT (143) Geographic Source: U.S.; Virginia Journal Announcement: RIEDEC95 This paper contains findings of a study that investigated the extent to which three schools nationally recognized for their change efforts could provide evidence of systemic change. The conceptual framework was developed from the following sources: (1) the effective-schools movement; (2) structural reform; (3) the middle-school movement; (4) curriculum, instruction, and assessment reform efforts; and (5) the literature on special-needs populations. Data were obtained from interviews with the principals, school district personnel, teachers, students, and parents; classroom observation; and document analysis. Findings indicate that structural change efforts received the most focus in the three schools. Despite engagement with the authentic-assessment movement, there was little change in curriculum and assessment practices. Finally, the schools clearly communicated their visions. A conclusion is that changing a school's philosophy and/or mission is only one step toward systemic change. Until change moves from the school-level structural arena to the classroom-level arena of curriculum and instruction, reform will continue to be piecemeal rather than systemic. One figure and a copy of the interview protocol are included. (LMI) Descriptors: Case Studies; Curriculum Development; *Educational Change; Effective Schools Research; Elementary Secondary Education; Instructional Improvement; Models; *School Effectiveness; *School Restructuring ED375593 EC303433 Transforming Policy To Enhance Educational Services for the Gifted. Passow, A. Harry; Rudnitski, Rose A. 4 Apr 1994 20p.; Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the American Educational Research Association (New Orleans, LA, April 4-8 1994). EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: POSITION PAPER (120); CONFERENCE PAPER (150) Geographic Source: U.S.; New York Journal Announcement: RIEMAR95 This paper looks at broad trends in education of the gifted and identifies elements that states should review and reconsider in terms of the current climate for educational reform. The 1972 Marland report is contrasted with the 1993 report of the U.S. Department of Education titled "National Excellence: A Case for Developing America's Talent;" Marland's exclusive focus on the education of the gifted and talented versus the later report's emphasis on excellence for all students is noted. This paper then identifies the following specific areas for state policy review, based on a review of documents from 49 states: (1) philosophy and rationale; (2) mandated services; (3) definitions of the gifted; (4) identification procedures; (5) programs for the gifted; and (6) differentiated curriculum and instruction. States are urged to accept the challenge offered by the "National Excellence" Report, reevaluate their policies, and consider changes recommended in this paper. (DB) Descriptors: Ability Identification; Curriculum; Definitions; Delivery Systems; *Educational Change; Educational Needs; Educational Philosophy; *Educational Policy; Elementary Secondary Education; *Gifted; Legal Responsibility; State Legislation; *State Programs; *Talent ED329047 EC300039 What Happens to Students in Gifted Programs? The Learning Outcomes Study at the University of Virginia. Cornell, Dewey G.; And Others Nov 1990 14p.; Produced under the auspices of the National Research Center on the Gifted and Talented. Paper presented at the Annual Convention of the National Association for Gifted Children (40th, Little Rock, AR). EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: PROJECT DESCRIPTION (141); RESEARCH REPORT (143) Geographic Source: U.S.; Virginia Journal Announcement: RIEJUL91 This paper introduces the Learning Outcomes Study at the University of Virginia, an ongoing 2-year investigation of over 1,000 elementary school children who entered one of 16 different gifted programs (or no program) in the fall of 1990. The study will compare effects of four examples each of four types of program delivery arrangements: (1) within-classroom (or mainstream type); (2) pull-out programs; (3) separate classes or ability tracking; (4) and special schools. Special comparisons will be made of program effects on minority and disadvantaged students. Information will also be collected on each program's curriculum, teaching methods and goals, as well as the background and training of program teachers, and student identification criteria. Students will be assessed four times: at the time of entry into a formal gifted program, at the end of their first year in the program, and at the beginning and end of their second year. Multiple outcome measures will assess student achievement, attitudes, and adjustment. Additional questions possibly examined include the relationship between self-concept and intrinsic motivation; whether these two concepts have a differential impact on achievement; and the behavioral adjustment of high achieving students. (18references) (DB) Descriptors: Academic Achievement; *Academically Gifted; *Delivery Systems; Disadvantaged Youth; Elementary Education; Minority Groups; *Outcomes of Education; *Program Effectiveness; Self Concept; Student Adjustment; *Student Attitudes; Student Educational Objectives; Student Motivation EJ486480 EC609076 A Retrospective View: The Javits Program. Gallagher, James J. Gifted Child Quarterly, v38 n2 p95-96 1994 Special Issue: Javits Grant Projects. ISSN: 0016-9862 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); POSITION PAPER (120) Journal Announcement: CIJNOV94 This commentary on the demonstration programs of the Jacob K. Javits Gifted and Talented Students Education Program discusses their role in inducing educational change, their usefulness in illustrating new ideas, their broadening of the definition of the gifted student, their ability to change participating teachers' perspective, and their benefits to students beyond those identified as gifted. (JDD) Descriptors: Ability Identification; Change Agents; *Demonstration Programs; Educational Change; Elementary Secondary Education; *Federal Programs; *Gifted; Intervention; *Program Development; *Program Effectiveness Identifiers: *Jacob K Javits Gifted Talented Stdnt Educ Act 1988 ED379901 EC303776 Talented Children and Adults: Their Development and Education. Piirto, Jane 1994; 648p. ISBN: 0-02-395775-1 Available From: Merrill/Prentice-Hall, 445 Hutchison Ave., Columbus, OH 43235 ($50). Document Not Available from EDRS. Language: English Document Type: BOOK (010); INSTRUCTIONAL MATERIAL (051) Geographic Source: U.S.; Ohio Journal Announcement: RIEJUL95 Target Audience: Students This textbook focuses on the development and education of talented children and adults. Part 1 considers who the gifted and talented are, in terms of personality aspects, intellectual competence, and specific talent in a domain. It presents a pyramidal framework of talent based on looking at adult talent and its precursors in childhood behavior. Chapters in Part 1 are: "Who Are the Talented? Giftedness, Talent, Genius, and Intelligence"; "Getting Started: Developing a Program for Talented Youth"; "Identifying the Academically Talented: Superior Cognitive Talent and Specific Academic Talent"; "Creativity and Talent"; and "Identifying Creativity and Talent Behaviors." Part 2 considers the paths of talent development, from birth to adult in three chapters. Part 3 considers what one does with talented children, in curriculum and counseling. Part 3 chapters are: "Precepts for Curriculum for the Academically Talented," "Curriculum Practices: In and Out of the Classroom," "Guidance and Counseling Needs of the Talented," and "At-Risk Talented Children." The text emphasizes guidance aspects of dealing with talented children more than therapeutic approaches. Each chapter begins with focusing questions. Several case examples are offered of talented individuals, programs serving the gifted, and techniques for teaching gifted and talented individuals.Appendices contain a gifted/talented data gathering questionnaire and the text of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act. (Contains approximately 850 references.) (JDD) Descriptors: Ability Identification; Academically Gifted; Adult Development; Adult Education; At Risk Persons; Counseling; Creativity; Curriculum Development; *Educational Methods; Elementary Secondary Education; *Gifted; Guidance; Individual Characteristics; Individual Development; Intelligence; Intervention; Program Development; Student Characteristics; *Student Development; *Talent; *Talent Development; *Talent Identification ED352782 EC301712 Critical Issues in Gifted Education: Programs for the Gifted in Regular Classrooms. Volume III. Maker, C. June, Ed. 1993; 460p. ISBN: 0-89079-549-5 Available From: PRO-ED, 8700 Shoal Creek Blvd., Austin, TX 78758-6897($37). Document Not Available from EDRS. Language: English Document Type: BOOK (010); COLLECTION (020) Geographic Source: U.S.; Arizona Journal Announcement: RIEMAY93 This book presents 29 papers addressing critical issues in the education of the gifted. Papers have the following titles and authors: "Education of the Gifted and the Excellence-Equity Debate: Lessons from History" (Thomas R. McDaniel); "Comments on McDaniel's 'Education of the Gifted and the Excellence-Equity Debate'" (James J. Gallagher); "Teacher Assistance Teams: Implications for the Gifted" (James C. Chalfant and Margaret Van Dusen Pysh); "Critique of the Teacher Assistance Teams Chapter by Chalfant and Van Dusen Pysh" (Barbara W. Moller); "A Program Option for Advanced Learners" (Sharon K. Hooker); "A Reaction to Local Program Development as a Disjointed Enterprise" (Joyce VanTassel-Baska); "The Use of the Demonstration Teaching Model in Education of the Gifted" (Marilyn A. Rice) "Demonstration Teaching Another View" (Janice R. Szabos); "Becoming Content with Content" (Roger Shanley); "Becoming Content with Content: A Critical Analysis" (Gloria Grotjan); "Process Differentiation for Gifted Learners in the Regular Classroom: Teaching to Everyone's Needs" (Hilda Rosselli); "A Critique of Rosselli's 'Process Differentiation': Beyond Models" (Diane Orzechowski-Harland); "Differentiating Products for the Gifted and Talented: The Encouragement of Independent Learning" (Sally M. Reis and Gina D. Schack); "Critique of Reis and Schack's 'Differentiating Products for the Gifted and Talented'" (Sandy Lethem); "Differentiating the Learning Environment for Gifted Students" (Shirley W. Schiever); "Creating and Maintaining a Responsive Environment for Gifted Students" (Dorothy A. Sisk); "Classroom Management: An Expanded View" (Janet Conroy); "Critique of Conroy's 'Classroom Management: An Expanded View'" (Mary Vuke); "Individualized Teaching of the Gifted in Regular Classrooms" (Hazel J. Feldhusen); "Critique of Feldhusen's 'Individualized Teaching of the Gifted in Regular Classrooms'" (Margie K. Kitano); "A Learning Center Approach to Individualized Instruction for Gifted Students" (Roseanne Lopez and Joy MacKenzie); "A Step-by-Step Plan for Developing Learning Centers" (Helen D. Follis); "Mentoring: Expanding Learning for Gifted Students" (Willima R. Nash et al.); "Response to 'Mentoring: Extending Learning for Gifted Students'" (Jody Batten and Jan Rogers); "High School Internship Program" (Jeannette A. Bodnar); "An Expanded View of Internships" (JoAnn B. Seghini); "Independent Study: Panacea or Palliative" (Frances D. Burns); "Reaction to 'Independent Study'" (Reva C. Friedman and Tom J. Gallagher); and "Gifted Students in the Regular Classroom: What Practices Are Defensible and Feasible" (C. June Maker). Most papers include references. (DB) Descriptors: *Academically Gifted; Classroom Techniques; *Curriculum Development; *Delivery Systems; Demonstrations (Educational); Educational Environment; Educational History; Educational Objectives; Educational Philosophy; Educational Trends; Elementary Secondary Education; Equal Education;Experiential Learning; Independent Study; Individualized Instruction; Internship Programs; Mentors; Models; Program Development; *Talent Identifiers: *Differentiated Curriculum (Gifted) ED352774 EC301704 Challenging Gifted Students in the Regular Classroom. ERIC Digest #E513. Parke, Beverly N. Council for Exceptional Children, Reston, Va.; ERIC Clearinghouse on Handicapped and Gifted Children, Reston, Va. Dec 1992 3p.; Sponsoring Agency: Office of Educational Research and Improvement (ED), Washington, DC. Contract No: RI88062007 Report No: EDO-EC-92-3 Available From: Council for Exceptional Children, 1920 Association Dr., Reston, VA 22091-1589 ($1, minimum order $5 prepaid). EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: ERIC PRODUCT (071); ERIC DIGESTS (SELECTED) (073) Geographic Source: U.S.; Virginia Journal Announcement: RIEMAY93 Target Audience: Practitioners This digest, in question and answer format, summarizes what is known about effective ways to provide fully educational services for gifted students in the regular classroom. The following questions are addressed: What are the steps to full service? (educators need to plan environments in which all students can fully develop their abilities and interests); What are the characteristics of students who are gifted and talented? (such students differ in the pace of learning, depth of understanding, and interests); What is the role of the regular classroom teacher? (teachers should be facilitators with skills in both subject areas and learning management); What program options are needed to meet the needs of these students? (a multiple programming approach is needed); What instructional provisions must be made? (student characteristics should guide development of instructional accommodations). A 14-item list of references and suggestions for further reading are included. (DB) Descriptors: *Academically Gifted; *Educational Needs; *Educational Practices;Elementary Secondary Education; Individualized Programs; Instructional Development; *Mainstreaming; Program Development; *Student Characteristics; Student Development; *Talent; Teacher Role; Teaching Methods Identifiers: ERIC Digests ED344413 EC301142 Classroom Strategies for Meeting Multiple Needs: A Five-Step Model. Delisle, Deborah S.; Delisle, James R. Mar 1992 8p.; In: Challenges in Gifted Education: Developing Potential and Investing in Knowledge for the 21st Century; see EC 301 131. EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: NON-CLASSROOM MATERIAL (055) Geographic Source: U.S.; Ohio Journal Announcement: RIESEP92 Target Audience: Practitioners; Teachers This paper proposes a five-step model intended to meet the needs of gifted students in the context of the mixed ability reality that most teachers in regular classrooms encounter. The model consists of five steps each of which has several components. The steps and components are: (1) acceptance (initiatives must start out small and sound to be successful, must focus on "cans" rather than "can'ts", and must recognize various learning patterns, styles, and rates); (2) classroom climate (should be child centered, active, open and respectful); (3) knowledge of content objectives (including the course of study, the role of textbooks, and a wide variety of resources and materials); (4) learning activities (characterized by flexible pacing, both acceleration and enrichment options, and use of interdisciplinary theme units); and (5) evaluation (use of alternative methods by a variety of individuals to evaluate both observable and nonobservable domains). (DB) Descriptors: Acceleration (Education); Course Content; Curriculum Development;Educational Environment; Educational Methods; Elementary Secondary Education; Enrichment Activities; *Gifted; Individual Differences; Instructional Materials; Interdisciplinary Approach; Learning Activities; *Mainstreaming; *Models; Program Development; Program Implementation; Regular and Special Education Relationship; Student Development; Student Evaluation; Units of Study EJ427057 EC600512 Gifted Education in the Balance: Building Relationships with General Education. VanTassel-Baska, Joyce Gifted Child Quarterly, v35 n1 p20-25 Win 1991 Special Issue: Gifted Education and the School Reform Movement. ISSN: 0016-9862 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); POSITION PAPER (120); NON-CLASSROOM MATERIAL (055) Journal Announcement: CIJOCT91 Target Audience: Practitioners Gifted education depends on two linkages in its program development efforts: the special education linkage and the general education linkage. A closer working relationship with general education is recommended, along with careful consideration of the curriculum reform movement, basic research on teaching and learning, and effective schools research. (Author/JDD) Descriptors: *Curriculum Development; Educational Cooperation; Elementary Secondary Education; *Gifted; *Learning Processes; Program Development; *Regular and Special Education Relationship; School Effectiveness; Special Education; Special Programs; Teaching Methods; Teamwork ED334806 EC300606 Developing Programs for Students of High Ability. ERIC Digest #E502. Berger, Sandra L. Council for Exceptional Children, Reston, Va.; ERIC Clearinghouse on Handicapped and Gifted Children, Reston, Va. Aug 1991 3p.; Sponsoring Agency: Office of Educational Research and Improvement (ED), Washington, DC. Contract No: RI88062007 Report No: EDO-EC-91-7 Available From: Council for Exceptional Children, 1920 Association Dr., Reston, VA 22091-1589 ($1.00 each, minimum order $5.00 prepaid, product no. E502). EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: ERIC PRODUCT (071); ERIC DIGESTS (SELECTED) (073) Geographic Source: U.S.; Virginia Journal Announcement: RIEDEC91 Target Audience: Practitioners This "ERIC Digest" discusses the components of an effective educational program for students who are gifted. The paper defines the term "program" and distinguishes between programs and provisions. Eight major components of an effective program are noted: needs assessment, definition of population, identification procedures, program goals, program organization and format, staff selection and training, curriculum development, and program evaluation. A list of 15 references is appended. (JDD) Descriptors: Elementary Secondary Education; *Gifted; *Program Development; Program Effectiveness; *Special Programs Identifiers: ERIC Digests ED329042 EC300034 Education of the Gifted: Programs and Perspectives. Smutny, Joan Franklin; Blocksom, Rita Haynes Phi Delta Kappa Educational Foundation, Bloomington, Ind. 1990 92p.; ISBN: 0-87367-445-6 Available From: Phi Delta Kappa, Eighth St. and Union Ave., P.O. Box 789, Bloomington, IN 47402 ($4.00). EDRS Price - MF01/PC04 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: NON-CLASSROOM MATERIAL (055); DIRECTORY (132) Geographic Source: Indiana Journal Announcement: RIEJUL91 Target Audience: Practitioners This book provides an overall perspective to program development for gifted children and youth. The approaches used draw on many theories, points of view, and program structures. Chapter titles are as follows: "Identification of the Gifted," "Strategies for Teaching the Gifted," "Organizing the Gifted Program," "Building Support for the Gifted Program," "Preschool Gifted Children," "Gifted Girls: A Population at Risk," "Serving Special Populations of the Gifted," "Serving Gifted Minority and Disadvantaged Students," "Gifted Programs for Secondary School Students," and "Evaluating Gifted Programs." In addition to references which accompany each chapter, a gifted education bibliography lists approximately 120 items. Appendixes list national organizations serving the gifted, professional journals on the gifted, and state education departments' gifted education programs. (JDD) Descriptors: *Ability Identification; Disadvantaged Youth; Elementary Secondary Education; Females; *Gifted; Gifted Disabled; High Risk Students; Minority Groups; Preschool Education; Program Development; *Program Evaluation; *Teaching Methods; Underachievement ED344382 EC301110 Guidelines for Planning Gifted Education Programming in New Hampshire. Treffinger, Donald; Tannehill, Susan New Hampshire State Dept. of Education, Concord. Office of Gifted Education. 1989; 142p. EDRS Price - MF01/PC06 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: NON-CLASSROOM MATERIAL (055) Geographic Source: U.S.; New Hampshire Journal Announcement: RIESEP92 Government: State Target Audience: Practitioners; Administrators This handbook is intended to aid in development of educational programs for gifted students in New Hampshire. The handbook is divided into seven sections. Section I, provides material regarding the specific policies that authorize and pertain to gifted education in New Hampshire and offers resources to assist educators in describing the present status of gifted education in their area. Section II includes an overview of the nature and goals of gifted education, the rationale for gifted education, and the fundamental beliefs upon which the handbook's guidelines were established. Section III examines preparation considerations to establish a sound foundation for planning efforts, such as setting priorities and gathering and analyzing data. Section IV examines the nature and purposes of the planning process. It outlines who should be involved in planning, reviews planning tasks, and provides a checklist to monitor planning progress. Section V discusses major responsibilities and tasks at the district level such as promoting shared decision making and creating a master plan. Section VI addresses the extension of district-level criteria to the local school or building level and proposes seven indicators of excellence in programming. Section VII, discusses plan implementation and management, evaluation and long-range planning, and communication and school-community relations. Appendices include: "Summary of Planning Tasks," "References" (over 70); "Parent Handout on Contemporary Programming," "Assessing the Nurturing Students' Interests" (Talent Checklists), "Guidelines for Cooperative Agenda Meetings," and "Sample Forms and Resources from Selected Programming Models." (JDD) Descriptors: Committees; Educational Philosophy; *Educational Planning; *Educational Practices; Elementary Secondary Education; *Gifted; *Program Development; Program Implementation; School Districts; *Special Education; Special Programs; State Programs; State Standards Identifiers: *New Hampshire Internet Resources Internet Listservs Top of Page Back to ERIC Menu Back to CEC Home Page Copyright ©1996 ERIC Clearinghouse on Disabilities and Gifted Education URL: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm WT02-B20-51IA001-000011-B023-170http://www.cec.sped.org:80/faq/gt-help.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101074448 text/html 21787HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 07:44:48 GMTLast-modified: Tuesday, 10-Sep-96 14:16:00 GMTContent-length: 21594Content-type: text/html GT-Help-FAQ GT-Help-FAQ (last updated July 17, 1996) THE ERIC CLEARINGHOUSE ON DISABILITIES AND GIFTEDEDUCATION (ERIC EC) The Council for Exceptional Children 1920Association Drive Reston, VA 20191 Toll Free: 1-800-328-0272 TTY: 703-264-9449 E-mail: ericec@cec.sped.org Internet: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm Help! I need research to support the value of appropriate programs for gifted and talented students. There is opposition to the idea and we are conducting a campaign to show support for the program. The first step in planning responsible advocacy for gifted students is to contact your state Department of Education in your state's capitol and speak with the person responsible for gifted education. Find out if your state has written material on state policies or regulations that affect education for students who are gifted. Responsible advocacy also includes an active lobbying effort for a rigorous regular education curriculum. There are several reasons to do so. First, a gifted education curriculum is based on the regular education curriculum. And every child is entitled to an appropriate education, including continuous learning experiences. Second, if the gifted program is perceived as the only "good" education, then all parents are justified in wanting this for their child. When measuring the rigor of the gifted education curriculum, let two questions guide your actions: (1) Can every child do this? (2) Should every child do this? If the answer to either question is "yes," then the curriculum would be difficult to justify as appropriate solely for gifted students. Other documents that are useful for advocacy include the following: GT-Group.htm URL: http://www.cec.sped.org/faq/gt-group.htm National Excellence URL: http://www.ed.gov/pubs/DevTalent/ Prisoners of Time URL: http://www.ed.gov/pubs/PrisonersOfTime/index.html This file includes information about advocating for appropriate education for gifted children. At the end of this file are links to Internet resources and Internet listservs (discussion groups) where you can obtain more specific information on this topic. There may be an ERIC digest that provides further information on this topic. You can read the full text of ERIC EC digests under our listing at the U.S.Department of Education, Office of Educational Research and Improvement. Enclosed are several citations from the ERIC database. These records are a sample of the kind of information you can find in the ERIC database. For more citations on your topic of interest, you may want to search the ERIC database yourself on the Internet. References with ED (ERIC Document) and EJ (ERIC Journal) identifiers are cited in theERIC database; for example, ED333123 or EJ333999. ERIC documents are availablein microfiche collections at more than 825 locations worldwide (check your local college or public library). They can also be ordered for a fee through the ERIC Document Reproduction Service (EDRS) at 1-800-443-ERIC. References with an EJ (ERIC Journal) number are available for a fee from the originating journal (check with your local college or public library), through interlibrary loan services, or from articlereproduction clearinghouses, such as UMI: 1-800-248-0360; or ISI:1-800-523-1850. ERIC descriptors (search terms) used: Gifted or Talent and Child Advocacy ED359743 EC302493 National Excellence: A Case for Developing America's Talent. Ross, Pat O'Connell; And Others Office of Educational Research and Improvement (ED), Washington, DC. Programs for the Improvement of Practice. Oct 1993 42p.; Foreword by Richard W. Riley, Secretary of Education. Report No: PIP-93-1201 ISBN: 0-16-042928-5 Available From: U.S. Government Printing Office, Superintendent of Documents, Mail Stop: SSOP, Washington, DC 20402-9328. EDRS Price - MF01/PC02 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: POSITION PAPER (120); EVALUATIVE REPORT (142) Geographic Source: U.S.; District of Columbia Journal Announcement: RIEDEC93 Government: Federal This report on the educational needs of American gifted and talented students identifies indicators of an educational crisis, describes the current status of education for these students, and presents recommendations to meet the educational needs of these students. Indicators demonstrating the need for change include the relatively poor performance by American students on international tests and the small number of students performing at the highest levels on National Assessment of Educational Progress tests. Recent studies have shown that gifted and talented elementary school students have mastered 35-40% of the curriculum in five basic subjects before they begin the school year; most regular classroom teachers make few, if any, provisions for talented students; highest achieving students study less than an hour a day; and only 2 cents out of every $100 spent on K-12 education supports special opportunities for talented students. A review describes how gifted and talented students are currently identified, the number of students served, the kind of support available, the kind of education most gifted and talented students receive, and characteristics of effective programs for these students. Seven recommendations are offered: (1) set challenging curricular standards; (2) establish high-level learning opportunities; (3) ensure access to early childhood education; (4) increase learning opportunities for disadvantaged and minority children with outstanding talents; (5) broaden the definition of gifted (a broadened definition based on the federal Javits Gifted and Talented Education Act is offered); (6) encourage appropriate teacher training and technical assistance; and (7) match world performance. (Contains 43 references.) (DB) Descriptors: Ability Identification; Comparative Education; *Definitions; Early Childhood Education; Educational Assessment; *Educational Needs; *Educational Objectives; Educational Quality; Elementary Secondary Education; *Excellence in Education; Expenditure per Student; Futures (of Society); *Gifted; Gifted Disadvantaged; Special Education; *Talent; Talent IdentificationIdentifiers: Javits Gifted and Talented Students Act ED388022 EC304377 The Status of Programs for High Ability Students. Collaborative Research Study 94306. Purcell, Jeanne H. National Research Center on the Gifted and Talented, Storrs, CT. Sep 199496p. Sponsoring Agency: Office of Educational Research and Improvement (ED), Washington, DC. Contract No: R206R00001 Available From: NRC/GT, The University of Connecticut, 362 Fairfield Road, U-7, Storrs, CT 06269-2007. EDRS Price - MF01/PC04 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: EVALUATIVE REPORT (142) Geographic Source: U.S.; Connecticut Journal Announcement: RIEMAR96 The Program Status Research Study examined the status of local programs for students with high abilities and reasons given by key personnel for program status. A mail survey to 2,900 local personnel in 19 states (divided into four groups according to economic health and the existence or non-existence of a state mandate to provide services) yielded a response rate of 54 percent. Analysis indicated that programs in states with mandates and in good economic health are "intact" and "expanded," while programs in all other groups are being "threatened," "reduced," and "eliminated" in high numbers. Respondents attributed intact programs to the existence of a state mandate and advocacy efforts and threatened programs to a decline in state and local funds. Respondents indicated that 75 percent of high ability students in grades 3-8 receive program services, 50 percent in grades 1-2 and 9-12, receive similar services, but program services for students at the Pre-K to K level were almost nonexistent. Interviews with four key personnel from each state confirmed the main reasons given by survey respondents for variations in program status. Six guidelines with accompanying research support are offered, including, among others: (1) maintenance of advocacy efforts in states with good economic health and mandates; (2) increase of advocacy efforts in states with poor economic health and/or where mandates do not exist; and (3) focus of advocacy efforts on policy makers at the state government level. Appendices include the survey and exemplary policy statements of school boards. (Contains 60 references.) (DB) Descriptors: *Advocacy; Compliance (Legal); Educational Legislation; *Educational Policy; Elementary Secondary Education; Financial Exigency; *Gifted; National Surveys; Needs Assessment; Program Development; *Program Termination; Retrenchment; *Special Programs; State Legislation EJ439630 EC602502 Advocacy for Gifted Programs in the New Educational Climate. Ross, Pat O'Connell Gifted Child Quarterly, v35 n4 p173-76 Fall 1991 Special Issue: Advocacy and Support for Gifted Programs. ISSN: 0016-9862 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); POSITION PAPER (120) Journal Announcement: CIJJUN92 Target Audience: Practitioners This article urges educators of the gifted and talented to become knowledgeable about educational reform efforts at the local, state, and national levels. Specific initiatives pertinent to gifted education include ungraded primary schools; performance-based assessment of student progress; use of student portfolios; and rigorous, revamped curricula. (DB) Descriptors: Curriculum Development; *Educational Change; *Educational Trends;Elementary Secondary Education; *Gifted; Nongraded Instructional Grouping; Student Evaluation; *Talent; Teacher Role Identifiers: Student Portfolios ED321499 EC231820 Supporting Gifted Education through Advocacy. ERIC Digest #E494. Berger, Sandra L. Council for Exceptional Children, Reston, Va.; ERIC Clearinghouse on Handicapped and Gifted Children, Reston, Va. 1990 5p. Sponsoring Agency: Office of Educational Research and Improvement (ED), Washington, DC. Contract No: RI88062007 EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: ERIC PRODUCT (071); NON-CLASSROOM MATERIAL (055); ERIC DIGESTS (SELECTED) (073) Geographic Source: U.S.; Virginia Journal Announcement: RIEDEC90 Target Audience: Parents; Community; Practitioners This digest offers guidelines for group advocacy efforts on behalf of gifted education. Four potential pitfalls are identified: using an adversarial rather than a persuasive approach; assuming that people in administrative and political positions are not too bright or not very knowledgeable--or both; being impatient; and ineffectively coping with intragroup tensions. In contrast, effective advocacy involves four basic phases: needs assessment; planning; contact; and follow up and evaluation. Eleven guidelines for establishing and maintaining a successful parent advocacy group are suggested and include: focus on a mission and a sense of purpose; include not only parents but also business leaders and school professionals; contact the state advocacy group; adopt a constitution that spells out the organization's goals; identify and respect the group that holds the power; allow professionals to develop the program; conduct short- and long-term evaluation of the advocacy process; and be an informed advocate. (DB) Descriptors: *Activism; *Child Advocacy; Elementary Secondary Education; *Gifted; Group Unity; Lobbying; Organizations (Groups); Parent Associations; Program Development; *Social Action Identifiers: ERIC Digests EJ486446 EC609042 The Top Ten Statements That Should Never again Be Made by Advocates of Gifted Children. Delisle, James Gifted Child Today Magazine, v17 n2 p34-35,42 Mar-Apr 1994 ISSN: 0892-9580 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); POSITION PAPER (120) Journal Announcement: CIJNOV94 Guidelines for gifted education programs are offered in a discussion of 10 commonly held myths, such as only gifted students can do in-depth, independent projects; 20% of high school dropouts are gifted; gifted students are more prone to depression and suicide; cooperative learning is inappropriate with gifted students; and gifted students are bored in regular classrooms. (JDD) Descriptors: Child Advocacy; *Educational Methods; Elementary Secondary Education; *Gifted; *Special Education; *Student Characteristics; *Teacher Attitudes EJ472634 EC607072 Educational Rights of Gifted Students: Lost in the Legal Shuffle? Russo, Charles J.; And Others Roeper Review, v16 n1 p67-71 Sep 1993 ISSN: 0278-3193 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); REVIEW LITERATURE (070) Journal Announcement: CIJMAR94 This article examines developments at the federal level that impact upon both the legal and educational rights of gifted students. It also reviews educational data supporting the need to establish special programs and concludes with recommendations for redressing inequities in educational programs for the gifted. (DB) Descriptors: *Child Advocacy; Civil Liberties; Court Litigation; Educational Legislation; *Equal Education; Federal Legislation; *Gifted; Special Education; Student Needs EJ462564 EC605891 Parental Advocacy for the Gifted. Vestal, Jennifer C. Gifted Child Today (GCT), v16 n2 p8-13 Mar-Apr 1993 ISSN: 0892-9580 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); NON-CLASSROOM MATERIAL (055) Journal Announcement: CIJSEP93 Target Audience: Parents This article provides suggestions on becoming an advocate for change in the educational services offered to a gifted child. The article emphasizes the importance of researching the situation before meeting with teachers and administrators, understanding the legal and political issues involved, networking with other parents, and formulating a specific proposal. (JDD) Descriptors: *Child Advocacy; Elementary Secondary Education; *Gifted; *Parent Role; *Parent School Relationship; Parent Teacher Cooperation ED353721 EC301752 Taking the Bull by the Horns of a Dilemma. Howley, Craig 14 Nov 1992 39p.; Keynote address presented at the Conference of the Tennessee Association for the Gifted (Nashville, TN, November 14, 1992). For a related paper, see EC 301 751. EDRS Price - MF01/PC02 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: CONFERENCE PAPER (150); POSITION PAPER (120) Geographic Source: U.S.; West Virginia Journal Announcement: RIEJUN93 This speech addresses the educational needs of gifted children in the context of the existing educational system's philosophy and various reform efforts. It first examines the doctrine of progress, suggesting that important educational change is glacial and much of what purports to be educational change is ephemeral. It claims that the present prime directive of our educational system is to socialize job holders. Such reform movements as "authentic assessment" are seen to be more efforts to hold schools accountable to government than true examples of educational change. An alternative view is offered, which states that: (1) progress along the path of improvement is uncertain; (2) schooling tries to make people useful, but ends by dumbing them down; (3) good schooling entails enlightenment; and (4) education is a process of liberation that does not require schooling. It is concluded that teachers of gifted students need to see their prime mission as care of students' intellect, rather than development of their hypothetical usefulness. The existing "one best system" for all students is seen as in decline and suffering from an epidemic of "thoughtlessness" which can only be countered by an emphasis on thoughtfulness in the education of the gifted. (Contains seven references.) (DB) Descriptors: Child Advocacy; Delivery Systems; *Educational Needs; *Educational Philosophy; Educational Principles; *Educational Trends; Elementary Secondary Education; Futures (of Society); *Gifted; School Role; Special Education Teachers; Teacher Role; Trend Analysis ED353720 EC301751 Keeping Children Gifted: How It Happens and How It Doesn't. Howley, Craig 13 Nov 1992 26p.; Keynote Address presented at the Conference of the Tennessee Association for the Gifted (Nashville, TN, November 13, 1992). For a related paper, see EC 301 752. EDRS Price - MF01/PC02 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: CONFERENCE PAPER (150); POSITION PAPER (120) Geographic Source: U.S.; West Virginia Journal Announcement: RIEJUN93 This speech by an educator and parent of gifted children addresses the problem of appropriate educational services for gifted children, concluding that advocacy for these children entails pushing for acceleration, an often neglected but effective option. The paper begins with anecdotes which illustrate the unmet needs of gifted children and which identify recent trends questioning the economic utility of higher education. The paper suggests that gifted children often learn laziness in school and that the goal for such children should not be "normalization" as it is for exceptional children with handicaps but, rather, maximization of the child's potential. The presentation claims that rapid progress is needed to stimulate gifted children to stay gifted, and therefore acceleration should always be considered when developing Individualized Education Programs for gifted students. A framework for rapid progress is offered, listing service and placement options ranging from regular age-grade placement to an advanced program in a special school. (DB) Descriptors: *Academically Gifted; *Acceleration (Education); *Child Advocacy;*Delivery Systems; *Educational Needs; Educational Philosophy; Elementary Secondary Education; Gifted; Individualized Education Programs; Models; Program Development; Special Education; Student Educational Objectives EJ439635 EC602507 Gifted Education without a State Mandate: The Importance of Vigorous Advocacy. Irvine, David J. Gifted Child Quarterly, v35 n4 p196-99 Fall 1991 Special Issue: Advocacy and Support for Gifted Programs. ISSN: 0016-9862 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); PROJECT DESCRIPTION (141) Journal Announcement: CIJJUN92 Target Audience: Policymakers New York State does not have a mandate requiring differential instruction for gifted students but has increased services. Factors promoting program development have included financial incentives, mandatory screening, educational reform, and vigorous advocacy. Negative factors associated with lack of a mandate have been inequities in program access, program quality control, and limited teacher preparation programs. (DB) Descriptors: Ability Identification; Access to Education; *Child Advocacy; Delivery Systems; Educational Change; Elementary Secondary Education; *Gifted; Legal Responsibility; Lobbying; Special Education; State Legislation; *State Standards; *Talent Identifiers: *New York EJ439631 EC602503 Programs for Gifted Students: Enlightened Self-Interest. Gallagher, James J. Gifted Child Quarterly, v35 n4 p177-78 Fall 1991 Special Issue: Advocacy and Support for Gifted Programs. ISSN: 0016-9862 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); POSITION PAPER (120) Journal Announcement: CIJJUN92 Target Audience: Policymakers This article argues that providing good gifted and talented education programs is in the nation's economic self-interest and is essential to the United States' future economic competitiveness in the world community. (DB) Descriptors: Child Advocacy; Economic Factors; *Economic Progress; Elementary Secondary Education; *Futures (of Society); *Gifted; Program Development; Public Relations; *Special Education; *Talent Internet Resources Internet Listservs Top of Page Back to ERIC Menu Back to CEC Home Page Copyright ©1996 ERIC Clearinghouse on Disabilities and Gifted Education URL: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm WT02-B20-52IA001-000011-B023-182http://www.cec.sped.org:80/faq/gt-long.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101074458 text/html 20647HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 07:45:06 GMTLast-modified: Tuesday, 10-Sep-96 14:17:00 GMTContent-length: 20454Content-type: text/html GT-Long-FAQ GT-LongFAQ (last updated July 17, 1996) THE ERIC CLEARINGHOUSE ON DISABILITIES AND GIFTEDEDUCATION (ERIC EC) The Council for Exceptional Children 1920Association Drive Reston, VA 20191 Toll Free: 1-800-328-0272 TTY: 703-264-9449 E-mail: ericec@cec.sped.org Internet: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm Have there been any longitudinal studies on gifted students and the effect of special services such as gifted programs? There are very few longitudinal studies, but some effects can be gleaned from them. Differentiated curriculum does have a positive effect on achievement outcomes, but other factors, such as individual persistence and sense of mission, are very important. Programs that are entirely within a heterogeneous class are less likely to result in increased learning than other program types, perhaps because it is harder to offer the necessary consistent challenge. Well thought out programs allowing grade or subject acceleration produce positive learning effects and do not appear to hamper social or emotional development. This file includes information about longitudinal research studies. At the end of this file are links to Internet resources and Internet listservs (discussion groups) where you can obtain more specific information on this topic. There may be an ERIC digest that provides further information on this topic. You can read the full text of ERIC EC digests under our listing at the U.S.Department of Education, Office of Educational Research and Improvement. Enclosed are several citations from the ERIC database. These records are a sample of the kind of information you can find in the ERIC database. For more citations on your topic of interest, you may want to search the ERIC database yourself on the Internet. References with ED (ERIC Document) and EJ (ERIC Journal) identifiers are cited in theERIC database; for example, ED333123 or EJ333999. ERIC documents are availablein microfiche collections at more than 825 locations worldwide (check your local college or public library). They can also be ordered for a fee through the ERIC Document Reproduction Service (EDRS) at 1-800-443-ERIC. References with an EJ (ERIC Journal) number are available for a fee from the originating journal (check with your local college or public library), through interlibrary loan services, or from articlereproduction clearinghouses, such as UMI: 1-800-248-0360; or ISI:1-800-523-1850. ERIC descriptors (search terms) used: Gifted and Longitudinal Studies EJ506069 CE528054 Viewing Talent Development Longitudinally: An Aid to Policymaking. Subotnik, Rena F.; Arnold, Karen D. Educational Forum, v59 n4 p372-80 Sum 1995 ISSN: 0013-1725 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: POSITION PAPER (120); JOURNAL ARTICLE (080) Journal Announcement: CIJNOV95 Longitudinal studies of gifted and talented individuals can provide a base upon which to determine educational practice. Such studies could reveal whether life-span patterns are unique and how demographic characteristics affect aspirations and achievement. (SK) Descriptors: Educational Policy; *Gifted; *Longitudinal Studies; Policy Formation; *Research Needs; *Talent ED388019 EC304374 Qualitative Extension of the Learning Outcomes Study. Research Monograph 94110. Delcourt, Marcia A. B.; Evans, Karen National Research Center on the Gifted and Talented, Storrs, CT. Nov 1994 235p.; Executive Summary on p.ix-xxvi also published separately.Sponsoring Agency: Office of Educational Research and Improvement (ED), Washington, DC. Contract No: R206R00001 Available From: NRC/GT, University of Connecticut, 362 Fairfield Road, U-7, Storrs, CT 06269-2007. EDRS Price - MF01/PC10 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: RESEARCH REPORT (143); TEST, QUESTIONNAIRE (160) Geographic Source: U.S.; Connecticut Journal Announcement: RIEMAR96 This report describes an extension of the Learning Outcomes Study (a nationwide longitudinal investigation of 1,010 students just entering programs for gifted learners in grades 2 and 3) to investigate excellence within each of the four program types considered: within-class programs, pull-out programs, separate classes, and special schools. The qualitative extension focused on an "exemplary" model from each of the program types. Two program evaluation tools, the Program Profile Form and Program Satisfaction Survey (with versions for students, parents, teachers, and administrators), were created to document key program components. Program profiles included a description of each program's setting and general procedures (identification process, curricular options, staff selection, school demographics) and five criteria: leadership, atmosphere and environment, communication, curriculum and instruction, and attention to student needs. In addition, ways that all selected programs addressed the needs of diverse populations of students were addressed. Appendices provide additional information on program demographic information, program profiles, the interview questions used, the program satisfaction surveys, and other research aspects of the study. Executive Summary is also published separately. (Contains approximately 95 references.) (DB) Descriptors: Academic Achievement; *Delivery Systems; Demonstration Programs; *Educational Quality; *Gifted; *Grouping (Instructional Purposes); Longitudinal Studies; Mainstreaming; Outcomes of Education; Participant Satisfaction; Primary Education; Program Effectiveness; Program Evaluation; Qualitative Research; Special Classes; Special Schools; Standards; Student Placement; *Teaching Models EJ462544 EC605835 The Fulfillment of Promise Revisited: A Discriminant Analysis of Factors Predicting Success in the Terman Study. Pyryt, Michael C. Roeper Review, v15 n3 p178-79 Feb-Mar 1993 ISSN: 0278-3193 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); RESEARCH REPORT (143) Journal Announcement: CIJSEP93 Target Audience: Researchers A multivariate approach reexamined Lewis Terman's longitudinal study data comparing the 100 most successful and 100 least successful men identified in the 1920s as having very high intelligence. Results reaffirmed the importance of educational attainment in vocational achievement, though intelligence and amount of early acceleration also predicted group membership. (DB) Descriptors: Acceleration (Education); Discriminant Analysis; *Educational Attainment; *Gifted; *High Achievement; Intelligence; Intelligence Quotient; *Longitudinal Studies; Low Achievement; Males; Performance Factors; *Predictor Variables; *Success Identifiers: Genetic Studies of Genius EJ462534 EC605825 The Beyonders in a Thirty Year Longitudinal Study of Creative Achievement. Torrance, E. Paul Roeper Review, v15 n3 p131-35 Feb-Mar 1993 ISSN: 0278-3193 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); RESEARCH REPORT (143) Journal Announcement: CIJSEP93 Initial findings and case studies of a 30-year follow-up of gifted students and adults suggest that characteristics such as love of one's work, persistence, purpose in life, love of challenge, high energy level, and a sense of mission may be more important in the long run than creative ability, intelligence, and high school achievement. (DB) Descriptors: Academic Achievement; Career Development; Case Studies; *Creativity; Exceptional Persons; Followup Studies; *Gifted; Graduate Surveys; High Schools; *Individual Development; Intelligence; Longitudinal Studies; *Performance Factors; *Personality Traits; Prediction; *Student Development; Talent EJ454426 EC604567 Characteristics of Elementary Students Entering Gifted Programs: The Learning Outcomes Project at the University of Virginia. Cornell, Dewey G.; And Others Journal for the Education of the Gifted, v15 n4 p309-31 Sum 1992 ISSN: 0162-3532 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); RESEARCH REPORT (143) Journal Announcement: CIJAPR93 First-year data from a longitudinal investigation of over 1,100 children receiving different types of gifted services or regular instruction indicated significant differences in achievement levels, self-concepts, and teacher ratings of students selected for different services, with achievement fostered by special school and class options and self-concept higher in within-class and pull-out programs. (DB) Descriptors: *Academic Achievement; *Academically Gifted; *Delivery Systems; Educational Methods; Elementary Education; Longitudinal Studies; *Outcomes of Education; Resource Room Programs; *Self Concept; Special Classes; Special Schools; Student Characteristics; *Student Placement EJ441235 EC602527 Patterns of Academic Achievement in Students Who Qualified for a Gifted Program on the Basis of Nonverbal Tests. Bittker, Christine M. Roeper Review, v14 n2 p65-67 Dec 1991 ISSN: 0278-3193 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); RESEARCH REPORT (143) Journal Announcement: CIJJUL92 This study followed 96 gifted students from kindergarten through high school and found that students who qualified for the gifted program on the basis of verbal or quantitative reasoning abilities performed better in academic subjects than did students who qualified only on the basis of nonverbal abilities. (Author/JDD) Descriptors: Ability Identification; Abstract Reasoning; *Academic Achievement; Cognitive Ability; Elementary Secondary Education; *Gifted; Longitudinal Studies; *Mathematics Skills; *Nonverbal Ability; Nonverbal Tests; *Performance Factors; *Verbal Ability EJ427839 SP520415 Educational Productivity Predictors among Mathematically Talented Students. Benbow, Camilla Persson; And Others Journal of Educational Research, v84 n4 p215-23 Mar-Apr 1991 ISSN: 0022-0671 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); RESEARCH REPORT (143) Journal Announcement: CIJOCT91 Data from a longitudinal survey of mathematically precocious 13-year olds (n=1,247) were used to test 5 factors (quality and quantity of instruction, home environment, motivation, and ability) for their ability to predict educational achievement and educational and career aspirations. Students were followed until age 23. (SM) Descriptors: *Academic Achievement; *Academically Gifted; *Academic Aspiration; Career Choice; Evaluation Criteria; Grade 7; Grade 8; Junior High School Students; Longitudinal Studies; *Mathematics Achievement; National Surveys; *Predictor Variables; Secondary Education; Youth Identifiers: *Study of Mathematically Precocious Youth EJ413295 EC231424 The Hollingworth Longitudinal Study: Follow-Up, Findings, and Implications. Harris, Carole Ruth Roeper Review, v12 n3 p216-22 Mar 1990 Report No: ISSN-0278-3193 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); RESEARCH REPORT (143) Journal Announcement: CIJJAN91 A follow-up study analyzed 64 gifted individuals of 123 children originally identified by educator and psychologist Leta Hollingworth. The data that were gathered and analyzed concern personal/family status, education, vocational-professional status, avocational interests, achievements, and adjustment/fulfillment. (DB) Descriptors: Academic Achievement; *Academically Gifted; Adults; Exceptional Persons; *Followup Studies; *High Achievement; *Individual Characteristics; Longitudinal Studies Identifiers: *Hollingworth (Leta Stetter) ED328015 EC233229 A Five Year Longitudinal Study of Gifted and Talented Students: Grade 9--Post-High School Year. Volume 6. Summary Report. Remizoff, M. Calgary Board of Education (Alberta). Dec 1989 131p.; Volumes 1-5 (1,835 pages) contain detailed data on which this summary is based and have not been entered into the ERIC database. For these volumes, contact Calgary Board of Education, 515 Macleod Trail, S.E., Calgary, Alberta, Canada T2G 2L9. EDRS Price - MF01/PC06 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: RESEARCH REPORT (143); EVALUATIVE REPORT (142) Geographic Source: Canada; Alberta Journal Announcement: RIEJUN91 The summary report describes a 5-year longitudinal study in Calgary (Alberta, Canada) of gifted and talented students from grade 9 through the post-high school year. Students had previously attended either a special school setting or were integrated with regular students in their home schools. The study examined: students' achievement; their progress and well-being in academic, social, and personal domains; course work; transition from junior high to senior high school; high school graduation; and preparedness for post-high school life. Subjective data obtained included the views of students, parents, and teachers over the 5 years. Objective data included student scores on tests and academic grades. Additional data included students' areas of strengths and weaknesses, choices made by students, activities engaged in, and recognitions they received. General findings included: students on the whole were successful, well-adjusted individuals; special school and mainstreamed students were comparable with respect to skills, abilities, and progress in academic, personal, and social domains; achievement of the two groups of students was generally comparable; students who had attended the special school were more likely to report satisfaction than mainstreamed students; and fewer special school than mainstreamed students reported social adjustment problems at the postsecondary level. (DB) Descriptors: Academic Achievement; Foreign Countries; *Gifted; Graduate Surveys; High School Graduates; High Schools; Interpersonal Competence; Longitudinal Studies; *Mainstreaming; Outcomes of Education; Postsecondary Education; *Special Schools; *Student Adjustment; *Student Attitudes Identifiers: Alberta (Calgary) ED307303 TM013330 Acceleration for the Academically Talented: A Follow-Up of the Academic Talent Search Class of 1984. Thomas, Terry A. Mar 1989 14p. EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: RESEARCH REPORT (143) Geographic Source: U.S.; California Journal Announcement: RIEOCT89 The purpose was to investigate the long-term impact of the California State University (Sacramento) Academic Talent Search Summer School (ATSSS) by means of a longitudinal follow-up of students at an interval of 4 years. A group of 100 academically talented middle school students (grades 7 through 9) were selected from the 350 participants in the ATSSS at California State University in 1984. Qualifications for the program were based on scores on the Scholastic Aptitude Test or equivalent test scores. During the summer, students studied fast-paced mathematics, writing, and/or Latin. Four years later, in 1988, a questionnaire was mailed to the selected students to determine their high school experiences. A response rate of 80% of the 100 locatable students gave a sample that compared favorably with the 1984 summer school group. Responses were analyzed descriptively using frequency distribution and cross-tabulation tables. Results indicate that: (1) program participants viewed the experience as highly positive; (2) academic acceleration through the program was associated with positive changes in school grades as indicated by grade point averages, interest in school and learning, and in students' abilities to get along with intellectual peers, age peers, and adults; (3) the program contributed to self-esteem and feelings of self-control; and (4) participants performed well in sports as well as academics. No pattern of social maladjustments or harmful results from the acceleration was found. (TJH) Descriptors: *Academically Gifted; *Acceleration (Education); Extracurricular Activities; Followup Studies; Grade 7; Grade 8; Grade 9; Grade Point Average; Junior High Schools; *Junior High School Students; Longitudinal Studies; Middle Schools; Peer Acceptance; Program Effectiveness; Self Concept; *Social Adjustment; Student Attitudes; Student Motivation; *Summer Schools; *Talent Identifiers: *Academic Talent Search Program; California State University Sacramento EJ248187 CE511182 Longitudinal Career Patterns of the Gifted: A Summary of Research Findings. Jepsen, David A. Journal of Career Education, v7 n4 p279-88 Jun 1981 Available From: Reprint: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); RESEARCH REPORT (143) Journal Announcement: CIJNOV81 Describes the accumulated research evidence on the adult vocational achievements and satisfactions observed in the lives of people identified as gifted during their school years to identify early experiences frequently associated with these achievements and satisfactions. (Author/CT) Descriptors: Academic Achievement; *Academically Gifted; *Career Development; Educational Research; Family Role; *Gifted; *Job Satisfaction; *Longitudinal Studies; Success; Talent ED162756 PS010278 Identification and Nurturance of Extraordinarily Precocious Young Children. Annual Report to the Spencer Foundation (Granting Period: September 1977 through August 1978). Robinson, Halbert B.; And Others Washington Univ., Seattle. Child Development Research Group. 1978 99p.; For 1976-77 Annual Report, see ED 151 095; Appendix A2 of this document may be of marginal legibility due to color paper Sponsoring Agency: Spencer Foundation, Chicago, Ill. EDRS Price - MF01/PC04 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: RESEARCH REPORT (143) Geographic Source: U.S.; Washington Journal Announcement: RIEAPR79 The intellectual and social abilities of young precocious children and the effects of educational interventions on these children are examined in this third year report of a longitudinal study of the developmental patterns of unusually precocious children. The report focuses on several studies conducted with preschool and elementary school age children during the 1977-78 granting year. Included are a brief overview of the project structure; test performance results for the 1977-78 year, (including cognitive, social, and personality factor data); descriptions of 3 educational intervention programs studied, and a report on the current status of the longitudinal study's focal group of "extraordinarily precocious" children. The appendices which comprise approximately half the documents contain program information and related letters and brochures as well as 3 papers describing the identification of intellectual precocity in young children, social development in intellectually advanced children, and the tenets of the Early Entrance/Optimal Match Program. (Author/SE) Descriptors: Elementary Education; *Exceptional Child Education; *Exceptional Child Research; *Gifted; *Intellectual Development; *Intervention; Longitudinal Studies; Preschool Education; *Social Development; Talent Internet Resources Internet Listservs Top of Page Back to ERIC Menu Back to CEC Home Page Copyright ©1996 ERIC Clearinghouse on Disabilities and Gifted Education URL: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm WT02-B20-53IA001-000011-B023-199http://www.cec.sped.org:80/faq/gt-legal.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101074509 text/html 19812HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 07:45:18 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 09-Sep-96 21:51:00 GMTContent-length: 19620Content-type: text/html  NAME OF FILE, GT-Legal-FAQ GT-Legal-FAQ (last updated August 1, 1996) THE ERIC CLEARINGHOUSE ON DISABILITIES AND GIFTEDEDUCATION (ERIC EC) The Council for Exceptional Children 1920Association Drive Reston, VA 20191 Toll Free: 1-800-328-0272 TTY: 703-264-9449 E-mail: ericec@cec.sped.org Internet: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm Please provide information on legal issues and gifted education. Do gifted children have any rights under federal education legislation? Are they guaranteed an appropriate education? This file includes information about legislation and gifted students. At the end of this file are links to Internet resources and Internet listservs (discussion groups) where you can obtain more specific information on this topic. There may be an ERIC digest that provides further information on this topic. You can read the full text of ERIC EC digests under our listing at the U.S.Department of Education, Office of Educational Research and Improvement. Enclosed are several citations from the ERIC database. These records are a sample of the kind of information you can find in the ERIC database. For morecitations on your topic of interest, you may want to search the ERIC database yourself onthe Internet. References with ED (ERIC Document) and EJ (ERIC Journal) identifiers are cited in the ERIC database; for example, ED333123 or EJ333999. ERIC documents are available in microfiche collections at more than 825 locations worldwide (check your local college or public library). They can also be ordered for a fee through the ERIC Document Reproduction Service (EDRS) at 1-800-443-ERIC. References with an EJ (ERIC Journal) number are available for a fee from the originating journal (check with your local college or public library), through interlibrary loan services, or from the article reproduction clearinghouses, such as UMI: 1-800-248-0360; or ISI: 1-800-523-1850. ERIC descriptors (search terms) used: Gifted and Court Litigation or Civil Rights or Educational Legislation EJ505155 EC611476 Gifted Education at a Crossroads: The Program Status Study. Purcell, Jeanne H. Gifted Child Quarterly, v39 n2 p57-65 Spr 1995 ISSN: 0016-9862 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); RESEARCH REPORT (143) Journal Announcement: CIJOCT95 This study examined the status of local gifted education programs in 19 states and reasons attributed by 1,579 educators for the status of the programs. Programs in states with gifted education mandates and good economic health were intact and expanded, while programs in states without mandates or in poor economic health were threatened. (SW) Descriptors: Administrator Attitudes; *Economic Factors; Educational Legislation; Elementary Secondary Education; Financial Problems; Financial Support; *Gifted; Government School Relationship; *Program Development; Program Termination; *Special Programs; *State Legislation; Teacher Attitudes EJ494714 EA530230 Education of Gifted Students: A Civil Rights Issue? Gallagher, James J. Phi Delta Kappan, v76 n5 p408-10 Jan 1995 ISSN: 0031-7217 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: EVALUATIVE REPORT (142); JOURNAL ARTICLE (080) Journal Announcement: CIJAPR95 There are many students with high native abilities that remain underdeveloped because of inadequate opportunity, practice, and motivation. Although genetics significantly affects development of various intelligences, environment (including cultural values) and sequential experiences help crystallize native abilities. Schools must organize and institutionalize equal opportunities and experiences for talented students, regardless of race, gender, or ethnic origin.(12 references) (MLH) Descriptors: *Academic Ability; *Civil Rights; *Educational Opportunities; Elementary Secondary Education; *Environmental Influences; Equal Education; Genetics; *Gifted; Program Development; *Student Motivation EJ506638 EC611507 Meeting the Educational Needs of the Gifted: A Legal Imperative. Ford, Donna Y.; And Others Roeper Review, v17 n4 p224-28 May-Jun 1995 ISSN: 0278-3193 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); POSITION PAPER (120) Journal Announcement: CIJNOV95 Target Audience: Practitioners Developments at the federal level affecting the legal and educational rights of gifted students are briefly examined, along with evidence supporting the need to establish special programs that are mandated and for which state schools are accountable. Eight challenges are presented and accompanied by recommendations regarding education for children who are gifted. (Author/SW) Descriptors: *Change Strategies; Civil Rights; Educational Change; *Educational Policy; Elementary Secondary Education; *Federal Legislation; *Gifted; *Special Education; *Student Needs; Student Rights ED373459 EC303227 State of the States Gifted and Talented Education Report, 1994. Council of State Directors of Programs for the Gifted. 1994; 139p. EDRS Price - MF01/PC06 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: PROJECT DESCRIPTION (141); TEST, QUESTIONNAIRE (160) Geographic Source: U.S.; Texas Journal Announcement: RIEJAN95 Target Audience: Policymakers This report on gifted education is based on surveys returned by central education agencies in 49 states, the District of Columbia, Guam, and the Virgin Islands. The first section contains informational charts which provide a broad overview of state level services for gifted students. Included are data on the level of personnel support for the program, whether or not the state has a mandate and what the mandate requires, the number of students served by the program, and the level of financial support for these services. The second part of the report contains narrative information from state and trust territories on topics related to school reform. This section shows the impact that issues such as middle grade reform, site-based decisionmaking, and state education agency reorganization have had and are having on services to gifted students. Finally, the third section contains the names, addresses, and telephone numbers of contact persons at state education agencies and state associations. (DB) Descriptors: Delivery Systems; *Educational Change; *Educational Legislation; *Educational Policy; Elementary Secondary Education; *Gifted; Middle Schools; National Surveys; School Based Management; School Restructuring; State Aid; State Departments of Education; *State Legislation; *State Programs ED372590 EC303223 Model Legislation: Gifted and Talented. Foster, Andrew H.; And Others North Carolina Univ., Chapel Hill. Gifted Education Policy Studies Program. Feb 1994; 19p.; Sponsoring Agency: Office of Educational Research and Improvement (ED), Washington, DC. Contract No: R206A00596 EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: NON-CLASSROOM MATERIAL (055); LEGAL MATERIAL (090) Geographic Source: U.S.; North Carolina Journal Announcement: RIEDEC94 Target Audience: Policymakers This report presents a model state legislative bill to provide for the special needs of gifted and talented students. The model bill utilizes a "best practices" framework and attempts to be fiscally responsible and provide maximum flexibility while meeting the needs of gifted and talented students. The model legislation itself begins with a statement of purpose followed by a section defining the population of gifted and talented students and stating a policy of nondiscrimination. A section on supervision of gifted and talented programs covers the Office of State Coordinator, the duties of the Office of State Coordinator, and collaboration with the State Advisory Board. The section on the State Advisory Board for Gifted and Talented Education includes guidelines for Board establishment, Board membership, and Board duties. Specific program responsibilities and criteria are presented in the section on gifted and talented programs. In addition, a definition and nondiscrimination policy statement are offered on the issue of traditionally underserved populations. The final section makes appropriation recommendations. Following the model legislation, analysis is provided for each of the Bill's sections. (DB) Descriptors: Advisory Committees; Change Strategies; *Educational Legislation; Educational Practices; Elementary Secondary Education; *Gifted; Models; Program Administration; Program Development; *State Legislation; *Talent ED372583 EC303216 State Policy Issues in the Education of Gifted and Talented Students. Mitchell, Patricia Bruce Jun 1994; 23p.; In: Ross, Patricia O' Connell, Ed. National Excellence: A Case for Developing America's Talent. An Anthology of Readings; see EC 303 213. Sponsoring Agency: Office of Educational Research and Improvement (ED), Washington, DC. EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: EVALUATIVE REPORT (142) Geographic Source: U.S.; District of Columbia Journal Announcement: RIEDEC94 Target Audience: Policymakers This paper, commissioned for the development of the national report, "National Excellence: A Case for Developing America's Talent," examines current state policies, regulations, and legislation concerning education programs for gifted and talented students. The paper also looks at other state policies which have a direct influence on the nature and scope of local programs for gifted and talented students. Recent policies to restructure education are considered in the context of their effects on programs for gifted and talented students. Specific principles are recommended for shaping the reform agenda in the areas of curriculum and instruction, accountability, and governance. For each principle, examples of actions and potential impact on gifted and talented students are discussed. In addition, approaches taken by states to the following traditional issues are considered: (1) whether gifted and talented education policies should be linked with special education policies; (2) how the state should define and demarcate the gifted and talented population; (3) whether the state should mandate services for gifted and talented students; and (4) how the state can provide fiscal incentives to districts for gifted and talented education programs. The paper concludes with a checklist for states in policy development and recommendations for federal leadership. (DB) Descriptors: Ability Identification; Accountability; Curriculum Development; Definitions; *Educational Change; Educational Legislation; Educational Needs; *Educational Policy; Elementary Secondary Education; *Excellence in Education; Federal State Relationship; *Gifted; Governance; Instructional Development; Policy Formation; School Districts; School Restructuring; State Legislation; State School District Relationship; *Talent; Talent Identification Identifiers: *State Policy EJ496241 EC610116 Gifted Education and Discrimination: The Role of the Office for Civil Rights. Marquardt, Ronald G.; Karnes, Frances A. Journal for the Education of the Gifted, v18 n1 p87-94 Fall 1994 ISSN: 0162-3532 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); PROJECT DESCRIPTION (141) Journal Announcement: CIJMAY95 This article reviews activities of the Office for Civil Rights of the U.S. Department of Education involving programs for gifted students from 1985 through 1991. Analysis of 48 letters of findings identified issues involved, protected classes, geographic regions involved, and results of investigations. (Author/DB) Descriptors: *Civil Rights; Conflict Resolution; Due Process; *Educational Discrimination; Elementary Secondary Education; *Eligibility; *Gifted; Government Role; *Government School Relationship; Social Bias; Special Education Identifiers: *Office for Civil Rights EJ479436 EC607996 Pathways to Solutions: Using Conflict Resolution in Matters of the Gifted and Talented. Karnes, Frances A.; Marquardt, Ronald G. Gifted Child Today (GCT), v16 n6 p38-41 Nov-Dec 1993 ISSN: 0892-9580 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); PROJECT DESCRIPTION (141); NON-CLASSROOM MATERIAL (055) Journal Announcement: CIJJUL94 Target Audience: Practitioners; Parents Educational disputes involving gifted students may be resolved via conferences with parties involved, mediation, due process, or court litigation. Students in programs or activities receiving federal support may file complaints with the U.S. Department of Education's Office for Civil Rights. Suggestions are offered for becoming informed about relevant state laws, regulations, and court cases. (JDD) Descriptors: Arbitration; *Civil Rights; *Conflict Resolution; *Court Litigation; *Due Process; Federal Aid; *Gifted; Law Related Education; Parent Teacher Conferences; Student Rights Identifiers: *Office for Civil Rights EJ506639 EC611508 Gifted Education and the Courts: Teacher Certification and Employment Decisions. Karnes, Frances A.; Marquardt, Ronald G. Roeper Review, v17 n4 p229-31 May-Jun 1995 ISSN: 0278-3193 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); EVALUATIVE REPORT (142) Journal Announcement: CIJNOV95 Four state court cases are discussed, involving the issue of employing noncertified versus certified teachers in gifted education and teachers with seniority versus gifted education experience. Based on the two West Virginia cases and two Pennsylvania cases, it is concluded that mandatory certification provides greater legal protection for gifted education. (SW) Descriptors: *Court Litigation; Elementary Secondary Education; *Employment Practices; *Gifted; Legal Problems; Special Education Teachers; *Teacher Certification; Teacher Employment; *Teacher Qualifications; *Teacher Selection Identifiers: Dallap v Sharon City School District; Dilley v Slippery Rock Area School District; Egan v Board of Education; Johnson v Cassell; Pennsylvania; West Virginia ED379849 EC303722 State Policies Regarding Education of the Gifted as Reflected in Legislation and Regulation. Collaborative Research Study CRS93302. Passow, A. Harry; Rudnitski, Rose A. National Research Center on the Gifted and Talented, Storrs, CT. Oct 1993; 107p. Sponsoring Agency: Office of Educational Research and Improvement (ED), Washington, DC. Contract No: R206R00001 Available From: NRC/GT, The University of Connecticut, 362 Fairfield Rd., U-7, Storrs, CT 06269-2007. EDRS Price - MF01/PC05 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: EVALUATIVE REPORT (142) Geographic Source: U.S.; Connecticut Journal Announcement: RIEJUL95 Target Audience: Policymakers This study analyzed state policies on the identification and education of gifted students as reflected in legislation, regulations, rules, recommendations, and guidelines provided by 49 states. The elements examined include: (1) state mandated services, (2) district plans for the gifted, (3) gifted education as part of special education, (4) philosophy or rationale, (5) definitions of gifted and talented, (6) identification procedures, (7) programs for the gifted, (8) differentiated curriculum and instruction, (9) counseling and other support services, (10) parent involvement, (11) program evaluation, (12) teacher education and certification, and (13) state funding for the gifted. The analysis indicated that all states have formulated policies that support education of the gifted and talented but that considerable variability among states exists with respect to specific components. Major recommendations are made in the following areas: establishing challenging curriculum standards; providing high-level learning opportunities; ensuring access to early childhood education; offering extended opportunities for economically disadvantaged and minority children; providing teacher training and technical assistance; and matching the high performance of similar students throughout the world. (Contains 76 references.) (DB) Descriptors: *Ability Identification; Compliance (Legal); Counseling; *Curriculum Development; Definitions; Educational Legislation; Educational Philosophy; *Educational Policy; Elementary Secondary Education; Eligibility; Financial Support; *Gifted; National Surveys; Needs Assessment; Program Development; Program Evaluation; Pupil Personnel Services; School Districts; State Aid; State Legislation; *State Programs; *State Standards; Teacher Education Identifiers: *Differentiated Curriculum (Gifted) EJ472634 EC607072 Educational Rights of Gifted Students: Lost in the Legal Shuffle? Russo, Charles J.; And Others Roeper Review, v16 n1 p67-71 Sep 1993 ISSN: 0278-3193 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); REVIEW LITERATURE (070) Journal Announcement: CIJMAR94 This article examines developments at the federal level that impact upon both the legal and educational rights of gifted students. It also reviews educational data supporting the need to establish special programs and concludes with recommendations for redressing inequities in educational programs for the gifted. (DB) Descriptors: *Child Advocacy; Civil Liberties; Court Litigation; Educational Legislation; *Equal Education; Federal Legislation; *Gifted; Special Education; Student Needs EJ441228 EC602520 The Marland Report: Twenty Years Later. Harrington, Joseph; And Others Journal for the Education of the Gifted; v15 n1 p31-43 Fall 1991 ISSN: 0162-3532 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); PROJECT DESCRIPTION (141) Journal Announcement: CIJJUL92 This report examines federal involvement in gifted education in the 20 years since the Marland report on needs of gifted and talented students. Noted is the passage, in 1988, of the Javits Bill which implemented the major recommendationsof the Marland report including establishment of the Office of Gifted and Talented and training of teachers. (DB) Descriptors: Educational Legislation;Gifted;Government Role;Special Education;Talent; Educational History;Elementary Secondary Education;Federal Aid;Teacher Education; Identifiers: Hawkins Stafford Act 1988; Marland (Sidney P.) Internet Resources Internet Listservs Top of Page Back to ERIC Menu Back to CEC Home Page Copyright ©1996 ERIC Clearinghouse on Disabilities and Gifted Education URL: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm WT02-B20-54IA001-000011-B023-211http://www.cec.sped.org:80/faq/gt-minor.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101074519 text/html 23395HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 07:45:27 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 09-Sep-96 21:54:00 GMTContent-length: 23203Content-type: text/html  NAME OF FILE, GT-Minority-FAQ GT-Minority-FAQ (last updated July 31, 1996) THE ERIC CLEARINGHOUSE ON DISABILITIES AND GIFTEDEDUCATION (ERIC EC) The Council for Exceptional Children 1920Association Drive Reston, VA 20191 Toll Free: 1-800-328-0272 TTY: 703-264-9449 E-mail: ericec@cec.sped.org Internet: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm Some racial and ethnic minority groups have been underrepresented in our classes for gifted children. How can we find these children, and what type of instruction has been successful? This file includes information about gifted students from minority populations who have traditionally been unrecognized and underrepresented in gifted education. At the end of this file are links to Internet resources and Internet listservs (discussion groups) where you can obtain more specific information on this topic. There may be an ERIC digest that provides further information on this topic. You can read the full text of ERIC EC digests under our listing at the U.S.Department of Education, Office of Educational Research and Improvement. Enclosed is a representative sample of citations from the ERIC database. These records are a sample of the kind of information you can find in the ERICdatabase. For more citations on your topic of interest, you may want to search the ERIC database yourself onthe Internet. References with ED (ERIC Document) and EJ (ERIC Journal) identifiers are cited inthe ERIC database; for example, ED333123 or EJ333999. ERIC documents areavailable in microfiche collections at more than 825 locations worldwide (check yourlocal college or public library). They can also be ordered for a fee through the ERICDocument Reproduction Service (EDRS) at 1-800-443-ERIC. References with an EJ (ERIC Journal) number are available for a fee from theoriginating journal (check with your local college or public library), throughinterlibrary loan services, or from the article reproduction clearinghouses,such as UMI: 1-800-248-0360; or ISI: 1-800-523-1850. ERIC descriptors (search terms) used: Gifted and Individual Differences or Cultural Differences or Economically Disadvantaged or Minority Group Children and Curriculum Development or Teaching Methods EJ489497 EC609433 Giftedness, Diversity, and Problem-Solving. Multiple Intelligences and Diversity in Educational Settings. Maker, C. June; And Others TEACHING Exceptional Children, v27 n1 p4-19 Fall 1994 ISSN: 0040-0599 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); NON-CLASSROOM MATERIAL (055) Journal Announcement: CIJJAN95 Target Audience: Practitioners Howard Gardner's Theory of Multiple Intelligences offers educators a comprehensive framework for identifying giftedness in diverse student populations. A definition of problem types is presented that, when combined with varied intelligences, forms a problem-solving matrix for designing assessment procedures and developing curriculum. (JDD) Descriptors: *Ability Identification; *Curriculum Development; Elementary Secondary Education; Evaluation Methods; *Gifted; Individual Differences; *Intelligence; *Student Evaluation Identifiers: Diversity (Student); *Multiple Intelligences ED388020 EC304375 Towards a New Paradigm for Identifying Talent Potential. Research Monograph 94112. Frasier, Mary M.; Passow, A. Harry National Research Center on the Gifted and Talented, Storrs, CT. Dec 1994; 97p.; Executive Summary on p.vii-xix also published separately.Sponsoring Agency: Office of Educational Research and Improvement (ED), Washington, DC. Contract No: R206R00001 Available From: NRC/GT, University of Connecticut, 362 Fairfield Road, U-7, Storrs, CT 06269-2007. EDRS Price - MF01/PC04 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: POSITION PAPER (120) Geographic Source: U.S.; Connecticut Journal Announcement: RIEMAR96 This monograph presents a paradigm for identifying giftedness among all groups of young people. Section 1 presents a review and critique of traditional identification approaches and highlights the limitations that tests may have for identifying talent potential among groups currently underrepresented in gifted programs. Section 2 examines the values and environmental influences of several cultures, to identify the additional challenges faced by high achieving, ethnically diverse students. Within-group cultural differences are also considered. The third section reports the results of an exploratory study which examined the characteristics of economically disadvantaged and limited English proficient gifted students. Section 4 looks at behaviors that characterize gifted performance, noting research results which suggest that there may be well-known "absolute" behaviors which characterize high performance cross-culturally, as well as specific behaviors which manifest themselves in particular cultural contexts. Emerging insights from the Javits Gifted and Talented Students' Education Act are addressed in the fifth section. The final section provides a synthesis of the previously presented ideas and proposes a five-element paradigm of giftedness, including: (1) new constructs of giftedness; (2) absolute and specific behaviors; (3) cultural and contextual variables; (4) authentic assessment; and (5) identification through learning opportunities. Executive Summary is also published separately. (Contains approximately 125 references.) (Author/DB) Descriptors: *Ability Identification; Behavior Patterns; *Cultural Differences; Cultural Influences; Economically Disadvantaged; Educational Legislation; Elementary Secondary Education; Ethnic Groups; Federal Legislation;*Gifted; Limited English Speaking; Minority Groups; Models; *Student Characteristics; Student Evaluation; *Talent; Talent Identification Identifiers: *Jacob K Javits Gifted Talented Stdnt Educ Act 1988 EJ484985 EC608668 Strategies for Enhancing Learning in the Multicultural Classroom. Clasen, Donna Rae B.C. Journal of Special Education, v18 n1 p60-64 1994 ISSN: 0704-7509 Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); PROJECT DESCRIPTION (141); NON-CLASSROOM MATERIAL (055) Journal Announcement: CIJOCT94 Target Audience: Teachers; Practitioners A university-public school cooperative project (Project STREAM) in Wisconsin has been identifying sixth-grade minority students with potential for postsecondary education and providing them with systematic attention through middle and senior high school. Teachers and students have identified eight strategies as being particularly effective in the multicultural classroom. (Author/DB) Descriptors: Ability Identification; *Academically Gifted; *College School Cooperation; Cultural Pluralism; Higher Education; High Schools; Instructional Effectiveness; Intermediate Grades; *Minority Groups; *Multicultural Education; Postsecondary Education; Secondary Education; Teacher Effectiveness; *Teaching Methods Identifiers: *Project STREAM; University of Wisconsin EJ496250 EC610125 Bridging the Gap between Minority Disadvantaged High Potential Children andAnglo Middle Class Gifted Children. Sisk, Dorothy A. Gifted Education International, v10 n1 p37-43 1994 ISSN: 0261-4294 Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); PROJECT DESCRIPTION (141) Journal Announcement: CIJMAY95 This article examines reasons for the underrepresentation of minority groupsin programs for gifted students and describes Project STEP-UP (SystematicTraining for Educational Programs for Underserved Pupils), a program to trainteachers, administrators, and parents of high potential minority economicallydisadvantaged students in 12 school districts in 4 states. (DB) Descriptors: *Ability Identification; Academic Aptitude; Anglo Americans;*Economically Disadvantaged; Elementary Secondary Education; *Gifted; Incidence;Inservice Teacher Education; Middle Class Students; *Minority Groups;Postsecondary Education; *Student Development; Talent Identification;Underachievement Identifiers: *Project Step Up EJ486474 EC609070 Portfolio Assessment: A Key to Identifying Hidden Talents and EmpoweringTeachers of Young Children. Coleman, Laurence J. Gifted Child Quarterly, v38 n2 p65-69 1994 Special Issue: Javits Grant Projects. ISSN: 0016-9862 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); PROJECT DESCRIPTION (141) Journal Announcement: CIJNOV94 Early Assessment for Exceptional Potential of Young Minority and/orEconomically Disadvantaged Students is a project which used portfolioassessment to identify exceptional potential in primary-level children anddevelop instructional plans. The project determined universal identifiers ofexceptional potential and taught teachers to recognize them by providingauthentic examples of such behavior. (Author/JDD) Descriptors: *Ability Identification; Demonstration Programs; EconomicallyDisadvantaged; *Gifted; *Intervention; Minority Group Children; Models;*Portfolios (Background Materials); Primary Education; *Student Evaluation Identifiers: *Early Identification; *Portfolio Performance Appraisal Systems EJ480039 RC509839 The Raven Matrices and Navajo Children: Normative Characteristics and CultureFair Application to Issues of Intelligence, Giftedness, and AcademicProficiency. MacAvoy, Jim And Others Journal of American Indian Education, v33 n1 p32-43 Fall 1993 ISSN: 0021-8731 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: RESEARCH REPORT (143); JOURNAL ARTICLE (080) Journal Announcement: CIJJUL94 The Raven Coloured and Standard Progressive Matrices (RCPM and RSPM) and agroup achievement test were administered to 908 Navajo students in grades 2-12. Results suggest that the RCPM is appropriate for use through grade 2 and theRSPM in grades 3-9. Discusses gender differences and differences betweenstudents in schools on and off the Navajo Reservation. (KS) Descriptors: American Indian Education; *Culture Fair Tests; ElementarySecondary Education; *Gifted Disadvantaged; *Intelligence Tests; Local Norms;Sex Differences; *Student Evaluation; Test Norms; *Test Validity Identifiers: *Navajo (Nation); *Raven Progressive Matrices ED372592 EC303226 Contexts for Promise: Noteworthy Practices and Innovations in theIdentification of Gifted Students. Callahan, Carolyn M., Ed.; And Others National Research Center on the Gifted and Talented, Storrs, CT. Apr 1993; 226p. Sponsoring Agency: Office of Educational Research and Improvement (ED), Washington, DC. Contract No: R206R00001 Available From: The National Research Center on the Gifted and Talented,Curry School of Education, UVA, Ruffner Hall, 405 Emmet St. S.,Charlottesville, VA 22903-2495. EDRS Price - MF01 Plus Postage. PC Not Available from EDRS. Language: English Document Type: COLLECTION (020) Geographic Source: U.S.; Virginia Journal Announcement: RIEDEC94 This monograph contains 11 papers describing model projects that address theidentification of gifted students. An introduction by Carolyn M. Callahan andCarol A. Tomlinson identifies commonalities and themes in the promisingpractices highlighted in the papers. The papers include: (1) "Project STREAM:Support, Training and Resources for Educating Able Minorities" (Donna RaeClasen); (2) "Early Assessment for Exceptional Potential in Young Minorityand/or Economically Disadvantaged Students" (Beverly D. Shaklee and others);(3) "A Model Program for Identifying Young Underserved Gifted Students"(Waveline T. Starnes); (4) "The Full Potential Program for Underserved AfricanAmerican Students" (Nancy Amuleru-Marshall and others); (5) "Spotting TalentEarly in Minority Students: Project STEMS in Howard County, Maryland" (Paula M.Pizzat); (6) "Urban Scholars: Access to Excellence for Students and Schools"(Joan Becker); (7) "The Search for Talent: New Methods for Assessing StudentStrengths" (Evelyn Levsky Hiatt); (8) "Talent beyond Words: Identifying andDeveloping Potential through Music and Dance in Economically Disadvantaged,Bilingual and Handicapped Children" (Barry Oreck and Susan Bum); (9) "TheTwice-Exceptional Project: Identifying and Serving Gifted/Handicapped Learners"(M. Elizabeth Nielsen and others); (10) "The Menasha Joint School DistrictGifted Program: Matching Identification and Curriculum" (Scott L. Hunsaker);and (11) "Coordinating Instruments with Identification in Bayonne, New Jersey"(Paula M. Pizzat). A final chart summarizes the programs. Individual paperscontain references. (DB) Descriptors: *Ability Identification; Black Students; *Demonstration Programs;Early Childhood Education; Economically Disadvantaged; *Educational Practices;Elementary Secondary Education; *Gifted; Gifted Disabled; Minority Groups;Special Programs; *Talent; *Talent Identification; Urban Education Identifiers: Georgia (Atlanta); Maryland (Howard County); Maryland(Montgomery County); Massachusetts (Boston); New Jersey (Bayonne); New Mexico(Albuquerque); New York (New York); Ohio; Texas; Wisconsin ED371499 EC303086 A Javits Project: Gifted Education Policy Studies Program. Final Report. Gallagher, James; Coleman, Mary Ruth North Carolina Univ., Chapel Hill. Gifted Education Policy Studies Program. Apr 1994; 60p. Sponsoring Agency: Department of Education, Washington, DC. Contract No: R206A00596 EDRS Price - MF01/PC03 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: RESEARCH REPORT (143) Geographic Source: U.S.; North Carolina Journal Announcement: RIENOV94 The Gifted Education Policy Studies Program was designed to address twoissues: the status of state and local policies on the identification of giftedstudents from special populations (culturally diverse, children withdisabilities, and economically disadvantaged); and the impact of educationalreform movements (cooperative learning and middle schools) on services forgifted students. Content analysis of documents collected from each stateconcerning identification of gifted students revealed that inclusive policieswere present, but the record for actual inclusion of special populations waspoor. Site visits to three states (Arkansas, Ohio, Texas) with inclusivepractices revealed that local leaders were able to take state help in the formof demonstration projects and seed money to create broader identificationprocedures. Barriers to more effective policies were identified, and modellegislation was developed. Concerning the impact of middle schools on giftededucation, a survey of 400 teachers revealed that gifted education specialistsembraced ability grouping and rejected the position that being identified asgifted created social difficulties for students, while middle schools personnelfelt the opposite. A survey of educators of gifted students and educatorsusing cooperative learning revealed differences on almost every dimensionconcerning the value of cooperative learning. Case studies identified featuresof middle schools with strong programs for gifted students and features ofprograms that blend cooperative learning and gifted education. (Contains 42references.) (JDD) Descriptors: Ability Grouping; *Ability Identification; Case Studies;*Cooperative Learning; Cultural Differences; Economically Disadvantaged;Educational Change; *Educational Innovation; Educational Legislation;*Educational Policy; Educational Practices; Elementary Secondary Education;*Gifted; Gifted Disabled; *Middle Schools; Special Needs Students; StatePrograms; Teacher Attitudes Identifiers: Arkansas; *Inclusive Schools; Ohio; Texas ED359743 EC302493 National Excellence: A Case for Developing America's Talent. Ross, Pat O'Connell; And Others Office of Educational Research and Improvement (ED), Washington, DC. Programsfor the Improvement of Practice. Oct 1993; 42p.; Foreword by Richard W. Riley, Secretary of Education. Report No: PIP-93-1201 ISBN: 0-16-042928-5 Available From: U.S. Government Printing Office, Superintendent of Documents,Mail Stop: SSOP, Washington, DC 20402-9328. EDRS Price - MF01/PC02 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: POSITION PAPER (120); EVALUATIVE REPORT (142) Geographic Source: U.S.; District of Columbia Journal Announcement: RIEDEC93 Government: Federal This report on the educational needs of American gifted and talented studentsidentifies indicators of an educational crisis, describes the current status ofeducation for these students, and presents recommendations to meet theeducational needs of these students. Indicators demonstrating the need forchange include the relatively poor performance by American students oninternational tests and the small number of students performing at the highestlevels on National Assessment of Educational Progress tests. Recent studieshave shown that gifted and talented elementary school students have mastered 35-40% of the curriculum in five basic subjects before they begin the school year;most regular classroom teachers make few, if any, provisions for talentedstudents; highest achieving students study less than an hour a day; and only 2cents out of every $100 spent on K-12 education supports special opportunitiesfor talented students. A review describes how gifted and talented students arecurrently identified, the number of students served, the kind of supportavailable, the kind of education most gifted and talented students receive, andcharacteristics of effective programs for these students. Sevenrecommendations are offered: (1) set challenging curricular standards; (2)establish high-level learning opportunities; (3) ensure access to earlychildhood education; (4) increase learning opportunities for disadvantaged andminority children with outstanding talents; (5) broaden the definition ofgifted (a broadened definition based on the federal Javits Gifted and TalentedEducation Act is offered); (6) encourage appropriate teacher training andtechnical assistance; and (7) match world performance. (Contains 43references.) (DB) Descriptors: Ability Identification; Comparative Education; *Definitions;Early Childhood Education; Educational Assessment; *Educational Needs;*Educational Objectives; Educational Quality; Elementary Secondary Education;*Excellence in Education; Expenditure per Student; Futures (of Society);*Gifted; Gifted Disadvantaged; Special Education; *Talent; TalentIdentification Identifiers: Javits Gifted and Talented Students Act EJ474437 EC607521 Identifying Gifted Minorities. Weaver, Delores; And Others Gifted Child Today (GCT), v16 n5 p18-19 Sep-Oct 1993 ISSN: 0892-9580 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); PROJECT DESCRIPTION (141) Journal Announcement: CIJAPR94 A program was implemented in the Pittsburgh (Pennsylvania) Public Schools to provide screening, identification, and programming for primary-level gifted students from culturally diverse and economically disadvantaged populations. The program's objectives include field testing recommended practices, developing appropriate identification procedures, and developing a support system for identified students. (JDD) Descriptors: *Ability Identification; Economically Disadvantaged; *Educational Methods; *Gifted Disadvantaged; Minority Groups; Primary Education; *Program Development Identifiers: Pittsburgh School District PA ED329634 UD027945 Defensible Programs for Cultural and Ethnic Minorities. Critical Issues in Gifted Education. Volume II. Maker, C. June, Ed.; Schiever, Shirley W., Ed. 1989; 376p. ISBN: 0-89079-184-8 Available From: Pro-Ed, 8700 Shoal Creek Boulevard, Austin, TX 78758 ($35.00). Document Not Available from EDRS. Language: English Document Type: BOOK (010); COLLECTION (020); RESEARCH REPORT (143) Geographic Source: U.S.; Texas Journal Announcement: RIEJUL91 This collection of 41 articles examines critical issues in the provision of special services for gifted Asian American, American Indian, Black, and Hispanic American students. The following key issues are addressed for each group: (1) the identification of the gifted in that population; (2) the purpose of the special program for that population; (3) the need to differentiate the special program from that provided for majority culture students; (4) the nature of program modifications; and (5) any special considerations and administrative implications. The following findings are discussed: (1) definitions of giftedness must be appropriate to the student being served; (2) internal program articulation must address student strengths and weaknesses, and prevent interruptions in service by stabilizing placement criteria; (3) definitions, program purpose, and identification procedures must be clear; (4) all aspects of the program must be consistent with each other; (5) definitions and program purposes must be comprehensive; (6) teachers must respond to the differing values, concerns, and behavioral manifestations of giftedness; (7) gifted students must be viewed as having unique needs that are different from their peers'; and (8) instruments and procedures used in assessment must be valid. A 32-item list of materials and resources for developing a curriculum for Hispanic American students and 32 charts and illustrations are included. Statistical data are presented in three tables and one graph. A 495-item bibliography and brief biographies of the editors and contributors are appended. (FMW) Descriptors: *Academically Gifted; American Indians; Asian Americans; Black Students; *Curriculum Development; Elementary Secondary Education; *Ethnic Groups; *Gifted Disadvantaged; Hispanic Americans; Minority Group Children; *Program Development; Student Needs; *Talent Identification Internet Resources Internet Listservs Top of Page Back to ERIC Menu Back to CEC Home Page Copyright ©1996 ERIC Clearinghouse on Disabilities and Gifted Education URL: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm WT02-B20-55IA001-000011-B023-223http://www.cec.sped.org:80/faq/incluson.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101074532 text/html 20792HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 07:45:37 GMTLast-modified: Tuesday, 10-Sep-96 14:27:00 GMTContent-length: 20599Content-type: text/html Inclusion Inclus-FAQ (Last updated July 20, 1996) THE ERIC CLEARINGHOUSE ON DISABILITIES AND GIFTEDEDUCATION (ERIC EC) The Council for Exceptional Children 1920Association Drive Reston, VA 20191 Toll Free: 1-800-328-0272 TTY: 703-264-9449 E-mail: ericec@cec.sped.org Internet: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm Please provide information on mainstreaming or inclusion and children with disabilities. This file includes information about Inclusion. At the end of the file are links to Internet resources and Internet listservs (discussion groups) where you can obtain more specific information on the topic. There may be an ERIC digest thatprovides further information on this topic. You can read the full text of ERIC EC digests under our listing at the U.S.Department of Education, Office of Educational Research and Improvement. Enclosed are several citations from the ERIC database. These records are asample of the kind of information you can find in the ERIC database. For morecitations on your topic of interest, you may want to search the ERIC database yourself onthe Internet. References with ED (ERIC Document) and EJ (ERIC Journal) identifiers are cited inthe ERIC database; for example, ED333123 or EJ333999. ERIC documents areavailable in microfiche collections at more than 825 locations worldwide (check yourlocal college or public library). They can also be ordered for a fee through the ERICDocument Reproduction Service (EDRS) at 1-800-443-ERIC. References with anEJ (ERIC Journal) number are available for a fee from the originating journal (checkwith your local college or public library), through interlibrary loan services, or fromarticle reproduction clearinghouses, such as UMI: 1-800-248-0360; or ISI:1-800-523-1850. Search terms: mainstreaming or inclusive schools or social integration ED387999 EC304354 Inclusion: 450 Strategies for Success--A Practical Guide for All Educators Who Teach Students with Disabilities. Hammeken, Peggy A. 1995; 138p. ISBN: 0-9644271-7-6 Available From: Peytral Publications, P.O. Box 1162, Minnetonka, MN 55345 ($19.95). Document Not Available from EDRS. Language: English Document Type: TEACHING GUIDE (052); TEST, QUESTIONNAIRE (160) Geographic Source: U.S.; Minnesota Journal Announcement: RIEMAR96 Target Audience: Teachers; Practitioners This book contains 450 strategies for starting or improving programs for including students with disabilities in regular classrooms. Consideration is first given to developing a plan for inclusion, grouping students, using assistants for the student groups, scheduling, presenting the inclusion plan, training staff, setting up an inclusion classroom, and working as a team. Specific classroom and curriculum modifications are then discussed, including modifications to textbooks and novels, daily assignments, spelling and written language, mathematics strategies, oral and written directions, oral presentations, note-taking, and grading. Suggestions are offered for creating audiocassettes, providing additional support for students with hearing and vision impairments, modifying the environment for students with attention deficit disorder, and dealing with behavior and attention difficulties as well as impulsivity and distractibility. Appended are 21 worksheets and reproducible forms to survey teachers, parents, and students; gather student data; develop a schedule; develop curriculum modifications; and carry out other administrative activities. (SW) Descriptors: Accessibility (for Disabled); Attention Deficit Disorders; Classroom Environment; *Classroom Techniques; *Curriculum Development; *Disabilities; Elementary Secondary Education; Hearing Impairments; *Inclusive Schools; Mainstreaming; Mathematics Instruction; Program Development; Spelling Instruction; Student Evaluation; Teaching Methods; Textbooks; Visual Impairments; Writing Instruction ED386014 EC304217 Teaching Special Learners in the General Education Classroom: Methods and Techniques. Second Edition. McCoy, Kathleen M. 1995; 484p. ISBN: 0-89108-238-7 Available From: Love Publishing Co., 1777 S. Bellaire St., Denver, CO 80222 ($49.95). Document Not Available from EDRS. Language: English Document Type: BOOK (010); INSTRUCTIONAL MATERIAL (051) Geographic Source: U.S.; Colorado Journal Announcement: RIEJAN96 Target Audience: Teachers; Practitioners This textbook emphasizes practical guidelines and approaches that work with special students mainstreamed into regular classrooms. The background of the mainstream and inclusion movements and labeling practices is considered, along with specific exceptionalities and methods effective in teaching children who have learning disabilities, mental handicaps, behavior problems, physical impairments, visual impairments, and hearing impairments. The book then covers the concept, practice, and components of the Individualized Education Plan, including teamwork in planning and implementation. Classroom organization and management techniques are addressed, including behavior management and the affective components of learning, attitudes, and how to communicate teacher expectations. The final chapters address basic skill areas, including: identification of reading difficulties, reading strategies, oral and written language, spelling, handwriting, mathematics assessment tools, mathematics instructional content, and techniques for helping children with special learning needs in math. The potential of technology to meet the increasing diversity in the general education setting is also addressed. Step-by-step suggestions and classroom vignettes are included, along with a glossary. (Each chapter contains references.) (SW) Descriptors: Basic Skills; Classroom Design; Classroom Techniques; Computer Uses in Education; *Disabilities; Educational Technology; Elementary Secondary Education; Evaluation Methods; *Inclusive Schools; Individualized Education Programs; *Language Arts; Mainstreaming; *Mathematics Instruction; *Reading Instruction; Student Evaluation; *Teaching Methods EJ503128 EC611203 Responsible Inclusion for Students with Learning Disabilities. Vaughn, Sharon; Schumm, Jeanne Shay Journal of Learning Disabilities, v28 n5 p264-70 May 1995 ISSN: 0022-2194 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); NON-CLASSROOM MATERIAL (055) Journal Announcement: CIJSEP95 Target Audience: Practitioners Responsible inclusion of students with learning disabilities in regular education involves putting the student first, allowing teachers to self-select their involvement in inclusion, providing adequate resources, developing school-based inclusive models, maintaining a continuum of services, offering professional development, developing an inclusion philosophy, and refining curriculum approaches and service delivery to meet all students' needs. (JDD) Descriptors: Delivery Systems; *Educational Practices; Elementary Secondary Education; *Guidelines; *Inclusive Schools; *Learning Disabilities; Regular and Special Education Relationship ED385052 EC304085 Reintegrating Students with Learning Disabilities into the Mainstream: A Two-Year Study. Fuchs, Douglas; And Others Vanderbilt Univ., Nashville, TN. Peabody Coll. Apr 1995 59p. Paper presented at the Annual Convention of the Council for ExceptionalChildren (72nd, Denver, CO, April 6-10, 1994). Sponsoring Agency: Special Education Programs (ED/OSERS), Washington,DC. Contract No: G008730082-89; HD15052 EDRS Price - MF01/PC03 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: RESEARCH REPORT (143); CONFERENCE PAPER (150) Geographic Source: U.S.; Tennessee Journal Announcement: RIEDEC95 This study evaluated the short-term and long-term effects of three variantsof a case-by-case process for readying students with learning disabilities tomove successfully from resource rooms to regular classrooms for mathinstruction. Twenty-seven special educators from 21 elementary and middleschools and their 47 students with learning disabilities were assigned randomlyto one of three experimental conditions or a control group. In theexperimental conditions, students were prepared for the transition by use ofcurriculum-based measurement and transenvironmental programming, each alone andin combination. Educational placement, math achievement, and student attitudesabout reintegration were assessed in special and regular education settings.Teachers using the more complex and labor-intensive variants of the case-by-case process were more successful at moving students across settings andfostering greater math achievement and positive attitude change, especiallywhile the students were still in special education. Nevertheless, at 1-yearfollow-up, about half of the 47 students had never been integrated or weremoved to the mainstream temporarily, only to be returned to special education.One reason for the relatively high return rate may have been that reintegratedstudents' math achievement slowed considerably in the mainstream. Implicationsare discussed. Study data are presented in nine tables and one figure.(Contains 49 references.) (Author/DB) Descriptors: *Curriculum Based Assessment; Elementary Secondary Education;Inclusive Schools; *Learning Disabilities; *Mainstreaming; MathematicsInstruction; Outcomes of Education; Program Effectiveness; *Reentry Students;Remedial Instruction; Resource Room Programs; *Student Placement; *TransitionalPrograms ED385042 EC304075 The Evaluation of Inclusive Education Programs. Lipsky, Dorothy Kerzner; Gartner, Alan City Univ. of New York, NY. National Center on Educational Restructuring andInclusion. NCERI Bulletin, v2 n2 Spr 1995 1995 9p. EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: SERIAL (022); REVIEW LITERATURE (070) Geographic Source: U.S.; New York Journal Announcement: RIEDEC95 This bulletin summarizes research on the benefits of inclusive educationprograms; provides data on the current status of special education; andconsiders studies of individual inclusion programs, state and district studies,and the effects of inclusion on students without disabilities. The researchand evaluation data on inclusion indicate a strong trend toward improvedstudent outcomes (academic, behavior, and social) for both special educationand general education students. It is suggested that the drive for upgradingstandards and the inclusion of all students in these reforms has createdtension for educators. A point of congruence between the school effectivenessefforts and those promoting inclusion is that a new approach must become partof a restructured educational system. Districts conducting successfulrestructuring programs that include all students have identified the followingkey factors: visionary leadership; collaboration; refocused use of assessment;supports for staff and students; funding that is sufficient and "follows thestudent," and effective parent and family involvement. (Contains 57references.) (SW) Descriptors: Academic Achievement; *Disabilities; Educational Improvement;Educational Research; Elementary Secondary Education; *Inclusive Schools;Mainstreaming; *Outcomes of Education; *Program Effectiveness; ProgramEvaluation; School Effectiveness; Social Integration; Special Education;Student Behavior EJ499169 EA530433 Special Education in Restructured Schools: Findings from Three Multi-YearStudies. Zigmond, Naomi; And Others Phi Delta Kappan, v76 n7 p531-40 Mar 1995 ISSN: 0031-7217 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: EVALUATIVE REPORT (142); JOURNAL ARTICLE (080) Journal Announcement: CIJJUL95 Describes innovative, inclusive models for providing special educationservices for learning-disabled students developed by three universities andfunded by the Office of Special Education. The projects, involvingconsiderable financial and professional resources, were implemented at sixrestructuring elementary schools. Findings suggest that general educationsettings produce achievement outcomes for learning-disabled students that areneither desirable nor acceptable. (41 references) (MLH) Descriptors: *Academic Achievement; Educational Improvement; ElementaryEducation; *Learning Disabilities; *Mainstreaming; Models; *Outcomes ofEducation; *School Restructuring; *Special Education Identifiers: *Inclusive Educational Programs; University of Pittsburgh PA;University of Washington; Vanderbilt University TN EJ496166 EA530134 What Are the Outcomes for Nondisabled Students? Staub, Debbie; Peck, Charles A. Educational Leadership, v52 n4 p36-40 Dec-Jan 199 1995 ISSN: 0013-1784 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: EVALUATIVE REPORT (142); REVIEW LITERATURE (070);JOURNAL ARTICLE (080) Journal Announcement: CIJMAY95 Although research is limited, the available studies consistently indicatethat inclusion does not harm nondisabled students. A literature reviewdisclosed five positive themes: reduced fear of human differences, accompaniedby increased comfort and awareness; growth in social cognition; improvements inself-concept; development of personal moral and ethical principles; and warmand caring friendship. (26 references) (MLH) Descriptors: *Academic Achievement; Elementary Secondary Education;*Friendship; *Mainstreaming; *Outcomes of Education; Research Needs; SelfConcept; *Social Cognition Identifiers: *Inclusive Educational Programs EJ496165 EA530133 The Effects of Inclusion on Learning. Baker, Edward T.; And Others Educational Leadership, v52 n4 p33-35 Dec-Jan 199 1995 ISSN: 0013-1784 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: EVALUATIVE REPORT (142); REVIEW LITERATURE (070);JOURNALARTICLE (080) Journal Announcement: CIJMAY95 Summarizes recent research concerning inclusion's (generally positive)effects on student learning and social relations with classmates. Three meta-analyses address the most-effective-setting issue by generating a commonmeasure, an effect size. These effect sizes demonstrate a small-to-moderatebeneficial influence of inclusive education on special-needs children' academicand social outcomes. (11 references) (MLH) Descriptors: *Academic Achievement; Educational Benefits; ElementarySecondary Education; *Influences; *Mainstreaming; Meta Analysis; *Outcomes ofEducation; Public Policy; *Socialization; *Special Needs Students; StudentPlacement Identifiers: *Inclusive Educational Programs EJ472716 EC607355 Cooperative Planning for Regular Classroom Instruction of Students withDisabilities. Gable, Robert A.; And Others Preventing School Failure, v37 n4 p16-20 Sum 1993 ISSN: 1045-988X Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); NON-CLASSROOM MATERIAL(055) Journal Announcement: CIJMAR94 Target Audience: Practitioners This article presents an approach to cooperative planning for individualizinginstruction of students with special needs in mainstream settings. Guidelinesfor making decisions about aspects of joint lesson plans and a Co-TeachingPlanning Form are offered. (DB) Descriptors: *Cooperative Planning; Decision Making; Elementary SecondaryEducation; *Individualized Instruction; *Instructional Development;*Mainstreaming; Records (Forms); Regular and Special Education Relationship;*Special Needs Students; Team Teaching Identifiers: *Teacher Collaboration EJ472714 EC607353 Co-Teaching: An Overview of the Past, a Glimpse at the Present, andConsiderations for the Future. Friend, Marilyn; And Others Preventing School Failure, v37 n4 p6-10 Sum 1993 ISSN: 1045-988X Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); REVIEW LITERATURE (070) Journal Announcement: CIJMAR94 The development and current status of coteaching to meet the needs ofstudents with disabilities in mainstream settings are reviewed. Issues areidentified concerning resources (finances, time, and space); participants (roleclarification of both professionals and paraprofessionals); and implementation(the need for documentation of coteaching effectiveness). (DB) Descriptors: *Disabilities; Educational History; Elementary SecondaryEducation; Instructional Effectiveness; *Mainstreaming; Program Implementation;Regular and Special Education Relationship; *Resource Allocation; RolePerception; Special Education Teachers; Special Needs Students; *Teacher Role;*Team Teaching Identifiers: *Teacher Collaboration EJ472648 EC607086 Developmentally Appropriate Strategies for Promoting Full Participation inEarly Childhood Settings. Cavallaro, Claire C.; And Others Topics in Early Childhood Special Education, v13 n3 p293-307 Fall 1993 ISSN: 0271-1214 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); NON-CLASSROOM MATERIAL(055) Journal Announcement: CIJMAR94 Target Audience: Practitioners This article presents strategies for early intervention in integratedsettings for children with disabilities. The strategies attempt to followprinciples of both developmentally appropriate practice and effective specialeducation. Strategies are grouped into four categories: (1) attention andresponsiveness to the child; (2) environmental structuring, (3) adultmediation, and (4) peer mediation. (Author/DB) Descriptors: Child Development; Classroom Environment; *Disabilities; EarlyChildhood Education; *Early Intervention; *Educational Practices; InstructionalEffectiveness; Instructional Improvement; *Mainstreaming; Regular and SpecialEducation Relationship; Special Education; *Teaching Methods Identifiers: *Developmentally Appropriate Programs EJ457531 EC605074 Including Students with Severe Disabilities in the Regular ClassroomCurriculum. Stainback, Susan; Stainback, William Preventing School Failure, v37 n1 p26-30 Fall 1992 ISSN: 1045-988X Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); NON-CLASSROOM MATERIAL(055) Journal Announcement: CIJJUN93 Target Audience: Practitioners This article suggests strategies that general educators, in collaborationwith integration facilitators and other specialists, can use to includestudents with severe disabilities in the regular classroom curriculum withininclusive schools. Implementation considerations focus on a team approach,peer involvement, emphasis on functional skills, and educationally challengingall students. (JDD) Descriptors: Classroom Techniques; Elementary Secondary Education;*Mainstreaming; Regular and Special Education Relationship; *SevereDisabilities; *Social Integration; *Teaching Methods Internet Resources Internet Listservs Top of Page Back to ERIC Menu Back to CEC Home Page copyright © 1996 ERIC Clearinghouse on Disabilities and Gifted Education Last updated: August 21, 1996 Send updates to: ericec@cec.sped.org URL: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm WT02-B20-56IA001-000011-B023-237http://www.cec.sped.org:80/faq/idealegi.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101074547 text/html 17061HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 07:45:52 GMTLast-modified: Tuesday, 10-Sep-96 22:06:00 GMTContent-length: 16868Content-type: text/html IDEAlegis IDEA-legisFAQ (last updated September 9, 1996) THE ERIC CLEARINGHOUSE ON DISABILITIES AND GIFTEDEDUCATION (ERIC EC) The Council for Exceptional Children 1920Association Drive Reston, VA 20191 Toll Free: 1-800-328-0272 TTY: 703-264-9449 E-mail: ericec@cec.sped.org Internet: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm Do you have any information on the legal aspects of inclusion for students with identified disabilities? This file includes information about IDEA and some legal aspects. At the end of this file are links to Internet resources and Internet listservs (discussion groups) where you can obtain more specific information on the topic. There may be ERIC digests that provide information on related topics. You can read the full text of ERIC EC digests under our listing at the U.S. Department of Education, Office of Educational Research and Improvement. Enclosed are several citations from the ERIC database. These records are a sample of the kind of information you can find in the ERIC database. For morecitations on your topic of interest, you may want to search the ERIC database yourself on the Internet. References with ED (ERIC Document) and EJ (ERIC Journal) identifiers are cited inthe ERIC database; for example, ED333123 or EJ333999. ERIC documents areavailable in microfiche collections at more than 825 locations worldwide (check yourlocal college or public library). They can also be ordered for a fee through the ERICDocument Reproduction Service (EDRS) at 1-800-443-ERIC. References with anEJ (ERIC Journal) number are available for a fee from the originating journal (checkwith your local college or public library), through interlibrary loan services, or fromarticle reproduction clearinghouses, such as UMI: 1-800-248-0360; or ISI:1-800-523-1850. ERIC descriptors (search terms) used: Compliance (Legal) or Court Litigation The ERIC citations listed below are based on existing legislation. The legislation is scheduled to be reauthorized in the near future. EJ505077 EC611262 Clyde K. and Sheila K. v. Puyallup School District: The Courts, Inclusion, and Students with Behavioral Disorders. Yell, Mitchell L. Behavioral Disorders, v20 n3 p179-89 May 1995 ISSN: 0198-7249 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); NON-CLASSROOM MATERIAL (055); REVIEW LITERATURE (070) Journal Announcement: CIJOCT95 This article reviews the legal basis of inclusion of students with disabilities in regular education settings, focusing on students with behavior disorders. It examines case law and extrapolates principles from these cases, including the Daniel R. R. standard, the Rachel H. standard, and the Clyde K. and Sheila K. versus Puyallup School District case. (Author/JDD) Descriptors: *Behavior Disorders; *Compliance (Legal); *Court Litigation; Elementary Secondary Education; *Inclusive Schools; Mainstreaming; School Responsibility EJ503066 EC611141 IDEA'S LRE Mandate: Another Look. Counterpoint. Osborne, Allan G., Jr.; DiMattia, Philip Exceptional Children, v61 n6 p582-83 May 1995 ISSN: 0014-4029 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); POSITION PAPER (120) Journal Announcement: CIJSEP95 This reaction to Mitchell Yell (EC 611 140) contends that a trend toward judicially ordered least restrictive environment (LRE) placements for children with disabilities has begun. School officials are urged to take a more active role in restructuring educational systems so that inclusion can become a reality. If educators do not take the lead, the courts will. (JDD) Descriptors: *Activism; Court Litigation; *Court Role; *Disabilities; Elementary Secondary Education; Inclusive Schools; *Mainstreaming; Persuasive Discourse; School Restructuring; *School Role EJ503065 EC611140 The Least Restrictive Environment Mandate and the Courts: Judicial Activism or Judicial Restraint? Yell, Mitchell L. Exceptional Children, v61 n6 p578-81 May 1995 For related article, see EC 611 141. ISSN: 0014-4029 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); POSITION PAPER (120) Journal Announcement: CIJSEP95 This paper examines four court decisions felt by some authors to represent judicial activism concerning least restrictive environment for students with disabilities. The courts' reasoning and decision-making methods are discussed, and the paper concludes that there is no indication that the courts are ready to abandon precedence and begin substituting their judgments for educators' judgments. (JDD) Descriptors: Activism; *Court Litigation; *Court Role; *Disabilities; Elementary Secondary Education; Inclusive Schools; *Mainstreaming; School Role EJ499311 EC610674 Least Restrictive Environment, Inclusion, and Students with Disabilities: A Legal Analysis. Yell, Mitchell L. Journal of Special Education, v28 n4 p389-404 Win 1995 ISSN: 0022-4669 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); POSITION PAPER (120) Journal Announcement: CIJJUL95 This review of legislation, including the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA), and court cases concludes that IDEA does not compel placement of students with disabilities in regular classrooms but, rather, fully supports the continuum of placements. Principles extrapolated from these cases offer guidance to special educators making decisions regarding the least restrictive environment. (Author/DB) Descriptors: *Compliance (Legal); Court Litigation; Decision Making; Disabilities; Educational Legislation; Educational Principles; Elementary Secondary Education; Federal Legislation; *Inclusive Schools; Legal Responsibility; *Mainstreaming; *Student Placement Identifiers: *Individuals with Disabilities Education Act EJ494823 EC610031 Counterpoint: Special Education--Ineffective? Immoral? Fuchs, Douglas; Fuchs, Lynn S. Exceptional Children, v61 n3 p303-05 Dec-Jan 1995 ISSN: 0014-4029 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); POSITION PAPER (120) Journal Announcement: CIJAPR95 This counterpoint to a critique of the authors' paper, which argued against full inclusion of students with disabilities, offers evidence of the effectiveness of special education and notes court litigation that has recognized that separate is not always unequal. (JDD) Descriptors: Court Litigation; *Disabilities; Elementary Secondary Education; Equal Education; *Inclusive Schools; Instructional Effectiveness; *Mainstreaming; Social Integration; *Special Education ED383142 EC303966 Improving the Implementation of the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act: Making Schools Work for All of America's Children. Burke, Edward P., Ed. National Council on Disability, Washington, DC. 9 May 1995 257p.; Available From: National Council on Disability, 1331 F Street, N.W., Suite 1050, Washington, DC 20004-1107 (available in braille, large print, and on diskette). EDRS Price - MF01/PC11 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: POSITION PAPER (120) Geographic Source: U.S.; District of Columbia Journal Announcement: RIEOCT95 Government: Federal Progress in implementing the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA) and recommendations to further promote its implementation via the 1995 legislative reauthorization process are examined. The purpose of the legislation and major court findings regarding its interpretation are discussed. Ten hearings conducted by the National Council on Disabilities, to elicit views of parents and students on the law's effectiveness and to gather recommendations for better implementation, are summarized, with testimony from witnesses in the following 10 theme areas: the "zero reject" provision of the law, assessment for eligibility and nondiscriminatory evaluation of students, providing for appropriate education, providing the least restrictive environment, parent participation in decision-making, procedural due process for students, services to transition students from school to activities after school, discretionary programs to help implement the law, provisions that determine the federal share of costs and how federal funds are allocated, and the 1994 federal educational reform law entitled the Educate America Act. Appendices include hearing dates, locations, participants and witnesses, and a synthesis regarding IDEA implementation based on 27 research papers. (SW) Descriptors: *Disabilities; Due Process; Early Childhood Education; Educational Change; *Educational Legislation; *Educational Policy; Elementary Secondary Education; Federal Aid; *Federal Legislation; *Government School Relationship; Inclusive Schools; Mainstreaming; Parent Participation; Program Effectiveness; Program Implementation; Student Evaluation; Transitional Programs Identifiers: *Individuals with Disabilities Education Act; Reauthorization Legislation EJ490859 EA529803 Room for All. Arnold, Jean B.; Dodge, Harold W. American School Board Journal, v181 n10 p22-26 Oct 1994 ISSN: 0003-0953 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: EVALUATIVE REPORT (142); LEGAL MATERIAL (090); JOURNAL ARTICLE (080) Journal Announcement: CIJFEB95 Full inclusion is a confusing topic. Many people misunderstand the "least restrictive environment" provision of the federal Individuals with Disabilities Education Act. Districts need not educate every disabled child in a regular classroom for the entire day, but have numerous options, so long as each child is carefully evaluated. Recent lawsuits brought by parents of mentally retarded children support mainstreaming practices. (MLH) Descriptors: *Court Litigation; *Disabilities; Downs Syndrome; Educational Benefits; *Educational Environment; Elementary Secondary Education; *Federal Programs; Individualized Education Programs; Legal Responsibility; *Mainstreaming; Mental Retardation; Student Placement Identifiers: *Inclusive Educational Programs; *Individuals with Disabilities Education Act EJ489491 EC609427 The IDEA's Least Restrictive Environment Mandate: Legal Implications. Osborne, Allan G., Jr. Exceptional Children, v61 n1 p6-14 Sep 1994 ISSN: 0014-4029 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); POSITION PAPER (120) Journal Announcement: CIJJAN95 During the early years of the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA), the courts generally deferred to school officials on least restrictive environment (LRE) matters and ruled in favor of more restrictive placements. Recent cases may signal that the courts may be growing impatient with school officials for not providing less restrictive environments. (Author/JDD) Descriptors: *Compliance (Legal); *Court Litigation; *Disabilities; Educational History; Educational Legislation; Elementary Secondary Education; Federal Legislation; Legal Responsibility; *Mainstreaming; School Responsibility; *Trend Analysis Identifiers: *Individuals with Disabilities Education Act EJ483538 EC608633 Special Education Reform in Light of Select State and Federal Court Decisions. Kubicek, Frederick C. Journal of Special Education, v28 n1 p27-42 Spr 1994 ISSN: 0022-4669 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); POSITION PAPER (120) Journal Announcement: CIJSEP94 Target Audience: Policymakers This paper analyzes three conflicting positions that constitute the Regular Education Initiative, in light of 24 federal and state court decisions. It concludes that the "Little Change Model" complies with more of these standards (such as due process, equal access, and education quality). The "Extreme Change Model" (which includes the concept of "full inclusion") appears to be least compliant. (Author/DB) Descriptors: Change Strategies; *Compliance (Legal); *Court Litigation; *Disabilities; Educational Change; *Mainstreaming; *Regular and Special Education Relationship Identifiers: Inclusive Schools EJ477511 EA528996 The Mainstreaming Cases: Tensions and Trends for School Administrators. Huefner, Dixie Snow Educational Administration Quarterly, v30 n1 p27-55 Feb 1994 ISSN: 0013-161X Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: EVALUATIVE REPORT (142); LEGAL MATERIAL (090); JOURNAL ARTICLE (080) Journal Announcement: CIJJUN94 School administrators are caught between the special education requirements of a free appropriate education and the mainstreaming preference embodied in federal law. This article analyzes circuit court cases and explains four overlapping judicial standards that influence mainstreaming decisions. Administrators should avoid blanket-separation and full-inclusion models and make individualized placement decisions honoring the least restrictive environment concept. (Contains 45 references.) (MLH) Descriptors: *Administrator Responsibility; *Court Litigation; Delivery Systems; *Disabilities; Elementary Secondary Education; *Federal Legislation; Legal Problems; *Mainstreaming; *Special Education Identifiers: *Individuals with Disabilities Education Act ED383135 EC303958 The "Full Inclusion" Court Cases: 1989-1994. Lipton, Diane City Univ. of New York, NY. National Center on Educational Restructuring and Inclusion. National Center on Educational Restructuring and Inclusion Bulletin, v1 n2 Fall 1994; 9p. EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: SERIAL (022) Geographic Source: U.S.; New York Journal Announcement: RIEOCT95 Target Audience: Policymakers; Parents; Community This theme issue provides guidance on school district compliance with the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA) in the inclusion of students with disabilities. It provides a summary and analysis of four recent decisions in federal appellate courts, which all affirmed the right of students with significant disabilities to attend regular education classes full time when the educational benefits for the individual student warrant such a placement. The cases are: "Daniel R.R. v. State Board of Education," "Greer v. Rome City School District," "Oberti v. Board of Education of the Borough of Clementon School District," and "Sacramento City Unified School District v. Rachel Holland," and were decided upon by the Fifth, Eleventh, Third, and Ninth Circuit Courts, respectively. Consistent across all the decisions is the holding that, before denying a student the opportunity to be in an inclusive setting, school districts must demonstrate that placement in the regular class with appropriate support services and supplementary aids will not provide benefit for the student. It is also noted that the U.S. Supreme Court has denied review of the Holland decision, suggesting that these appellate court decisions will be the standard for some time to come. (DB) Descriptors: *Compliance (Legal); *Court Litigation; *Disabilities; Educational Legislation; Elementary Secondary Education; Federal Legislation; *Inclusive Schools; Mainstreaming; *Student Placement; *Student Rights Identifiers: *Individuals with Disabilities Education Act Internet Resources Internet Listservs Top of Page Back to ERIC Menu Back to CEC Home Page copyright © 1996 ERIC Clearinghouse on Disabilities and Gifted Education URL: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm WT02-B20-57IA001-000011-B023-249http://www.cec.sped.org:80/faq/i-costs.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101074556 text/html 12735HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 07:46:05 GMTLast-modified: Tuesday, 10-Sep-96 14:21:00 GMTContent-length: 12542Content-type: text/html IncluCost-FAQ IncluCostFAQ (last updated July 22, 1996) THE ERIC CLEARINGHOUSE ON DISABILITIES AND GIFTEDEDUCATION (ERIC EC) The Council for Exceptional Children 1920Association Drive Reston, VA 20191 Toll Free: 1-800-328-0272 TTY: 703-264-9449 E-mail: ericec@cec.sped.org Internet: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm Could anyone point me to some recent reviews that focus on therelative costs of special versus integrated classes, in relationto the benefits for exceptional children? I am looking forobjective, balanced evaluations. This file includes information about therelative cost of inclusion. At the end of the file are links to Internet resources and Internet listservs (discussion groups) where you can obtain more specific information on the topic. There may be an ERIC digest that provides further information on this topic. You canread the full text of ERIC EC digests under our listing at the U.S.Department of Education, Office of Educational Research and Improvement. Also enclosed are several citations from the ERIC database. These records are asample of the kind of information you can find in the ERIC database. For morecitations on your topic of interest, you may want to search the ERIC database yourself onthe Internet. References with ED (ERIC Document) and EJ (ERIC Journal) identifiers are cited inthe ERIC database; for example, ED333123 or EJ333999. ERIC documents areavailable in microfiche collections at more than 825 locations worldwide (check yourlocal college or public library). They can also be ordered for a fee through the ERICDocument Reproduction Service (EDRS) at 1-800-443-ERIC. References with anEJ (ERIC Journal) number are available for a fee from the originating journal (checkwith your local college or public library), through interlibrary loan services, or fromarticle reproduction clearinghouses, such as UMI: 1-800-248-0360; or ISI:1-800-523-1850. EJ506587 EA530845 Does Inclusion Cost More? The Cost of Special Education. Mawdsley, Ralph D. School Business Affairs, v61 n7 p27-31 Jul 1995 ISSN: 0036-651X Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: EVALUATIVE REPORT (142); JOURNAL ARTICLE (080) Journal Announcement: CIJNOV95 Whether inclusion will produce resource economies for school districts isdifficult to determine. Districts that have developed inclusive models havereported mixed results. There appear to be no savings in personnel costs,although some overall reduction in transportation expenditure has occurred. Inclusiondemands a more fluid approach to resource allocation. (18 references)(MLH) Descriptors: *Costs; *Disabilities; Educational Finance; Elementary SecondaryEducation; *Mainstreaming; *Resource Allocation; *Special Education; *SpecialNeeds Students Identifiers: Americans with Disabilities Act 1990; *Inclusive EducationalPrograms; Individuals with Disabilities Education Act EJ501207 EA530461 Fiscal Analysis of a Special Education Inclusion Program. Roahrig, Paul L. ERS Spectrum, v13 n1 p18-24 Win 1995 ISSN: 0740-7874 Language: English Document Type: EVALUATIVE REPORT (142); JOURNAL ARTICLE (080) Journal Announcement: CIJAUG95 Compares costs (for instruction, administration, transportation, and staffdevelopment) related to inclusive programs in four pilot elementary schoolswith costs for traditional special education services in nine other elementaryschools in the Greater Clark (Indiana) School District. The fiscal analysisfound both programs equally cost-effective. When implementing inclusion, staffdevelopment should be given priority and extra funding. (MLH) Descriptors: *Costs; Elementary Education; *Expenditure per Student;*Mainstreaming; *Pilot Projects; School Administration; *Special Education; StaffDevelopment; Transportation Identifiers: *Clark County Special Education Cooperative IN; *InclusiveEducational Programs EJ497523 EA530323 Another School's Reality. Raison, Jeffrey; And Others Phi Delta Kappan, v76 n6 p480-82 Feb 1995 ISSN: 0031-7217 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: PROJECT DESCRIPTION (141); JOURNAL ARTICLE (080) Journal Announcement: CIJJUN95 Describes mainstreaming at the Dowling Urban Environment Learning Center inMinneapolis, Minnesota--a fully inclusive, racially mixed, K-6 magnet schoolthat is expensive but well worth the cost. This school has a clear purpose,few signs of emotional exhaustion among staff, and little depersonalization. Dowling'sambience is in marked contrast to an ineffectively managed middleschool described in the September 1994 "Kappan." (MLH) Descriptors: *Disabilities; Elementary Education; *Magnet Schools; *Mainstreaming;Misconceptions; *Racial Balance; *Urban Schools Identifiers: *Inclusive Educational Programs; *Minnesota (Minneapolis) EJ496160 EA530128 Can Inclusion Work? A Conversation with Jim Kauffman and MaraSapon-Shevin. O'Neil, John Educational Leadership, v52 n4 p7-11 Dec-Jan 199 1995 ISSN: 0013-1784 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: POSITION PAPER (120); JOURNAL ARTICLE (080) Journal Announcement: CIJMAY95 Mara Sapon-Shevin and Jim Kauffman debate the potential and pitfalls of theinclusion movement. Sapon-Shevin enumerates the benefits of inclusionaccompanied by adequate resources, support and commitment, teacher preparationtime, restructuring, and staff development. Kauffman insists that alternativesettings are necessary for some students and deplores "dumping" kids,regardless of need, into regular classrooms to save money. (MLH) Descriptors: Cost Effectiveness; *Delivery Systems; Disabilities; *Educational Benefits;Elementary Secondary Education; *Mainstreaming; Misconceptions; *Regular andSpecial Education Relationship; *Special NeedsStudents; *Student Placement Identifiers: *Inclusive Educational Programs; Kauffman (Jim); Sapon Shevin(Mara) EJ493002 EC609766 Instructional Costs of Inclusive Schooling. Salisbury, Christine; Chambers, Arthur Journal of the Association for Persons with Severe Handicaps, v19 n3 p215-22Fall 1994 ISSN: 0274-9483 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); RESEARCH REPORT (143) Journal Announcement: CIJMAR95 Target Audience: Administrators; Practitioners This investigation examined longitudinal cost data of one school district'smovement toward more inclusive practices. Findings included district costswere significantly less than comparable costs for out-of-district services;numbers of students with severe disabilities significantly increased over afive-year period; and contractual (related services) costs doubled over theperiod. (Author/DB) Descriptors: *Costs; *Disabilities; *Educational Trends; Elementary SecondaryEducation; Inclusive Schools; *Mainstreaming; Program Costs; Pupil PersonnelServices; School Districts; *Severe Disabilities; Social Integration; TrendAnalysis EJ486368 EA529592 The Cost of Inclusion: Educating Students with Special Needs. McCormick, Charles; First, Patricia F. School Business Affairs, v60 n7 p30-31,34-36 Jul 1994 ISSN: 0036-651X Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: NON-CLASSROOM MATERIAL (055); POSITION PAPER (120);JOURNAL ARTICLE (080) Journal Announcement: CIJNOV94 Identifies the various types of costs that can result from the implementationof inclusive schooling in a school district so that the costs can be known andallowed for during the planning stage. (MLF) Descriptors: Compliance (Legal); *Cost Estimates; *Disabilities; ElementarySecondary Education; Individualized Education Programs; *Mainstreaming; PublicSchools; Space Classification; Special Education; *Special Needs Students; StudentPlacement Identifiers: *Inclusive Educational Programs EJ489361 EA529722 Mainstreaming: One School's Reality. Baines, Lawrence; And Others Phi Delta Kappan, v76 n1 p39-40,57-63 Sep 1994 ISSN: 0031-7217 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: PROJECT DESCRIPTION (141); JOURNAL ARTICLE (080) Journal Announcement: CIJJAN95 Profiles teachers' everyday experiences at a southeastern Texas middle schoolthat mainstreams most of its special needs students. Classroom observations,accompanied by teacher and student survey data, showed that mainstreaming haddeleterious effects. Since teachers spent a disproportionate amount of timeserving special education students, regular students received less individualassistance, parent-teacher contacts, and lesson preparation time. (MLH) Descriptors: Behavior Problems; Classroom Environment; Class Size; DisciplineProblems; Intermediate Grades; *Mainstreaming; Middle Schools; Principals; *SpecialNeeds Students; *Suburban Schools; *Teacher Burnout; *TeacherExpectations of Students; Work Environment Identifiers: *Inclusive Educational Programs; *Texas (Southeast) EJ492834 EA529925 The Costs of Inclusion. McLaughlin, Margaret J.; Warren, Sandra Hopfengardner School Administrator, v51 n10 p8-12,16-19 Nov 1994 ISSN: 0036-6439 Language: English Document Type: EVALUATIVE REPORT (142); JOURNAL ARTICLE (080) Journal Announcement: CIJMAR95 To obtain information about costs, University of Maryland researchersinterviewed special education directors, principals, and other administratorsin 14 schools or districts committed to including all students withdisabilities. Respondents identified five affected areas: teachers andinstructional assistants, transportation, facilities, materials and equipment,and professional development. Inclusion has startup costs but is probablycost effective over time. (MLH) Descriptors: *Budgeting; *Costs; *Delivery Systems; *Disabilities; ElementarySecondary Education; *Mainstreaming; Professional Development; *Special Education;Student Transportation; Teacher Distribution Identifiers: *Inclusive Educational Programs EJ484355 TM517907 Meeting the Educational Needs of At-Risk Students: A Cost Analysis of Three Models. King, Jennifer A. Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis, v16 n1 p1-19 Spr 1994 ISSN: 0162-3737 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: EVALUATIVE REPORT (142); JOURNAL ARTICLE (080) Journal Announcement: CIJSEP94 The following models targeting at-risk elementary students are compared for cost: (1) Success for All (Robert Slavin), (2) Accelerated Schools (Henry Levin), and (3) School Development Program (James Comer). The Slavin model is the most costly in expenditure, and the Levin model requires the most additional staff time. (SLD) Descriptors: Comparative Analysis; *Cost Effectiveness; Educational Change; Educational Finance; Elementary School Students; Elementary Secondary Education; Financial Support; *High Risk Students; *Models; *Needs Assessment; Secondary School Students; Staff Development; Time Management Identifiers: *Accelerated Schools; School Development Program; *Success for All Program Internet Resources Internet Listservs Top of Page Back to ERIC Menu Back to CEC Home Page copyright © 1996 ERIC Clearinghouse on Disabilities and Gifted Education Last updated: August 20, 1996 Send updates to: ericec@cec.sped.org URL: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm WT02-B20-58IA001-000011-B023-267http://www.cec.sped.org:80/faq/grading.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101074612 text/html 16755HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 07:46:16 GMTLast-modified: Tuesday, 10-Sep-96 14:12:00 GMTContent-length: 16562Content-type: text/html Grading Grading Practices (last updated September 5, 1996) THE ERIC CLEARINGHOUSE ON DISABILITIES AND GIFTEDEDUCATION (ERIC EC) The Council for Exceptional Children 1920Association Drive Reston, VA 20191 Toll Free: 1-800-328-0272 TTY: 703-264-9449 E-mail: ericec@cec.sped.org Internet: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm How can we decide on an equitable grading system for our mainstreamed students with disabilities? This file includes general information about grading practices for mainstreamed students with disabilities. At the end of this file are links to Internet resources and Internet listservs (discussion groups) where you can obtain more specific information on this topic. There may be ERIC digests that provide further information on related topics. You can read the full text of ERIC EC digestsunder our listing at the U.S.Department of Education, Office of Educational Research and Improvement. Enclosed are several citations from the ERIC database. These records are asample of the kind of information you can find in the ERIC database. For morecitations on your topic of interest, you may want to search the ERIC database yourself onthe Internet. References with ED (ERIC Document) and EJ (ERIC Journal) identifiers are cited inthe ERIC database; for example, ED333123 or EJ333999. ERIC documents areavailable in microfiche collections at more than 825 locations worldwide (check yourlocal college or public library). They can also be ordered for a fee through the ERICDocument Reproduction Service (EDRS) at 1-800-443-ERIC. References with an EJ (ERIC Journal) number are available for a fee from the originating journal (check with your local college or public library), through interlibrary loan services, or from article reproduction clearinghouses, such as UMI: 1-800-248-0360; or ISI: 1-800-523-1850. ERIC Descriptors (search terms) used: Disabilities or Special Education and Grades or Grading and "Student Evaluation" or Testing or "Testing Accommodations (Disabilities)" EJ517915 EC612752 Report Card Grading and Adaptations: A National Survey of Classroom Practices. Bursuck, William; And Others Exceptional Children, v62 n4 p301-18 Feb 1996 ISSN: 0014-4029 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); RESEARCH REPORT (143) Journal Announcement: CIJJUN96 A national survey of elementary and secondary general education teachers (n=368, response rate of 52%) examined classroom grading practices, including grading adaptations for students with disabilities. Results indicated that teachers found certain adaptations (pass-fail grades, portfolios, multiple grades, and grading for effort) useful for students both with and without disabilities. (DB) Descriptors: Classroom Techniques; *Disabilities; Educational Practices; Elementary Secondary Education; Evaluation Methods; *Grading; Inclusive Schools; National Surveys; *Report Cards; *Student Evaluation; *Teacher Attitudes Identifiers: *Academic Accommodations (Disabilities) EJ513459 EC612475 Modifying Tests for Diverse Learners. Salend, Spencer J. Intervention in School and Clinic, v31 n2 p84-90 Nov 1995 ISSN: 1053-4512 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); NON-CLASSROOM MATERIAL (055) Journal Announcement: CIJMAR96 Target Audience: Teachers; Practitioners Test modifications and techniques that teachers can employ to adapt their tests to meet individualized needs of mainstreamed students with disabilities are considered. Suggestions are offered to assist special education teachers in helping general educators design tests; address test reliability, validity, content, and format; and develop alternative grading systems. (SW) Descriptors: *Disabilities; Elementary Secondary Education; *Evaluation Methods; Learning Problems; Mainstreaming; *Student Evaluation; Student Needs; *Teacher Made Tests; *Test Construction; Test Format; Test Reliability; Test Validity Identifiers: *Testing Accommodations (Disabilities) EJ514571 CS750862 Homework, Grading, and Testing Practices Used by Teachers for Students with and without Disabilities. Struyk, L. Ruth; And Others Clearing House, v69 n1 p50-55 Sep-Oct 1995 ISSN: 0009-8655 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: RESEARCH REPORT (143); JOURNAL ARTICLE (080) Journal Announcement: CIJAPR96 Reports results from surveys of secondary school teachers regarding what they are doing with respect to homework, grading, and testing for students with and without disabilities. Discusses implications for inclusion programs. (SR) Descriptors: *Disabilities; Educational Research; *Grading; *Homework; National Surveys; Secondary Education; Teacher Attitudes; Teaching Experience; *Testing EJ483505 EC608600 Classroom Grading: A National Survey of Policies. Polloway, Edward A.; And Others Remedial and Special Education (RASE), v15 n3 p162-70 May 1994 ISSN: 0741-9325 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); RESEARCH REPORT (143) Journal Announcement: CIJSEP94 Analysis of 225 surveys returned by school district superintendents indicated that most districts have grading policies and that these policies usually include modifications for students with disabilities. Trends in grading systems used and communication mechanisms employed are highlighted and discussed in relation to home-school collaboration and integration of students with disabilities. (Author/DB) Descriptors: *Board of Education Policy; *Disabilities; *Educational Trends; Elementary Secondary Education; Family School Relationship; *Grades (Scholastic); *Grading; Mainstreaming; National Surveys; Regular and Special Education Relationship; School Districts; Superintendents; Trend Analysis EJ452863 EC604229 Grading Secondary Vocational Education Students with Disabilities: A National Perspective. Rojewski, Jay W.; And Others Exceptional Children, v59 n1 p68-76 Sep 1992 ISSN: 0014-4029 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); RESEARCH REPORT (143) Journal Announcement: CIJMAR93 A national survey of 133 secondary vocational educators examined practices and perceptions toward grading students with disabilities. The majority of respondents included a competency-based grading component, believed that student effort should be used to determine grades, and had never been involved in their students' Individualized Education Program development. (Author/JDD) Descriptors: Competence; *Disabilities; Educational Change; *Educational Practices; Evaluation Methods; *Grading; Individualized Education Programs; National Surveys; Secondary Education; *Student Evaluation; *Teacher Attitudes; Vocational Education; *Vocational Education Teachers EJ452511 CE524298 Teacher Feature: Alternative Grading. Alff, Marvin; Kearns, Donna Journal for Vocational Special Needs Education, v15 n1 p36-39 Fall 1992 ISSN: 0195-7597 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); POSITION PAPER (120) Journal Announcement: CIJMAR93 The history of grading offers little support for current grading practices. Alternative methods such as mastery, student self-comparison, contracting, multiple grades, and the point system should be examined in the context of philosophical issues to determine new grading policies. (SK) Descriptors: Disabilities; Educational Objectives; Evaluation Criteria; *Evaluation Methods; *Grading; *Student Evaluation Identifiers: *Alternative Assessment EJ425643 EC600290 Grading Mainstreamed Special Needs Students: Determining Practices and Attitudes of Secondary Vocational Educators Using a Qualitative Approach. Rojewski, Jay W.; And Others Remedial and Special Education (RASE), v12 n1 p7-15,28 Jan-Feb 1991 ISSN: 0741-9325 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: RESEARCH REPORT (143); JOURNAL ARTICLE (080) Journal Announcement: CIJSEP91 Target Audience: Researchers; Practitioners A qualitative research approach with 20 secondary vocational teachers explored issues related to grading students with special needs, including (1) successful grading practices and problems/concerns of teachers; (2) teachers' perceptions of the messages that grades communicate; (3) preservice and inservice teacher preparation for grading; and (4) the developmental process of gradually changing grading practices. (DB) Descriptors: Disabilities; Educational Practices; Grades (Scholastic); *Grading; Mainstreaming; Qualitative Research; Secondary Education; *Special Needs Students; Student Evaluation; Teacher Attitudes; Teacher Education; Vocational Education; Vocational Education Teachers EJ352478 EC192323 Measuring Pupil Progress: A Comparison of Standardized Achievement Tests and Curriculum-Related Measures. Marston, Douglas; And Others Diagnostique, v11 n2 p77-90 Win 1986 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); RESEARCH REPORT (143) Journal Announcement: CIJAUG87 Two studies of third- through sixth-grade low-achievers (N=83) and 26 third-graders (some receiving special education services) compared traditional standardized achievement tests and alternative curriculum-based measures. Results indicated that curriculum-based measures were more sensitive in assessing student progress in reading and writing and related more consistently to a criterion measure of student growth. (Author/CB) Descriptors: *Achievement Tests; *Curriculum; *Disabilities; Evaluation Methods; Intermediate Grades; *Low Achievement; Reading Improvement; Reading Tests; *Standardized Tests; Student Evaluation; *Test Reliability; Writing (Composition); Writing Improvement Identifiers: *Curriculum Related Testing ED278204 EC191771 Grading Mainstreamed Handicapped Students. Position Paper. Shanks, Robert D., Jr., Ed. Grand Island School District, Nebr. Jan 1986 30p.; Some tables contain small type. EDRS Price - MF01/PC02 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: POSITION PAPER (120) Geographic Source: U.S.; Nebraska Journal Announcement: RIEJUN87 Target Audience: Practitioners The position paper of the Grand Island, Nebraska, schools supports the assumption that when a pupil's handicap affects his ability to learn and perform, appropriate special education should include guidelines for special grading. The paper identifies grading obstacles such as differing perceptions of various participants in the grading process. Three grading philosophies (criterion-referenced, self-referenced, and norm-referenced) are explained. General grading practices (e.g., use of a multiple grading system to serve diverse functions) are recommended. Also noted are grading practices for handicapped and remedial students grouped into categories based on standards, grading vehicles, or logistics. Elements of the grading process supported by this paper include performance criteria, the grading decision, and reporting systems. Physical, cognitive, emotional, and sensory handicapping factors are described as they relate to grading practices. Problems that regular educators have with adjusting grading practices for handicapped pupils are noted. Ten grading policy recommendations include grading by the subject teacher, designation of "alternative assignment" when adaptive grading is applied, reporting to parents in the form of a written progress report as well as a standard grade, and failure only in extreme and well-documented cases. Questions to help a teacher determine whether alternative grading is necessary for a mainstreamed student are offered. A sample matrix of grading messages and receivers, a grading contract, a multicategory system of grading mainstreamed handicapped students, and a three-page reference list conclude the document. (DB) Descriptors: *Disabilities; Educational Policy; Elementary Secondary Education; *Grades (Scholastic); *Grading; *Mainstreaming Identifiers: *Alternative Grading; Nebraska (Grand Island) EJ323830 EC180680 Grading Handicapped Pupils: Review and Position Statement. Carpenter, Dale Remedial and Special Education (RASE), v6 n4 p54-59 Jul-Aug 1985 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); NON-CLASSROOM MATERIAL (055) Journal Announcement: CIJJAN86 A review of grading issues, philosophies, and recommendations is provided with implications and specific suggestions for grading mainstreamed handicapped pupils at the secondary level. A position statement related to grading secondary mainstreamed handicapped pupils concludes the paper. The need for a fair and clear grading system for all pupils is emphasized. (Author/CL) Descriptors: *Disabilities; Educational Philosophy; *Grading; *Mainstreaming; Secondary Education ED261504 EC180573 Grading Handicapped Students in Vocational Education Programs. Squires, Sandra K. Aug 1985; 17p. EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: NON-CLASSROOM MATERIAL (055) Geographic Source: U.S.; Nebraska Journal Announcement: RIEFEB86 Target Audience: Teachers; Practitioners The paper examines several basic grading procedures, noting the advantages and disadvantages of each procedure for handicapped students. Eight alternatives to grading are mentioned; of these, four are considered: (1) contract grading, (2) pass-fail grading, (3) the mastery learning approach, and (4) written evaluations (including checklists). It is suggested that a more appropriate approach than any of these commonly found practices must be worked out on a building level. Samples of grading proposals are provided which may be useful to vocational teachers, including a pass-fail system based on competency achievement for a post-secondary program with suggested time parameters of 6, 9, and 12 months; a proposal combining grading with a weighting system; and a framework consisting of a set of assumptions and a single learner progress chart. (CL) Descriptors: *Disabilities; *Grading; Informal Assessment; Secondary Education; Student Evaluation; *Vocational Education EJ299484 EA517702 Grading the Mainstreamed Handicapped Student. Kiraly, John, Jr.; Bedell, Julia J. NASSP Bulletin, v68 n472 p111-15 May 1984 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: POSITION PAPER (120) Journal Announcement: CIJSEP84 Contending that traditional grading practices victimize the mainstreamed handicapped student, this essay analyzes the uses of grades and recommends a flexible grading system based on the use of grades to assist mainstreamed students to achieve a sense of competence. (MJL) Descriptors: *Disabilities; *Grading; *Mainstreaming; School Administration; Secondary Education; Special Education; *Student Evaluation; Student Motivation; *Student Needs Internet Resources Internet Listservs Top of Page Back to ERIC Menu Back to CEC Home Page copyright © 1996 ERIC Clearinghouse on Disabilities and Gifted Education URL: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm WT02-B20-59IA001-000011-B023-283http://www.cec.sped.org:80/faq/i-long.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101074624 text/html 22513HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 07:46:30 GMTLast-modified: Tuesday, 10-Sep-96 14:24:00 GMTContent-length: 22320Content-type: text/html Inclusion-long Incl.Long-FAQ (Last updated July 24, 1996) THE ERIC CLEARINGHOUSE ON DISABILITIES AND GIFTEDEDUCATION (ERIC EC) The Council for Exceptional Children 1920Association Drive Reston, VA 20191 Toll Free: 1-800-328-0272 TTY: 703-264-9449 E-mail: ericec@cec.sped.org Internet: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm Is there any long-term research on the effects of inclusion? This file includes information about inclusion and longitudinal research. At the end of the file are links to Internet resources and Internet listservs (discussion groups) where you can obtain more specific information on the topic. There may be ERIC digests on related topics that provide further information. You can read the full text of ERIC EC digests under our listing at the U.S.Department of Education, Office of Educational Research and Improvement. Enclosed are several citations from the ERIC database. These records are asample of the kind of information you can find in the ERIC database. For morecitations on your topic of interest, you may want to search the ERIC database yourself onthe Internet. References with ED (ERIC Document) and EJ (ERIC Journal) identifiers are cited inthe ERIC database; for example, ED333123 or EJ333999. ERIC documents areavailable in microfiche collections at more than 825 locations worldwide (check yourlocal college or public library). They can also be ordered for a fee through the ERICDocument Reproduction Service (EDRS) at 1-800-443-ERIC. References with anEJ (ERIC Journal) number are available for a fee from the originating journal (checkwith your local college or public library), through interlibrary loan services, or fromarticle reproduction clearinghouses, such as UMI: 1-800-248-0360; or ISI:1-800-523-1850. Many school districts are still wrestling with the issue of how best to design and implement inclusive programs. The National Longitudinal Study, as cited by the U.S. Department of Education (1994) indicates that the success of students with disabilities in regular education classes is related to the supports and services they receive. Studies have indicated that when general education classes are modified to accommodate the needs of students with disabilities, these students have improved educational outcomes. For students with severe disabilities, these outcomes include better social development, more social interactions, enhanced skill acquisition and generalization, better health, more independence, greater success in meeting the objectives of individualized educational plans (IEPs), more positive attitudes on the part of nondisabled peers and others in the community, and more normalized adult functioning. For students with mild disabilities, studies found that integrated placements resulted in higher academic achievement and greater socioemotional growth. Recent research suggests that the more students with disabilities are included in general education classrooms and other age-appropriate environments, the more likely they are to have positive outcomes (Hunt, Farron-Davis, Staub, Beckstead, Curtis, Karasoff, & Sailor, 1992). ERIC descriptors (search terms) used: (Inclusion or Mainstreaming or Social Integration) and (Special Education or Disabilities) and Research Report and Longitudinal Studies ED370276 EC303007 Traversing the Mainstream: Regular Education and Students with Disabilities in Secondary School. A Special Topic Report from the National Longitudinal Transition Study of Special Education Students. Hebbeler, Kathleen SRI International, Menlo Park, Calif. Dec 1993 126p.; Sponsoring Agency: Special Education Programs (ED/OSERS), Washington, DC. Contract No: 300-87-0054 EDRS Price - MF01/PC06 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: RESEARCH REPORT (143) Geographic Source: U.S.; California Journal Announcement: RIEOCT94 This report documents what has been learned through the National Longitudinal Transition Study (NLTS) of Special Education Students about regular education and secondary students with disabilities. Findings are based on data from more than 8,000 youth in secondary special education, ages 13 to 21, in 1985-86. Focus of the report is on how much time students spent in regular education and the effects of regular education on outcomes independent of student and other characteristics. After an introductory chapter, chapter 2 presents a general description of the methodology of the NLTS and a discussion of analytic considerations unique to this report. Chapter 3 looks at characteristics of students with disabilities in regular education. Chapter 4 describes academic and social outcomes during high school associated with time in regular education. Outcomes for young adults in the areas of postsecondary education, employment, independent living, and community participation are presented in chapter 5. Chapter 6 synthesizes findings from the NLTS about regular education and secondary school students with disabilities. (Contains 41 references.) (DB) Descriptors: *Disabilities; Education Work Relationship; Employment; Graduate Surveys; High Schools; Independent Living; Longitudinal Studies; *Mainstreaming;*Outcomes of Education; Postsecondary Education; *Regular and Special Education Relationship; Social Integration; *Student Characteristics; Time Factors (Learning); Transitional Programs Identifiers: *National Longitudinal Transition Study Spec Educ ED361928 EC302395 What Makes a Difference? Factors Related to Postsecondary School Attendance for Young People with Disabilities. Newman, Lynn; Cameto, Renee SRI International, Menlo Park, Calif. Apr 1993 54p.; Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the American Educational Research Association (Atlanta, GA, April 1993). Sponsoring Agency: Special Education Programs (ED/OSERS), Washington, DC.Contract No: 300-87-0054 EDRS Price - MF01/PC03 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: RESEARCH REPORT (143); REVIEW LITERATURE (070); CONFERENCE PAPER (150) Geographic Source: U.S.; California Journal Announcement: RIEFEB94 Target Audience: Practitioners; Parents This paper presents findings of a 6-year study exploring factors contributing to postsecondary school attendance or nonattendance by youth with disabilities based on data from the National Longitudinal Transition Study of Special Education Students (NLTS) for 8,000 students, ages 13 through 21, with disabilities. Factors found to be related to enrollment in postsecondary institutions included student ability/achievement, parental education, family/school urbanicity, parent expectations, enrollment in academic classes, and involvement in high school group activities. Students who were mainstreamed in high school academic classes were found to be more likely to go on to postsecondary education, and students who displayed antisocial or behavioral problems were found to be less likely to enroll in postsecondary education. Findings for postsecondary academic programs were similar to those for vocational programs. Appendices provide background information on the NLTS sample and a list of 19 reports and papers based on the NLTS. (Contains 45 references.) (PB) Descriptors: College Attendance; *Disabilities; *Enrollment Influences; Factor Analysis; Higher Education; Longitudinal Studies; Mainstreaming; *Outcomes of Education; Parent Influence; *Postsecondary Education; *Student Attrition; Vocational Education ED346667 EC301279 Hispanic Secondary School Students with Disabilities: How Are They Doing? Newman, Lynn SRI International, Menlo Park, Calif. Apr 1992 47p.; Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the American Educational Research Association (San Francisco, CA, April 1992). Sponsoring Agency: Special Education Programs (ED/OSERS), Washington, DC.Contract No: 300-87-0054 EDRS Price - MF01/PC02 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: RESEARCH REPORT (143); CONFERENCE PAPER (150) Geographic Source: U.S.; California Journal Announcement: RIENOV92 This paper focuses on the secondary school experiences of Hispanic students with disabilities, presenting findings from the National Longitudinal Transition Study (NLTS) of Special Education Students. The 5-year NLTS study included data on more than 8,000 students (of whom 733 were Hispanic) enrolled in special education in the 1985-86 school year. The data provided in this report were collected in 1987 from telephone interviews with parents of the NLTS Hispanic youth. The paper begins with a description of individual and family background factors, such as disability category, functional skills, youth demographics and household characteristics. It continues with a description of students' secondary school experiences including school characteristics (such as size and urbanicity) and school policies and practices regarding instructional placement and vocational education services and programs. The paper then focuses on aspects of student school performance and activities related to vocational and instructional placement experiences including absenteeism, school completion, employment during secondary school, and participation in extracurricular activities. Findings indicated that Hispanic students with disabilities were unlikely to be in racially integrated or mainstream settings, had fewer vocational training opportunities than other special education students, and were unlikely to participate in extracurricular group activities. An appendix presents background information on the NLTS. (35 references) (DB) Descriptors: Demography; *Disabilities; *Education Work Relationship; Extracurricular Activities; Family Characteristics; *Hispanic Americans; Longitudinal Studies; Mainstreaming; Secondary Education; *Social Integration; Student Characteristics; Student Participation; Student Placement; Transitional Programs; Urban Education; Vocational Education EJ432802 EC601182 A Longitudinal Study of Students with Learning Disabilities in Mainstream and Resource Programs. Osborne, Susan S.; And Others Exceptionality: A Research Journal, v2 n2 p81-95 1991 ISSN: 0936-2835 Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); RESEARCH REPORT (143) Journal Announcement: CIJFEB92 Cognitive, academic, and behavioral characteristics of 42 children with learning disabilities were assessed from identification at age 6-7 to the age of 11.5. At endpoint, resource students showed a drop in verbal intelligence quotient and lower achievement compared to mainstreamed students, though there were no differences at the time of identification. (Author/PB) Descriptors: *Academic Achievement; Behavior Development; *Cognitive Development; Elementary Education; Grade Repetition; Intelligence Differences; *Learning Disabilities; Longitudinal Studies; *Mainstreaming; Outcomes of Education; *Resource Room Programs ED341228 EC300998 Youth with Disabilities: How Are They Doing? The First Comprehensive Report from the National Longitudinal Transition Study of Special Education Students. Wagner, Mary; And Others SRI International, Menlo Park, Calif. Sep 1991 582p.; For related documents, see EC 300 996-997. Sponsoring Agency: Special Education Programs (ED/OSERS), Washington, DC.Contract No: 300-87-0054 Available From: SRI International, 333 Ravenswood Ave., Menlo Park, CA 94025-3493 ($40.00). EDRS Price - MF03/PC24 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: RESEARCH REPORT (143) Geographic Source: U.S.; California Journal Announcement: RIEJUN92 This report presents findings of a 5-year study on the transition of youth with disabilities from secondary school to early adulthood. The study included more than 8,000 youth with disabilities who were aged 13 to 21 and receiving special education in 1985-86. It examined experiences of the students in education, employment, and personal independence. Data included interviews with students' parents in 1987, analysis of school records, and a survey of educators, followed up by 1989 interviews with a subsample of 800 parents and/or youth. An executive summary reports major findings addressing: characteristics of youth with disabilities, secondary school programs of students in regular schools, secondary school programs of students in special schools, secondary school performance, secondary school completion, social integration, personal and residential independence, employment, enrollment in postsecondary schools, engagement in productive activities outside the home, youth with emotional disturbances, youth with visual impairments, severely impaired youth, young women with disabilities, the economically disadvantaged, the link between secondary school and postschool outcomes, occupationally oriented vocational training, regular education placements, work experience during high school, and social activities. The report provides narrative analysis and many tables detailing findings in 11 chapters: "Introduction" (Mary Wagner); "More Than a Label: Characteristics of Youth with Disabilities" (Camille Marder and Robert Cox); "Secondary School Programs" (Mary Wagner); "Secondary School Performance" (Mary Wagner); "Sticking It Out: Secondary School Completion" (Mary Wagner); "Social Activities" (Lynn Newman); "Growing Up, Moving On: Aspects of Personal and Residential Independence" (Lynn Newman); "The Working World Awaits: Employment Experiences during and Shortly after Secondary School" (Ronald D'Amico); "Enrollment in Postsecondary Schools" (Paul Butler-Nalin and Mary Wagner); "A Broader Look at Outcomes: Engagement in Productive Activities after Secondary School" (E. Deborah Jay); and "Reflections" (Mary Wagner.) Five commentaries by leading professionals (Alan Abeson, Bud Fredericks, Teresa Middleton, Irving Kenneth Zola, and Jeffrey V. Osowski) and four appendixes conclude the report. References are provided for most chapters. (DB) Descriptors: Academic Achievement; *Disabilities; Dropouts; Economically Disadvantaged; *Education Work Relationship; Emotional Disturbances; *Employment; Enrollment; Females; Followup Studies; Graduate Surveys; High School Graduates; High Schools; Interviews; Longitudinal Studies; Mainstreaming;National Surveys; *Outcomes of Education; *Personal Autonomy; Postsecondary Education; Severe Disabilities; Social Integration; Social Life; Special Education; Special Schools; *Student Characteristics; Student Placement; Visual Impairments; Vocational Education; Work Experience Identifiers: *National Longitudinal Transition Study Spec Educ EJ380169 EC211219 A Longitudinal Study of Graduates of Special Education Preschools: Educational Placement after Preschool. Edgar, Eugene; And Others Topics in Early Childhood Special Education, v8 n3 p61-74 Fall 1988 Theme Issue: Demographics and Definitional Issues. Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); RESEARCH REPORT (143) Journal Announcement: CIJAPR89 Target Audience: Practitioners Placement data on 582 graduates of public special education preschool programs in Washington indicated that 36 percent of the children were placed in regular education and 65 percent in special education. Placement stability one and two years later was high, with 62 percent of those changing placements moving to less restrictive settings. (Author/JDD) Descriptors: Ability Grouping; *Disabilities; Elementary Education; Longitudinal Studies; *Mainstreaming; *Preschool Children; Preschool Education; *Special Education; *Student Placement Identifiers: *Washington ED319187 EC230876 Special Education in America's Cities: A Descriptive Study. Buttram, Joan L.; Kershner, Keith M. Research for Better Schools, Inc., Philadelphia, Pa. 1988 120p.; For a related document, see ED 294 364. Sponsoring Agency: Council of the Great City Schools, Washington, D.C. Available From: Research for Better Schools, 444 North 3rd St., Philadelphia, PA 19123-4107 ($19.95). EDRS Price - MF01 Plus Postage. PC Not Available from EDRS. Language: English Document Type: RESEARCH REPORT (143); STATISTICAL MATERIAL (110) Geographic Source: U.S.; Pennsylvania Journal Announcement: RIEOCT90 Target Audience: Practitioners This study examined the management, operation, and effectiveness of special education programs in 33 urban school districts from 1984-85 through 1986-87. Data were collected on special education students, facilities, budgets, pre- referral, referral, placement, exit from special education programs, program evaluation, vocational education, related services, special education complaints and hearings, mainstreaming, and student progress evaluation criteria. Findings are organized around six underlying themes: the stability of school district enrollments and funding for special education programs; the referral and subsequent placement of students in special education programs; the incidence of complaints and hearings; the impact of federal and state regulations on program evaluation; the integration of special and regular education programs; and policy and program recommendations. No major increasing trends were found in enrollment or expenditures over the years studied. Numbers of inappropriate referrals were reduced. Complaints and hearings were not a major problem in most areas, and most special education students were enrolled in buildings that also held regular education classes. Recommendations based on these and other findings are offered. Eleven appendices describe the study's methodology and present raw data. (PB) Descriptors: *Disabilities; Elementary Secondary Education; Enrollment; Handicap Identification; Longitudinal Studies; Mainstreaming; Parent Grievances; *Program Effectiveness; Program Evaluation; Referral; School Funds; School Surveys; Special Education; Student Evaluation; *Student Placement; *Urban Education; *Urban Schools; Urban Studies EJ327462 TM510953 Handicapped Students in the Least Restrictive Environment: A Longitudinal Study. Travis, Luann Witzke; And Others School Psychology Review, v14 n4 p521-30 1985 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); RESEARCH REPORT (143) Journal Announcement: CIJMAR86 The effects of age; disability (educable mentally impaired, emotionally impaired, and learning disabled); and time interval on the percentage of time spent in the regular classroom were studied over a three-year period. Reading, spelling, and mathematics achievement were also examined. (Author/GDC) Descriptors: *Academic Achievement; Age Differences; *Disabilities; Elementary Secondary Education; *Emotional Disturbances; *Learning Disabilities; Longitudinal Studies; *Mainstreaming; *Mild Mental Retardation; Pretests Posttests; Time on Task ED221959 EA015132 P.O. 94-142: Policy Implementation and Professional Educators' Concern. Holloway, William H.; And Others Mar 1981 27p.; EDRS Price - MF01/PC02 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: RESEARCH REPORT (143) Geographic Source: U.S.; Kansas Journal Announcement: RIEMAR83 The concerns of Kansas educators about the implementation of the Education for All Handicapped Children Act (P.L. 94-142) mandate are examined in this research report. Five different samples of public school educators, totaling 7,000 persons, were randomly selected and stratified according to district size. Each sample was sent either the Stages of Concerns Questionnaire (SoCQ) or the General Concerns Inventory (GCI). Returns were obtained from between 32 and 39 percent of the different samples. The hypothesis central to the study was that the developmental sequence of concerns is predictable and can be observed and measured. The longitudinal design provided a basis for (1) an annual examination of educators' concerns regarding P.L. 94-142, (2) assessment of the change in stages of concern over time, (3) a test of the developmental change theory, and (4) the design and development of a new instrument, the General Concerns Inventory. The results from 3 years of study (1978-80) indicated that Kansas educators are still at an early stage of adoption of the mandated policy and only modest developmental change has occurred in the interval, though that change is in the hypothesized direction. The developmental theory received continued support. (Author/MLF) Descriptors: Administrator Attitudes; *Adoption (Ideas); Compliance (Legal); *Disabilities; *Educational Innovation; Elementary Secondary Education; Federal Legislation; Intervention; Longitudinal Studies; *Mainstreaming; Measures (Individuals); Participation; *Program Implementation; School Districts; *School Personnel; Tables (Data); Teacher Attitudes; TrainingIdentifiers: *Education for All Handicapped Children Act; General Concerns Inventory; Kansas; Stages of Concern about the Innovation Internet Resources Internet Listservs Top of Page Back to ERIC Menu Back to CEC Home Page copyright © 1996 ERIC Clearinghouse on Disabilities and Gifted Education URL: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm WT02-B20-60IA001-000011-B023-292http://www.cec.sped.org:80/faq/i-procon.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101074635 text/html 23909HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 07:46:42 GMTLast-modified: Tuesday, 10-Sep-96 14:26:00 GMTContent-length: 23716Content-type: text/html Inclusion-ProCon InclProCnFAQ (Last updated July 23, 1996) THE ERIC CLEARINGHOUSE ON DISABILITIES AND GIFTEDEDUCATION (ERIC EC) The Council for Exceptional Children 1920Association Drive Reston, VA 20191 Toll Free: 1-800-328-0272 TTY: 703-264-9449 E-mail: ericec@cec.sped.org Internet: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm Please discuss the pros and cons of inclusion. This file includes information about the pros and cons of inclusion. At the end of the file are links to Internet resources and Internet listservs (discussion groups) where you can obtain more specific information on the topic. There may be a ERIC digest thatprovides further information on this topic. You can read the full text of ERIC EC digestsunder our listing at the U.S.Department of Education, Office of Educational Research and Improvement. Enclosed are several citations from the ERIC database. These records are asample of the kind of information you can find in the ERIC database. For morecitations on your topic of interest, you may want to search the ERIC database yourself onthe Internet. References with ED (ERIC Document) and EJ (ERIC Journal) identifiers are cited inthe ERIC database; for example, ED333123 or EJ333999. ERIC documents areavailable in microfiche collections at more than 825 locations worldwide (check yourlocal college or public library). They can also be ordered for a fee through the ERICDocument Reproduction Service (EDRS) at 1-800-443-ERIC. References with an EJ (ERIC Journal) number are available for a fee from the originating journal (check with your local college or public library), through interlibrary loan services, or from article reproduction clearinghouses, such as UMI: 1-800-248-0360; or ISI: 1-800-523-1850. ED352778 EC301708 Report Card to the Nation on Inclusion in Education of Students with MentalRetardation. Davis, Sharon Arc, Arlington, TX. Oct 1992 39p. Available From: The Arc, 500 E. Border St., Suite 300, Arlington, TX 76010($2). EDRS Price - MF01 Plus Postage. PC Not Available from EDRS. Language: English Document Type: PROJECT DESCRIPTION (141); EVALUATIVE REPORT (142) Geographic Source: U.S.; Texas Journal Announcement: RIEMAY93 Target Audience: Policymakers; Administrators; Practitioners This paper presents a summary of the current status of efforts to includestudents with mental retardation in mainstream educational programs. It beginswith a summary of a New Jersey federal court's ruling requiring more inclusiveeducation and a discussion of the commitment of the Arc (formerly TheAssociation for Retarded Citizens of the United States) to greater inclusion.The benefits of inclusive education for students with and without disabilitiesare briefly reviewed. Summary data (for 1989-90) are then given on placementsnationally in eight different instructional arrangements. The next sectionsprovide national and individual state data on the extent to which children withmental retardation are being educated in the following instructional settings:regular classes, resource rooms, separate classrooms, and separate schools. Asummary points out that only 6.7 percent of children with mental retardationare being educated in regular classrooms and that children with mentalretardation are much more likely than children with other disabilities to be insegregated settings. Ranking of states by a weighted formula finds most statesplace fewer than 10 percent of children with mental retardation in regularclasses. The paper ends with a call to action for policymakers andadministrators in the federal, state, and local governments as well as Arcchapter members. An appendix provides a table of state data. (DB) Descriptors: Court Litigation; *Educational Trends; Elementary SecondaryEducation; *Equal Education; *Mainstreaming; *Mental Retardation; Resource RoomPrograms; Special Classes; Special Schools; State Programs; Statistical Data;*Student Placement; Trend Analysis Identifiers: *Arc (Association for Retarded Citizens) ED331261 EC300244 Implications of the Regular Education Initiative Debate for SchoolPsychologists. Davis, William E. 13 Aug 1990 24p. Paper presented at the Annual Convention of the AmericanPsychological Association (98th, Boston, MA, August 13, 1990). EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: POSITION PAPER (120); CONFERENCE PAPER (150) Geographic Source: U.S.; Maine Journal Announcement: RIESEP91 Target Audience: Counselors; Practitioners The paper examines critical issues involved in the debate over the RegularEducation Initiative (REI) to merge special and regular education, withemphasis on implications for school psychologists. The arguments of proponentsand opponents of the REI are summarized and the lack of involvement by schoolpsychologists is noted. The REI is seen to effect school psychologists by apossibly drastic reduction in the demand for professional psychologicalservices in the schools, and by the denial of valuable and necessarypsychological services to many special needs students. Specific issues thatpsychologists need to address are: (1) pupil identification and classification;(2) pupil placement; and (3) changing roles and responsibilities. Schoolpsychologists are urged to become more involved in the debate because theirexpertise is needed, because they have a professional responsibility tocontribute, and because REI could have a direct impact on their futureemployment possibilities. They are urged to become involved at theprofessional/organizational level and at the local school level. Includes 33references. (DB) Descriptors: *Ancillary School Services; *Disabilities; Educational Change;Educational Trends; Elementary Secondary Education; Handicap Identification;Labor Market; Psychological Services; Regular and Special EducationRelationship; *School Psychologists; *Staff Role; Student Evaluation; StudentPlacement EJ387199 EC212326 The Regular Education Initiative Debate: Its Promises and Problems. Davis, William E. Exceptional Children, v55 n5 p440-46 Feb 1989 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); PROJECT DESCRIPTION (141);POSITIONPAPER (120) Journal Announcement: CIJAUG89 This paper analyzes the debate over the merger of special and regulareducation through the Regular Education Initiative. It identifies specificproblems and issues, suggests strategies for overcoming perceived obstacles,and recommends more substantial involvement of students and special and regulareducators at the local education agency level. (Author/JDD) Descriptors: *Disabilities; *Educational Policy; Educational Practices;*Educational Trends; Elementary Secondary Education; Policy Formation; SchoolDistricts; *Special Education Identifiers: *Regular and Special Education Relationship ED364046 EC302618 Inclusive Schools Movement and the Radicalization of Special EducationReform. Fuchs, Douglas; Fuchs, Lynn S. [Jul] 1993 42p. Sponsoring Agency: National Inst. of Child Health and Human Development(NIH), Bethesda, MD.; Special Education Programs (ED/OSERS), Washington,DC. Contract No: H023C10086-92; HD-15052 EDRS Price - MF01/PC02 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: POSITION PAPER (120) Geographic Source: U.S.; Tennessee Journal Announcement: RIEAPR94 This critical discussion of current trends in special education examines thecurrent inclusive schools movement and compares it to the regular educationinitiative (REI). After contrasting the two movements' respective advocates,goals, tactics, and understanding of and links to general education, the paperargues that the field's rhetoric has become increasingly strident and itsperspective has become increasingly insular and disassociated from generaleducation's concerns. Especially noted is the disproportional influence in theinclusive schools movement of those concerned with individuals with severeintellectual disabilities (especially The Association for the SeverelyHandicapped) and their rejection of the concept of a continuum of placementoptions. Goals of the inclusionists are seen as focusing on abolishing specialeducation and promoting social competence (in contrast to REI's emphasis onpreventing academic failure and emphasizing academic standards andaccountability). Special education is blamed by many in the inclusive schoolsmovement as being responsible for general education's failure to accommodatediverse student needs. Believers in full inclusion are urged to put thespecific needs of individual children first and to compromise with generaleducation. However, a pessimistic prediction is proffered concerning thecurrent movement's ability to forge a productive alliance with generaleducation. (Contains 120 references.) (Author/DB) Descriptors: Attitudes; *Disabilities; Educational Change; *EducationalTrends; Elementary Secondary Education; *Mainstreaming; Normalization(Handicapped); Opinions; *Regular and Special Education Relationship; SchoolRestructuring; *Severe Disabilities; Social Integration; *Special Education;Trend Analysis EJ413309 EC231438 Major Accomplishments and Future Directions in Early Childhood Mainstreaming. Guralnick, Michael J. Topics in Early Childhood Special Education, v10 n2 p1-17 Sum 1990 Theme Issue: Mainstreaming Revisited. Report No: ISSN-0271-1214 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); POSITION PAPER (120) Journal Announcement: CIJJAN91 The article looks at trends in early childhood mainstreaming of children withdisabilities. Specific discussions focus on implementation, the perspectivesof parents, and the development of friendships and peer relations inmainstreamed settings. A convergence among public policy, educationalpractice, and developmental principles and research is noted. (Author/DB) Descriptors: Child Development; *Disabilities; *Early Childhood Education;Educational Practices; *Educational Trends; *Mainstreaming; Parent Attitudes;Peer Relaionship; Program Implementation; Public Policy ED366145 EC302739 Full Inclusion: Analysis of a Controversial Issue. Reganick, Karol A. [1993] 24p. EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: REVIEW LITERATURE (070); POSITION PAPER (120) Geographic Source: U.S.; Florida Journal Announcement: RIEJUN94 This review of the literature and analysis looks at the concept of fullinclusion of students with disabilities in the context of the regular educationinitiative (REI). The concept of full inclusion is explained as the use of newmethods, techniques, and strategies to teach students with and withoutdisabilities in the same classroom. Identification of assumptions underlyingthe issue precede specific arguments both for and against full inclusion. Ananalysis of the validity of both sets of arguments considers attitudes ofeducators, parents, and students. Next, the paper looks at values emphasizedand compromised by the full inclusion model such as increased emphasis oncooperative learning and social development and possible compromises in thevalues of educational excellence and efficiency. The paper concludes that fullinclusion is the preferred condition but should not be the only possibility.Also stressed is the importance of specialists, classroom teachers, parents,and students all participating in student program development and decisionmaking. (Contains 212 references.) (DB) Descriptors: *Disabilities; Educational Trends; Elementary SecondaryEducation; *Mainstreaming; Normalization (Disabilities); Opinions; *Regular andSpecial Education Relationship; School Restructuring; *Social Integration;Trend Analysis Identifiers: *Inclusive Schools; *Regular Education Inservice Initiative ED279140 EC192102 Implementation of P.L. 94-142 and Its Accomplishments, Problems and FutureChallenges: A State Education Agency Perspective. Schrag, Judy A. 1987 36p. In: The Future of Special Education: Proceedings of the Council forExceptional Children Symposium (Lake Geneva, Wisconsin, May 1986); see ED 276245. EDRS Price - MF01/PC02 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: POSITION PAPER (120); CONFERENCE PAPER (150) Geographic Source: U.S.; Washington Journal Announcement: RIEJUL87 Written from the perspective of a state director of special education, thepaper identifies and discusses accomplishments in special education during the10 years since the Education for All Handicapped Children Act (P.L. 94-142)was enacted, current problems and issues, and future challenges within thefollowing key areas of change: (1) access to education for all handicappedchildren; (2) continuum of services from birth to adulthood--early childhoodintervention; (3) continuum of services from birth to adulthood--transitionprograms for older students with handicaps; (4) least restrictive environment;(5) special education manpower; (6) monitoring of special educationprograms/related services; and (7) programs for gifted students. Despite theincreasing financial challenges facing special education the future is likelyto bring solidified regular and special education partnerships, programming forunserved and underserved groups of handicapped students, improvedimplementation of the continuum of services delivery approach, increasedeffective integration of severely handicapped into the public schools,maintenance of procedural safeguards along with efforts to reduce thelegalistic burdens on special education, increased emphasis on technicalassistance in state monitoring of special education programs, and continuationand enhancement of gifted programming. (DB) Descriptors: Access to Education; Accountability; Administrator Attitudes;*Delivery Systems; *Disabilities; *Educational Trends; Education WorkRelationship; Elementary Secondary Education; Equal Education; FederalLegislation; Futures (of Society); *Gifted; Labor Force; Mainstreaming;Normalization (Handicapped); Program Evaluation; Retrenchment; *SpecialEducation; *Trend Analysis Identifiers: Early Intervention; *Education for All Handicapped Children Act ED366151 EC302746 Education Reform: A Step Forward or a Step Backward for Students withLearning Disabilities. Proceedings of a Symposium (Atlanta, Georgia, March 7-8,1992). Learning Disabilities Association of America, Pittsburgh, PA. Mar 1992 91p. EDRS Price - MF01/PC04 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: CONFERENCE PROCEEDINGS (021) Geographic Source: U.S.; Pennsylvania Journal Announcement: RIEJUN94 This proceedings document includes 11 papers presented at a 1992 symposium onthe impact of current educational reform initiatives on students with learningdisabilities. Preceding the papers is a summary of the outcomes of thesymposium, which are enumerated in terms of questions generated, commonalities,unresolved topics, and next steps. Papers have the following titles andauthors: "Education Reform: The Future Is a Continuation of Times Past" (JudithSchrag); "Education Reform: A Step Forward or a Step Backward for Individualswith Learning Disabilities" (La Nelle S. Gallagher); "Learner-CenteredPsychological Principles: Guidelines for School Redesign and Reform" (RoyMartin); "Education Reform, Communication, and Learning Disabilities" (DianePaul-Brown); "Statement on the Implications of Educational Reform onIndividuals with Learning Disabilities" (Jean Lokerson); "School Reform Must Bea Step Forward for Students with Learning Disabilities" (Steve Kukic);"Difference--A Focus of Reform in Education" (William Ellis); "The School as aQuality Organization for All Students" (Jeffrey Schneider); "The School Board'sRole in Educating Children with Special Needs" (Delores G. McGhee); "The Roleof Teacher Education in the Educational Reform Movement" (Rosemary F. Bowler);and "The Special/Regular Education Integration Initiative for Students withSpecific Learning Disabilities: Preliminary Findings from a CurrentInvestigation of Program Change" (Cherry K. Houck). Some papers includereferences. (DB) Descriptors: Administrator Role; Boards of Education; *Educational Change;Educational Needs; *Educational Policy; Educational Trends; ElementarySecondary Education; *Learning Disabilities; Regular and Special EducationRelationship; Teacher Education; Trend Analysis Identifiers: Regular Education Inservice Initiative EJ443456 PS519249 Educating Students with Severe Handicaps in Regular Classes. Alper, Sandra; Ryndak, Diane Lea Elementary School Journal, v92 n3 p373-88 Jan 1992 Special Issue: Integrating Learners with Disabilities ISSN: 0013-5984 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); REVIEW LITERATURE (070);PROJECTDESCRIPTION (141) Journal Announcement: CIJAUG92 Discusses the growing legal, philosophical, and empirical support forallowing students with severe handicaps to attend regular classes with peers ofthe same age. Presents advantages of integration for students with and withouthandicaps. Resources for bringing about integration are described. (GLR) Descriptors: Computer Assisted Instruction; Educational Quality; ElementarySecondary Education; *Equal Education; Friendship; Grouping (InstructionalPurposes); Individualized Education Programs; *Mainstreaming; *Peer Groups;Peer Teaching; *Regular and Special Education Relationship; *SevereDisabilities; Social Integration; Special Education; Student Attitudes; StudentPlacement; Teacher Role; Tutoring Identifiers: Education for All Handicapped Children Act; McGill ActionPlanning System; Peer Modeling; Reintegration; Zero Rejection Concept ED353764 EC301798 Philosophy, Differences, and Education. Baumgart, Diane 1992 15p.; In: Bunsen, Teresa D., Ed., And Others. Forum on Emerging Trends inSpecial Education: Implications for Personnel Preparation (4th, Washington,DC, April 9-10, 1992); see EC 301 793. EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: CONFERENCE PAPER (150) Geographic Source: U.S.; Idaho Journal Announcement: RIEJUN93 This paper argues that the philosophic assumptions underlying full inclusionefforts for students with severe disabilities and other restructuring movementsare actually barriers to "best practice" implementation, and an alternativeperspective based on social relations is offered. First two differentperspectives on disability, the "different person" perspective (which seesdifferences as inherent and immutable) and the rights perspective (which viewsall individuals as entitled to the same rights, services, and outcomes) arecompared. Both perspectives are seen to result in a dilemma and beinappropriate to guide current restructuring. In contrast, the socialrelations perspective views differences in the context of relationships whichare expected to change with time or as the comparison basis changes. Thisperspective is applied to a case in which an emphasis on gender differences inprovision of maternity leave is replaced with relation-based provision ofparental or family leave. Other examples apply the social relationsperspective to inclusion of students with severe disabilities and the provisionof bilingual/bicultural education to all students and not just to the Spanish-speaking minority. (Contains 15 references.) (DB) Descriptors: *Access to Education; *Educational Philosophy; EducationalPractices; Elementary Secondary Education; *Human Relations; *IndividualDifferences; Interpersonal Relationship; Limited English Speaking;*Mainstreaming; Models; *Severe Disabilities ED365051 EC302676 An Analysis of Student Outcomes Associated with Educational ProgramsRepresenting Full Inclusion and Special Class Models of Integration. Beckstead, Susan Porter; And Others San Francisco State Univ., CA. California Research Inst. 22 Jan 1992 33p. Sponsoring Agency: Office of Special Education and Rehabilitative Services(ED), Washington, DC. Contract No: G0087C3056-90; G0087C3058 EDRS Price - MF01/PC02 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: PROJECT DESCRIPTION (141) Geographic Source: U.S.; California Journal Announcement: RIEMAY94 This descriptive study formulates a comprehensive picture of the structure,educational practices, and associated positive student outcomes of integratedprograms for students with severe disabilities across a variety of Californiacommunities. Three of the seven participating programs represented the fullinclusion model of integration implemented at the elementary level. Four ofthe programs represented special class models of integration; two were locatedat elementary schools and two at high schools. The study presents descriptiveinformation on each of the models of integration, with quantitative measures ofpositive student outcomes. Outcome measures in this preliminary study wererestricted to the quality of the students' individualized education programs(IEP), the extent of integrated activities for each child across the schoolday, and the extent and type of interactions occurring between the studentswith disabilities and their nondisabled schoolmates. Findings included thefollowing: (1) the high school special class model received the highest ratingfor quality of IEPs; (2) students in the full inclusion programs spent anaverage of 94 percent of school hours in integrated settings; and (3) theamount of reciprocal interaction was almost identical across the three models.(Contains 37 references.) (DB) Descriptors: *Delivery Systems; Elementary Education; Elementary SchoolStudents; High Schools; High School Students; Individualized Education Programs;Interaction Process Analysis; *Mainstreaming; Models; Normalization(Disabilities); *Outcomes of Education; Peer Relationship; *ProgramEffectiveness; *Severe Disabilities; Social Integration; *Special Classes Identifiers: California Internet Resources Internet Listservs Top of Page Back to ERIC Menu Back to CEC Home Page copyright © 1996 ERIC Clearinghouse on Disabilities and Gifted Education URL: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm WT02-B20-61IA001-000011-B024-3http://www.cec.sped.org:80/faq/ld-adult.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101074654 text/html 19933HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 07:46:59 GMTLast-modified: Tuesday, 10-Sep-96 14:29:00 GMTContent-length: 19740Content-type: text/html LD-ADULT LD-Adults.FAQ(Last updated July 13, 1996) THE ERIC CLEARINGHOUSE ON DISABILITIES AND GIFTEDEDUCATION (ERIC EC) The Council for Exceptional Children 1920Association Drive Reston, VA 20191 Toll Free: 1-800-328-0272 TTY: 703-264-9449 E-mail: ericec@cec.sped.org Internet: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm Please provide some information about adults with learning disabilities. This file contains information about adults with learning disabilities. At the end of the file are links to Internet resources and Internet listservs (discussion groups) where you can obtain more specific information on the topic. There may be ERIC digests that provide information on related topics. You can read the full text of ERIC EC digests under our listing at the U.S. Department of Education, Office of Educational Research and Improvement. Enclosed are several citations from the ERIC database. These records are asample of the kind of information you can find in the ERIC database. For morecitations on your topic of interest, you may want to search the ERIC database yourself on the Internet. References with ED (ERIC Document) and EJ (ERIC Journal) identifiers are cited inthe ERIC database; for example, ED333123 or EJ333999. ERIC documents areavailable in microfiche collections at more than 825 locations worldwide (check yourlocal college or public library). They can also be ordered for a fee through the ERICDocument Reproduction Service (EDRS) at 1-800-443-ERIC. References with anEJ (ERIC Journal) number are available for a fee from the originating journal (checkwith your local college or public library), through interlibrary loan services, or fromarticle reproduction clearinghouses, such as UMI: 1-800-248-0360; or ISI:1-800-523-1850. ED388010 EC304365 Learning Disabilities: The Challenges of Adulthood. Patton, James R., Ed.; Polloway, Edward A., Ed. 1996; 303p.; Portions of this material appeared in the "Journal of Learning Disabilities," volume 25, numbers 7 and 8, 1992. ISBN: 0-89079-581-9 Available From: PRO-ED, 8700 Shoal Creek Blvd., Austin, TX 78757-6897 ($39). Document Not Available from EDRS. Language: English Document Type: BOOK (010); COLLECTION (020) Geographic Source: U.S.; Texas Journal Announcement: RIEMAR96 This collection of 13 essays focuses on the many challenges that adults with learning disabilities face in educational, work, and social settings. The essays are: (1) "Adults with Learning Disabilities: An Emerging Area of Professional Interest and Public Attention" (James R. Patton and Edward A. Polloway); (2) "Adult Development Theories: An Overview and Reflection on Their Relevance for Learning Disabilities" (J. David Smith); (3) "Transition of Youth with Learning Disabilities to Early Adulthood" (Ginger Blalock); (4) "The Postschool Adjustment of Persons with Learning Disabilities: Current Status and Future Projections" (Warren J. White); (5) "Learning Disabilities and Vocational Rehabilitation" (Carol A. Dowdy and others); (6) "Promoting Access, Accommodations, and Independence for College Students with Learning Disabilities" (Loring C. Brinckerhoff and others); (7) "Assessing Students with Learning Disabilities in Postsecondary Education Settings" (Melissa Behrens-Blake and Brian Bryant); (8) "The Success of College Students with Learning Disabilities: Factors Related to Educational Attainment" (Susan A. Vogel and Pamela B. Adelman); (9) "Identifying Alterable Patterns in Employment Success for Highly Successful Adults with Learning Disabilities" (Paul J. Gerber and others); (10) "Current and Future Research Priorities" (Anna Gajar); (11) "The Neurobiology and Neuropsychology of Adult Learning Disorders" (Erin D. Bigler); (12) "Personal Perspectives" (Edward A. Polloway and others); and (13) "Resources for Adults with Learning Disabilities" (Diane Bassett). Each essay contains a list of references. (MDM) Descriptors: Academic Achievement; Access to Education; *Adult Development; *Adults; Behavioral Science Research; College Students; Coping; *Educational Attainment; Educational Opportunities; Educational Resources; *Education Work Relationship; Employment Opportunities; *Learning Disabilities; Neuropsychology;Outcomes of Education; Performance Factors; Postsecondary Education; Secondary Education; Student Evaluation; Transitional Programs; *Vocational Adjustment; Vocational Rehabilitation ED387989 EC304343 Adults with Learning Disabilities: Definitions and Issues. Academy for Educational Development, Washington, DC. National Adult Literacy and Learning Disabilities Center. 1995; 7p. Sponsoring Agency: National Inst. for Literacy, Washington, DC. Contract No: X257B30002 EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: REVIEW LITERATURE (070) Geographic Source: U.S.; District of Columbia Journal Announcement: RIEMAR96 This fact sheet provides a definition of learning disability (LD) in adults; a list of common elements found in many useful LD definitions; and a list of areas in which LD may affect life situations of adults. The background of the concept of "learning disability" is briefly reviewed, followed by the definition of the Interagency Committee on Learning Disabilities, which was selected for use by the National Adult Literacy and Learning Disabilities Center because it reflects current information and issues associated with LD, allows for the presence of learning disabilities at any age, and has wide acceptance in the LD community. Highlights of the definition are pointed out, as are common elements in a variety of LD definitions. Definitions adopted by the U.S. Office of Education in 1977, the Learning Disabilities Association of America, the National Joint Committee on Learning Disabilities, and the Rehabilitation Services Administration are also provided. Finally, a brief discussion identifies areas in which LD impacts adults, including self esteem, education, vocation, social interactions, and independent living. (DB) Descriptors: *Adults; *Definitions; *Learning Disabilities; Quality of Life; Symptoms (Individual Disorders) Identifiers: Interagency Committee on Learning Disabilities; National Adult Literacy and Learn Disabil Ctr ED387988 EC304342 Screening for Adults with Learning Disabilities: The Role of the Practitioner in the Assessment Process. Academy for Educational Development, Washington, DC. National Adult Literacy and Learning Disabilities Center. 1995; 9p. Sponsoring Agency: National Inst. for Literacy, Washington, DC. Contract No: X257B30002 EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: REVIEW LITERATURE (070) Geographic Source: U.S.; District of Columbia Journal Announcement: RIEMAR96 Target Audience: Practitioners This guide is intended to help the literacy practitioner in the identification of adults with learning disabilities. These adults have worked diligently for a year or more to improve comprehension skills, writing and spelling, or work skills, yet, have made little progress. The role of screening as only the first step in a process involving a formal assessment by a qualified professional, is stressed. First, a set of questions to be answered by the literacy practitioner as he/she observes the individual is provided. Next are lists of typical characteristics of individuals with vision/hearing and/or auditory/visual processing problems. Following this is a list of typical problems in three areas of academic performance: reading, expressive language, and mathematics. A list of behavior patterns and psychological manifestations indicating the possibility of a learning disability is also provided. Finally, other means of information gathering such as reviews of records, a screening interview, a screening questionnaire, and a screening tool are suggested. (DB) Descriptors: Academic Achievement; Adult Basic Education; *Adults; Auditory Perception; Behavior Patterns; *Disability Identification; *Educational Diagnosis; *Learning Disabilities; *Literacy; Observation; *Screening Tests; Visual Perception ED370297 EC303028 LDA '94: A Capital IDEA. Poster Session Abstracts of the International Conference of the Learning Disabilities Association of America (Washington, D.C., March 16-19, 1994). Russell, Steven C., Comp. Learning Disabilities Association of America, Pittsburgh, PA. Mar 1994; 31p. EDRS Price - MF01/PC02 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: CONFERENCE PROCEEDINGS (021) Geographic Source: U.S.; Pennsylvania Journal Announcement: RIEOCT94 This booklet brings together one-page to two-page abstracts from research poster sessions held at a conference on learning disabilities. The 17 research abstracts are presented within four poster session categories: (1) research on assessment and characteristics of students with learning disabilities (with abstracts on handwriting, mainstreaming students with dyslexia, and executive functioning and phonological processing in attention deficit hyperactivity disorder and reading disability); (2) research on adolescents and adults with learning disabilities (with abstracts on prevention of sexual abuse, depression and anxiety in college students and rehabilitation clients, college programs, and prediction of university academic achievement); (3) research on instruction and treatment (with abstracts on language intervention with preschool children, alternative delivery systems, prevocational training, teaching language functions through the fine arts, biofeedback as a treatment for attention deficit disorders, and technological applications); and (4) a second session dealing with research on instruction and treatment (with abstracts on promising programs, university and public school partnerships, classwide peer tutoring, and improving reading comprehension and writing through content classes). (JDD) Descriptors: Adolescents; Adults; *Educational Methods; Elementary Secondary Education; *Intervention; *Learning Disabilities; Research Projects; *Student Characteristics; Student Evaluation EJ483441 EC608536 Assessment of Adults with Severe Learning Disabilities. Hagin, Rosa A.; And Others Learning Disabilities: A Multidisciplinary Journal, v5 n1 p35-41 Feb 1994 ISSN: 1046-6819 Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); PROJECT DESCRIPTION (141) Journal Announcement: CIJSEP94 Assessment models used with school-age samples require modification for use with adults having severe learning disabilities. At Fordham University's Comprehensive Learning Program, a screening session determines the mutual suitability of the client and the program being offered; subsequent comprehensive assessment of cognitive, educational, emotional, and motivational factors is then carried out for intervention planning. (DB) Descriptors: *Adults; *Evaluation Methods; *Intervention; *Learning Disabilities; *Models; Screening Tests; Student Evaluation Identifiers: *Fordham University NY EJ483439 EC608534 Psychological Adjustment and Adults with Severe Learning Difficulties: Implications of the Literature on Children and Adolescents with Learning Disabilities for Research and Practice. Brier, Norman Learning Disabilities: A Multidisciplinary Journal, v5 n1 p15-27 Feb 1994 ISSN: 1046-6819 Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); REVIEW LITERATURE (070) Journal Announcement: CIJSEP94 This review of the literature on the psychological adjustment of adults and children with severe learning difficulties looks at overall adjustment; interpersonal difficulties; self-concept; difficulties with self-control; and family relationships. Suggestions are offered regarding service delivery and the design of effective treatments for adult populations. (Author/DB) Descriptors: Adults; Delivery Systems; Emotional Adjustment; *Family Relationship; *Interpersonal Competence; Intervention; *Learning Disabilities; Mental Health; *Psychological Characteristics; *Self Concept; *Self Control EJ483438 EC608533 The Adult with Learning Disabilities: An Overview. Gottesman, Ruth L. Learning Disabilities: A Multidisciplinary Journal, v5 n1 p1-14 Feb 1994 ISSN: 1046-6819 Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); REVIEW LITERATURE (070) Journal Announcement: CIJSEP94 This literature review focuses on the outcome of childhood learning disabilities, adult symptomatology, and the educational and vocational status of adults with learning disabilities. It concludes that learning disabilities are life-long disabilities and that childhood deficiencies in reading, language, memory, attention, visual perception, and social-emotional adjustment tend to persist. (Author/DB) Descriptors: Academic Achievement; *Adults; Employment Level; *Individual Characteristics; *Learning Disabilities; Outcomes of Education; Outcomes of Treatment; *Persistence; *Symptoms (Individual Disorders) EJ481537 EC608455 A Review of Learning Strategies for Adults with Learning Disabilities Preparing for the GED Exam. Westberry, Susan J. Journal of Learning Disabilities, v27 n4 p202-09 Apr 1994 ISSN: 0022-2194 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); REVIEW LITERATURE (070) Journal Announcement: CIJAUG94 This literature review considers instructional and testing strategies for General Education Development (GED) adult students with learning disabilities. The GED test is described, and specific instructional strategies from the literature are identified for the areas of writing skills, science, social studies, literature and art, and mathematics. Several intervention models are also noted. (DB) Descriptors: *Adult Education; Adults; Equivalency Tests; *High School Equivalency Programs; Intervention; *Learning Disabilities; *Learning Strategies; Teaching Methods; Teaching Models; *Test Wiseness Identifiers: *General Educational Development Tests EJ479403 EC607963 When Academic Assistance Is Not Enough: Addressing the Mental Health Issues of Adolescents and Adults with Learning Disabilities. Price, Lynda A.; And Others Journal of Learning Disabilities, v27 n2 p82-90 Feb 1994 ISSN: 0022-2194 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); POSITION PAPER (120); PROJECT DESCRIPTION (141) Journal Announcement: CIJJUL94 This article addresses theoretical and practical issues in the provision of mental health services to address psychosocial problems of secondary and postsecondary students with learning disabilities. Examples are offered of case studies and interventions from two federally funded research/demonstration projects at the University of Minnesota: the Learning Disabilities Transition Project and Project Extra. (DB) Descriptors: Adolescents; Case Studies; Delivery Systems; Demonstration Programs; Emotional Problems; Interpersonal Competence; *Intervention; *Learning Disabilities; *Mental Health; Mental Health Programs; Postsecondary Education; *Psychological Patterns; Research and Development; Secondary Education; *Student Adjustment; Transitional Programs Identifiers: Psychosocial Factors; University of Minnesota EJ479342 EC607902 Researching Adults with Learning Disabilities from an Adult-Development Perspective. Gerber, Paul J. Journal of Learning Disabilities, v27 n1 p6-9 Jan 1994 ISSN: 0022-2194 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); NON-CLASSROOM MATERIAL (055) Journal Announcement: CIJJUL94 This article proposes use of a life-span developmental perspective in research on adults with learning disabilities. Considerations for incorporating such essential concepts as mediating variables, context, and age-span phases into research on this population are discussed. (DB) Descriptors: *Adult Development; *Adult Education; Age Differences; Developmental Stages; *Learning Disabilities; Lifelong Learning; Models; *Research Needs ED368899 CE066100 National Resources for Adults with Learning Disabilities. Payne, Mario D., Ed.; Robins, Eve, Ed. Academy for Educational Development, Washington, DC. National Adult Literacy and Learning Disabilities Center.; American Council on Education, Washington, DC. HEATH Resource Center. Mar 1994; 34p. Sponsoring Agency: Department of Education, Washington, DC.; National Inst. for Literacy, Washington, DC. Contract No: H030C-30003; X257B30002 EDRS Price - MF01/PC02 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: DIRECTORY (132) Geographic Source: U.S.; District of Columbia Journal Announcement: RIESEP94 This resource guide is designed to help adults who suspect they have a learning disability gather sufficient information to set realistic goals, achieve those goals, and lead productive lives. The first section, which discusses assessing learning disabilities, includes lists of agencies equipped to help diagnose learning disabilities in adults and questions to ask qualified professionals. A checklist of 28 identified characteristics of adults with learning disabilities is presented along with annotated lists of 13 national resource centers, 9 organizations concerned with general education, 8 learning disability organizations, 3 attention deficit disorder organizations, 4 organizations concerned with employment issues, 5 organizations concerned with technology, 16 organizations concerned with life management issues, and 20 publications of relevance to learning-disabled adults. A list of 16 pertinent toll-free numbers and information on the HEATH Resource Center and National Adult Literacy and Learning Disabilities Center conclude the guide. (MN) Descriptors: Adaptive Behavior (of Disabled); *Adults; Adult Vocational Education; Annotated Bibliographies; Attention Deficit Disorders; Check Lists; Daily Living Skills; *Educational Diagnosis; Educational Resources; Employment Services; *Learning Disabilities; Literacy Education; *National Organizations; *National Programs; *Resource Materials Internet Resources Internet Listservs Top of Page Back to ERIC Menu Back to CEC Home Page copyright © 1996 ERIC Clearinghouse on Disabilities and Gifted Education URL: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm WT02-B20-62IA001-000011-B024-16http://www.cec.sped.org:80/faq/assistec.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101074705 text/html 22461HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 07:47:12 GMTLast-modified: Wednesday, 21-Aug-96 17:40:00 GMTContent-length: 22266Content-type: text/html  AssisTech AssisTechFAQ (last updated 7/14/96) THE ERIC CLEARINGHOUSE ON DISABILITIES AND GIFTEDEDUCATION (ERIC EC) The Council for Exceptional Children 1920Association Drive Reston, VA 20191 Toll Free: 1-800-328-0272 TTY: 703-264-9449 E-mail: ericec@cec.sped.org Internet: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm Where can I find research on assistive technology for students with disabilities? This file includes information about assistive technology, and Internet resources where you can obtain more information. ERIC EC digest E529, "Assistive Technology for Students with Mild Learning Disabilities" provides further information on this topic. You can read the full text of ERIC EC digests under our listing at the U.S. Department of Education, Office of Educational Research and Improvement. Enclosed are several citations from the ERIC database. These records are asample of the kind of information you can find in the ERIC database. For morecitations on your topic of interest, you may want to search the ERIC database yourself on the Internet. References with ED (ERIC Document) and EJ (ERIC Journal) identifiers are cited inthe ERIC database; for example, ED333123 or EJ333999. ERIC documents areavailable in microfiche collections at more than 825 locations worldwide (check yourlocal college or public library). They can also be ordered for a fee through the ERICDocument Reproduction Service (EDRS) at 1-800-443-ERIC. References with anEJ (ERIC Journal) number are available for a fee from the originating journal (checkwith your local college or public library), through interlibrary loan services, or fromarticle reproduction clearinghouses, such as UMI: 1-800-248-0360; or ISI:1-800-523-1850. ERIC descriptors (search terms) used: Assisted Instruction Computer or Assistive Devices (For Disabled) and Disabilities EJ506668 EC611537 Education TECH Points for Assistive Technology Planning. Bowser, Gayl; Reed, Penny Journal of Special Education Technology, v12 n4 p325-38 Spr 1995 ISSN: 0162-6434 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); PROJECT DESCRIPTION (141) Journal Announcement: CIJNOV95 The Education TECH Point system can be used by school districts as a tool to develop effective federally required assistive technology delivery systems for students with disabilities. The technique involves the systematic analysis of questions concerning: initial referral, evaluation, extended assessment, plan development, implementation, and periodic review. (DB) Descriptors: *Assistive Devices (for Disabled); *Decision Making; Delivery Systems; *Disabilities; *Evaluation Methods; Individualized Education Programs; *Needs Assessment; Planning; Program Development; Student Evaluation; Technology ED380928 EC303802 Taming the Technology Clinton, Janeen S. Florida Diagnostic and Learning Resources System, West Palm Beach. Mar 1995; 112p.; Paper presented at the Florida Assistive Technology Impact and the Technology and Media Division of the Council for Exceptional Children Annual Conference (4th, Orlando, FL, March 2-4, 1995). EDRS Price - MF01/PC05 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: CONFERENCE PAPER (150); PROJECT DESCRIPTION (141) Geographic Source: U.S.; Florida Journal Announcement: RIEAUG95 This document reports on efforts to find technology-based solutions for the diverse challenges faced by students with disabling conditions. Twenty-three case studies describe actual scenarios experienced in the school district of Palm Beach County, Florida. For each case study, a situation is described, a challenge is identified, solutions are considered, an assessment is made to select the most appropriate system, and expenditures for the selected system are determined. The case studies deal with students with the following disabilities: arthrogryposis, cancer, cerebral palsy, educable mentally handicapped, emotionally disabled, gifted learning disabled, hearing impaired, muscular dystrophy, near drowning, post encephalitic generalized dystonia, stroke, traumatic brain injury, traumatic spinal cord injury, and visually impaired. Twelve vignettes are then presented, describing school situations that involve the use of assistive technology and challenging the reader to develop strategies to solve the problems described. A list of vendors is supplied, and school district procedures for placement of adaptive/assistive equipment for students with disabilities are included. (JDD) Descriptors: *Assistive Devices (for Disabled); *Augmentative and Alternative Communication; *Case Studies; *Communication Aids (for Disabled); *Computer Selection; *Disabilities; Educational Technology; Elementary Secondary Education; Equipment Evaluation; Equipment Utilization; Microcomputers; Problem Solving; Selection Identifiers: *Palm Beach County Schools FL EJ493037 EC609901 Assistive Technology for Students with Mild Disabilities. Behrmann, Michael M. Intervention in School and Clinic, v30 n2 p70-83 Nov 1994 ISSN: 1053-4512 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); REVIEW LITERATURE (070) Journal Announcement: CIJMAR95 This article reviews the legislative history of assistive technology, discusses its benefits to and applications in learning environments for students with mild disabilities, outlines pertinent issues, and makes suggestions for selecting and using the various technologies. An appendix examines national policy on assistive technology and state policy in Virginia. (JDD) Descriptors: *Assistive Devices (for Disabled); Educational Legislation; *Educational Methods; Educational Policy; *Educational Technology; Elementary Secondary Education; Federal Legislation; Media Selection; *Mild Disabilities; Public Policy Identifiers: Virginia ED378755 EC303653 Assistive Technology for Students with Mild Disabilities. ERIC Digest E529. Behrmann, Michael M. Council for Exceptional Children, Reston, Va.; ERIC Clearinghouse on Disabilities and Gifted Education, Reston, VA. Jan 1995 4p.; Sponsoring Agency: Office of Educational Research and Improvement (ED), Washington, DC. Contract No: RR93002005 Report No: EDO-EC-93-12 Available From: Council for Exceptional Children, 1920 Association Dr., Reston, VA 22091-1589 ($1 each, minimum order $5, prepaid). EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: ERIC PRODUCT (071); ERIC DIGESTS (SELECTED) (073) Geographic Source: U.S.; Virginia Journal Announcement: RIEJUN95 This informational digest considers assistive technology for students with mild disabilities in the context of Public Law 100-407, the Technology-Related Assistance for Individuals with Disabilities Act of 1988 which was designed to enhance the availability and quality of assistive technology devices and services to people with disabilities and their families. First, assistive technology devices are briefly described. Then seven areas in which assistive technology can assist students with mild disabilities are explained with examples. These are: (1) organization, (2) note taking, (3) writing assistance, (4) productivity, (5) access to reference materials, (6) cognitive assistance, and (7) materials modification. Contains three references and three suggested resources, and includes electronic resources. (DB) Descriptors: *Assistive Devices (for Disabled); *Communication Aids (for Disabled); *Computer Uses in Education; Educational Media; Educational Technology; Elementary Secondary Education; Federal Legislation; *Mild Disabilities; Study SkillsIdentifiers: ERIC Digests; Technology Related Assistance Individ Disabil Act EJ496556 IR529949 Opinion: Adaptive Computing and the Internet: One Step forward, Two Steps Back? Lazzaro, Joseph J. Internet Research, v4 n4 p2-8 Win 1994 ISSN: 1066-2243 Language: English Document Type: POSITION PAPER (120); JOURNAL ARTICLE (080) Journal Announcement: CIJMAY95 This overview of adaptive technology for computers and networking identifies issues that must be addressed for people with disabilities to participate fully in online activities. Discussion includes adaptive equipment; Internet access; and graphical user interface (GUI) concerns. Contact information for vendors for adaptive technology and organizations and services who provide information are listed. (KRN) Descriptors: *Access to Information; *Assistive Devices (for Disabled); Blindness; *Computer Networks; Computer Software; Computer Software Development; *Disabilities; Futures (of Society); Microcomputers; Policy; *Vendors; Visual Impairments Identifiers: *Adapted Computer Technology (for Disabled); *Graphical User Interfaces; Historical Background; Internet EJ495226 IR529878 Boon or Bust? Access to Electronic Publishing by Individuals Using Adaptive Computer Technology. Berliss, Jane Journal of the American Society for Information Science, v45 n10 p753-59 Dec 1994 ISSN: 0002-8231 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: POSITION PAPER (120); PROJECT DESCRIPTION (141); JOURNAL ARTICLE (080) Journal Announcement: CIJAPR95 Explores how people with disabilities use computer technology, as well as the issues involved in using this technology to access electronically published materials. Topics discussed include definitions of disability; uses of adaptive technology; the physical environment; documentation, training, and support; problems in accessing electronic media; and how libraries can overcome problems. (four references) (LRW) Descriptors: Access to Information; *Assistive Devices (for Disabled); Computer Software; *Electronic Publishing; Human Factors Engineering; Library Services; *Physical Disabilities; Physical Environment; Problems Identifiers: *Computer Use; Support Services; Training Needs; User Training EJ486715 IR528912 Assistive, Adaptive, Amazing Technologies. Pesta, John TECHNOS, v3 n2 p10-12 Sum 1994 ISSN: 1060-5649 Language: English Document Type: PROJECT DESCRIPTION (141); JOURNAL ARTICLE (080) Journal Announcement: CIJNOV94 Discussion of assistive, or adaptive, technology highlights major technologies that help physically impaired individuals at home, work, and school. Technologies described include voice recognition, microswitches, communication boards, headsticks and mouthsticks, vision control, adaptive keyboards, word prediction software, electronic readers, speech synthesizers, Braille adapters, oversized displays, closed-captioning, and adapted computers. (LRW) Descriptors: *Assistive Devices (for Disabled); Braille; Communication Aids (for Disabled); Computer Peripherals; Computer Software; *Disabilities; Federal Legislation; Speech Synthesizers Identifiers: *Adapted Computer Technology (for Disabled); Communication Boards; Voice Recognition EJ485173 HE532632 Assuring Access for the Disabled. Wilson, David L. Chronicle of Higher Education, v40 n35 pA25,28 May 4 1994 ISSN: 0009-5982 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: PROJECT DESCRIPTION (141); JOURNAL ARTICLE (080) Journal Announcement: CIJOCT94 New computer software, developed to advance technological applications, may inadvertently reduce computer access of disabled users. Increasing graphical applications not usable by blind persons are creating concern. Advocates for persons with disabilities are urging software developers to alter existing programs and develop new ones with disabilities in mind. (MSE) Descriptors: *Accessibility (for Disabled); *Access to Education; *Assistive Devices (for Disabled); *Blindness; *Computer Software; Computer Software Selection; *Disabilities; Higher Education; Technological Advancement; Trend Analysis ED381921 EC303867 Computers, Technology, and Disability. Update. American Council on Education, Washington, DC. HEATH Resource Center. 1994; 13p.; The information in this paper is reprinted from back issues of "Information from HEATH" dating back to 1986, and was updated in the fall of 1994. Sponsoring Agency: Department of Education, Washington, DC.Available From: HEATH, One Dupont Circle, Suite 800, Washington, DC 20036-1193 (free). EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: NON-CLASSROOM MATERIAL (055) Geographic Source: U.S.; District of Columbia Journal Announcement: RIESEP95 This paper describes programs and resources that focus on access of postsecondary students with disabilities to computers and other forms of technology. Increased access to technological devices and services is provided to students with disabilities under the Technology-Related Assistance for Individuals with Disabilities Act (Tech Act). Section 508 of the Rehabilitation Act as amended by P.L. 99-506, may also have an impact as it requires that electronic office equipment used by the federal government be usable by persons with disabilities and may increase accessibility in other markets as well. Special programs have been developed at several colleges and universities to provide computer access for individuals with disabilities. These programs train students in use of large print terminals, adaptive keyboards, computerized braillers, talking computers, and other aids to independence. Seven publications that discuss financial support for purchasing adaptive technology are described, along with two organizations offering financial support. Several resources that assist with accessing computer technology are also described, such as the inLarge screen enlarging program, the SpeechViewer II software and accessories package, the IBM PC User Group, the Unicorn Smart Keyboard, and a journal titled "Technology and Disability." (JDD) Descriptors: *Accessibility (for Disabled); Access to Education; *Assistive Devices (for Disabled); College Programs; College Students; *Computer Oriented Programs; Computers; Computer Uses in Education; *Disabilities; Federal Legislation; Financial Support; Higher Education; *Information Technology; Microcomputers Identifiers: Technology Related Assistance Individ Disabil Act ED377624 EC303551 Assistive Technology for Students with Disabilities: Rights under Federal Law. Ordover, Eileen Harvard Univ., Cambridge, Mass. Center for Law and Education. Jun 1994; 9p. Available From: Center for Law and Education, 955 Massachusetts Ave., Cambridge, MA 02139 ($2.50, plus postage and handling; add $1 for orders up to $9.99, or $2.50 for orders of $10 or more). EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: REVIEW LITERATURE (070) Geographic Source: U.S.; Massachusetts Journal Announcement: RIEMAY95 This outline sets forth assistive technology rights of students under the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA), the Carl D. Perkins Vocational and Applied Technology Education Act Amendments of 1990, Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, Americans with Disabilities Act, and the regulations implementing these statutes. The paper defines "assistive technology device" and "assistive technology service," outlines responsibilities of states receiving IDEA funds to provide such devices and services, notes eligibility requirements, examines requirements for vocational education programs, considers the use of assistive technology devices and services to enable placement in regular education settings, discusses the provision of auxiliary aids to students in postsecondary education programs, reviews the scope of the term "auxiliary aids and services," and points out that individuals with disabilities in public and private schools must be afforded an opportunity to participate in or benefit from an aid or service equal to that afforded others. References to the United States Code, the Code of Federal Regulations, and court cases are provided to support the paper's views. (JDD) Descriptors: *Assistive Devices (for Disabled); Compliance (Legal); *Disabilities; Educational Legislation; Educational Technology; Elementary Secondary Education; *Federal Legislation; Federal Regulation; Postsecondary Education; Preschool Education; *School Responsibility; *Student Rights; Vocational Education Identifiers: Americans with Disabilities Act 1990; Carl D Perkins Voc and Appl Techn Educ Act 1990; Individuals with Disabilities Education Act; Rehabilitation Act 1973 (Section 504) ED375596 EC303436 Trace Research and Development Center: Report of Progress, 1987-94. Wisconsin Univ., Madison. Trace Center. 1994; 125p. Sponsoring Agency: National Inst. on Disability and Rehabilitation Research (ED/OSERS), Washington, DC. Available From: Trace Center Reprint Service, University of Wisconsin-Madison, S-151 Waisman Center, 1500 Highland Ave., Madison, WI 53705 ($5). EDRS Price - MF01/PC05 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: PROJECT DESCRIPTION (141) Geographic Source: U.S.; Wisconsin Journal Announcement: RIEMAR95 This report documents activities and projects from 1987 to 1994 of the Trace Research and Development Center (Wisconsin), which addresses the communication needs of nonvocal severely disabled children and adults. During this period the Center also served as a national Rehabilitation Engineering Research Center on the topic of Access to Computers and Electronic Devices. Introductory information includes an overview of the Center and a description of recently released products. The main body of the document presents 41 individual project reports. These are grouped into the following focus areas (with sample projects noted in parentheses): (1) movement impairment (development of improved headpointing computer access system); (2) sensory impairment (tactile perception and business graphics studies); (3) cognitive impairment (interface training and use by persons with cognitive disabilities); (4) cross-impairment (computer and operating system accessibility design guidelines); (5) information and training programs (databases on communication, control and computer access development and downloading); and (6) service delivery programs (communication aids and systems clinic). Two additional sections describe cooperative and consultative efforts of the Center and list Trace Center publications. (DB) Descriptors: Accessibility (for Disabled); *Assistive Devices (for Disabled); *Communication Aids (for Disabled); *Communication Disorders; Computers; Delivery Systems; Hearing Impairments; Input Output Devices; Mental Retardation; Physical Disabilities; *Severe Disabilities; *Technological Advancement; Training Methods; Visual Impairments Identifiers: *Trace Research and Development Center WI ED372557 EC303189 Hand in Hand: Technology Inclusion. Access Group, Atlanta, GA. 1994; 6p.; Funding also provided by the Agent Orange Class Assistance Program.Sponsoring Agency: United Cerebral Palsy Association, New York, N.Y. Available From: Access Group, 1776 Peachtree Rd., N.W., Suite 208 North, Atlanta, GA 30309 (Also, on audiotape). EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: NON-CLASSROOM MATERIAL (055) Geographic Source: U.S.; Georgia Journal Announcement: RIEDEC94 Through technology, students with disabilities are identifying new options for participation, exerting more control, making more choices, and interacting more effectively. Inclusion, as a policy and as a practice, is reducing the physical and social isolation encountered by individuals and families, broadening expectations, reducing limits, and expanding choices. Technology and inclusion go hand in hand. Without technology supports and accommodations, many students cannot take full advantage of education. Without the opportunities for interaction found in inclusive settings, students cannot truly demonstrate their abilities. The following areas should be analyzed to determine whether technology support has the potential to facilitate the child's participation: (1) transportation to and from school and related events; (2) physical access; (3) classroom/library equipment and modifications; (4) shop/vocational education; (5) lunchroom; (6) playground/gym; (7) evaluation/assessment; (8) curriculum; (9) Individualized Education Program or Individualized Family Service Plan; (10) training; and (11) planning and policy.Several questions to consider in analyzing each area are listed. (JDD) Descriptors: Accessibility (for Disabled); Access to Education; *Assistive Devices (for Disabled); *Disabilities; Educational Technology; Elementary Secondary Education; *Mainstreaming; *Social Integration; *TechnologyIdentifiers: *Inclusive Schools Internet Resources Internet Listservs Top of Page Back to ERIC Menu Back to CEC Home Page copyright © 1996 ERIC Clearinghouse on Disabilities and Gifted Education URL: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm WT02-B20-63IA001-000011-B024-28http://www.cec.sped.org:80/faq/autism.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101074714 text/html 24890HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 07:47:24 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 09-Sep-96 20:59:00 GMTContent-length: 24698Content-type: text/html Autism Autism-FAQ (updated July 14, 1996) THE ERIC CLEARINGHOUSE ON DISABILITIES AND GIFTEDEDUCATION (ERIC EC) The Council for Exceptional Children 1920Association Drive Reston, VA 20191 Toll Free: 1-800-328-0272 TTY: 703-264-9449 E-mail: ericec@cec.sped.org Internet: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm Do you have any information on autism? This file includes general information about autism. At the end of this file are links to Internet resources and Internet listservs (discussion groups) where you can obtain specific information on this topic. There may be an ERIC digest that provides further information on this topic. You can read the full text of ERIC EC digests under our listing at the U.S. Department of Education, Office of Educational Research and Improvement. A fact sheet on Autism and Pervasive Developmental Disorder is available from the National Information Center for Children and Youth with Disabilities (NICHCY). Enclosed are several citations from the ERIC database. These records are asample of the kind of information you can find in the ERIC database. For morecitations on your topic of interest, you may want to search the ERIC database yourself on the Internet. References with ED (ERIC Document) and EJ (ERIC Journal) identifiers are cited inthe ERIC database; for example, ED333123 or EJ333999. ERIC documents areavailable in microfiche collections at more than 825 locations worldwide (check yourlocal college or public library). They can also be ordered for a fee through the ERICDocument Reproduction Service (EDRS) at 1-800-443-ERIC. References with anEJ (ERIC Journal) number are available for a fee from the originating journal (checkwith your local college or public library), through interlibrary loan services, or fromarticle reproduction clearinghouses, such as UMI: 1-800-248-0360; or ISI:1-800-523-1850. ERIC descriptors (search terms) used: Autism EJ513559 EC612807 Individualized Education Programs for Students with Autism: Including Parents in the Process. Simpson, Richard L. Focus on Autistic Behavior, v10 n4 p11-15 Oct 1995 ISSN: 0887-1566 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); POSITION PAPER (120) Journal Announcement: CIJMAR96 The involvement of parents in developing individualized education programs (IEPs) for their children with autism is discussed. Essential components of IEP documents are outlined, and strategies that professionals can use to promote significant family involvement are considered. (Author/SW) Descriptors: *Autism; Elementary Secondary Education; *Individualized Education Programs; *Parent Participation; Parent School Relationship; *Parent Teacher Cooperation ED388009 EC304364 Teaching Children with Autism: Strategies for Initiating Positive Interactions and Improving Learning Opportunities. Koegel, Robert L., Ed.; Koegel, Lynn Kern, Ed. 1995; 236p. ISBN: 1-55766-180-4 Available From: Paul H. Brookes Publishing Co., P.O. Box 10624, Baltimore, MD 21285-0624 ($38). Document Not Available from EDRS. Language: English Document Type: BOOK (010); COLLECTION (020); NON-CLASSROOM MATERIAL (055) Geographic Source: U.S.; Maryland Journal Announcement: RIEMAR96 Target Audience: Teachers; Practitioners This book is designed to provide a conceptual and practical guide for teaching children with autism in a way that will maximize their developmental potential. The 12 chapters are: (1) "Emerging Interventions for Children with Autism: Longitudinal and Lifestyle Implications" (Robert L. Koegel and others); (2) "Communication and Language Intervention" (Lynn Kern Koegel); (3) "Overselective Responding: Description, Implications, and Intervention" (Jennifer Rosenblatt and others); (4) "Spontaneous Language Use" (Don Hawkins); (5) "Social-Communicative Skills in Higher-Functioning Children with Autism" (William D. Frea); (6) "'Teach the Individual' Model of Generalization: Autonomy through Self-Management" (Robert L. Koegel and others); (7) "Parent Education and Parenting Stress" (Douglas Moes); (8) "Social Support for Families" (Ann Leslie Albanese and others); (9) "Friendships between Children with and without Developmental Disabilities" (Christine M. Hurley-Geffner); (10) "Integrated School Placements for Children with Disabilities" (Diane Hammon Kellegrew); (11) "Parent-Professional Collaboration and the Efficacy of the IEP Process" (Michelle Wood); and (12) "A Parent-Professional Consultation Model for Functional Analysis" (Kimberly B. Mullen and William D. Frea). (Contains approximately 875 references.) (MDM) Descriptors: *Autism; *Communication Skills; *Educational Strategies; Elementary Secondary Education; Inclusive Schools; Interpersonal Competence; *Intervention; Language Usage; Parent Education; Parent Role; *Parent Teacher Cooperation; Peer Relationship; Self Management; Social Integration; Social Support Groups; *Teaching Methods EJ451589 EC604142 Improving Social Skills and Disruptive Behavior in Children with Autism through Self-Management. Koegel, Lynn Kern; And Others Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, v25 n2 p341-53 Sum 1992 ISSN: 0021-8855 Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); RESEARCH REPORT (143) Journal Announcement: CIJFEB93 Target Audience: Researchers This study, involving 4 children (ages 6 and 11) with autism, demonstrated that a self-management technique was effective in improving responsiveness to verbal initiations from others and in extending responsiveness to settings (community, home, and school) without the presence of a treatment provider. Concomitant reductions in disruptive behavior were also observed. (Author/DB) Descriptors: *Autism; *Behavior Change; Behavior Problems; Children; *Generalization; Interpersonal Communication; *Interpersonal Competence; Responses; *Self Control; Self Evaluation (Individuals); *Training Methods; Transfer of Training; Verbal Communication Identifiers: *Self Management EJ442902 EC602656 Development of a Continuum of Services for Children and Adults with Autism and Other Severe Behavior Disorders. Luce, Stephen C.; And Others Research in Developmental Disabilities, v13 n1 p9-25 1992 Special Issue: Community-Based Treatment Programs: Some Problems and Promises. ISSN: 0891-4222 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); POSITION PAPER (120) Journal Announcement: CIJAUG92 Target Audience: Administrators; Practitioners Key elements of a continuum of services for individuals with autism and other severe behavior disorders are described, focusing on development of a strong central organization; funding; staff recruitment, training, supervision, and evaluation; program evaluation; outreach parent training; home-based early intervention; vocational training; intermediate care facilities; and consultation programs. (JDD) Descriptors: Adults; *Autism; *Behavior Disorders; Children; *Delivery Systems; Early Intervention; Financial Support; *Intervention; Organizational Development; Program Development; *Program Evaluation; Staff Development ED289278 EC201239 Guidelines To Assist Families and Professionals When Looking for Programs and Services for Children and Adults with Autism. Parts One, Two, and Three and Guidelines for the Selection of an Appropriate Educational Placement for the Student with Autism: A Checklist To Assess Service Appropriateness. 1987; 17p.; The first set of three brochures were developed by the New Jersey Task Force on Autism. The fourth brochure was developed at the Bancroft School and New Jersey Council of Organizations and Schools for Autistic Children and Adults. For related information, see EC 201 234-238. EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: NON-CLASSROOM MATERIAL (055) Geographic Source: U.S.; New Jersey Journal Announcement: RIEMAY88 Target Audience: Parents Four district brochures presenting guidelines on services for children and adults with autism have been combined to form this document. "General Guidelines for Education and Treatment of Individuals with Autism" addresses aspects of education and treatment, listing important questions about such topics as ancillary services, indivdualization, home programming, and accreditation. "Guidelines Pertaining to Adult Day Training/Workshops" examines adult day training/workshops, and touches upon such issues as the need for distinct services, individualized planning, and the philosophy of training and programming. "Guidelines Pertaining to Group Homes for Children and Adults" covers issues of community resources, individualization, staff training, and the role of the parents. In the fourth brochure, guidelines are offered for the selection of an appropriate educational placement for students with autism. Areas addressed are classroom environment and structure, student/staff ratio, teaching methods, progress evaluation, accountability, related services, and personal reactions. (CL) Descriptors: Adults; *Autism; Elementary Secondary Education; *Group Homes; Individual Development; Parent Materials; *Program Evaluation; Psychological Needs; *School Effectiveness; Vocational Rehabilitation ED289275 EC201236 Autism: Basic Information and Autism Questions and Answers. Meyers, Kathleen; Griesman, Brenda Bancroft School, Haddonfield, NJ. Apr 1986 27p.; For related document, see EC 201 234-239. EDRS Price - MF01/PC02 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: NON-CLASSROOM MATERIAL (055) Geographic Source: U.S.; New Jersey Journal Announcement: RIEMAY88 Target Audience: Practitioners The booklet provides background information on the diagnosis and characteristics of autism. A chart portrays the signs and symptoms, followed by the definition of the syndrome by the National Society For Children and Adults with Autism. Associated features are noted along with information on age of onset, etiology, incidence and sex ratio, complications, and differential diagnosis. The diagnostic criteria put forth by the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (Third Edition) DSM-III are also presented in terms of associated features, age at onset, course, impairment, complications, prevalence, sex ratio, predisposing factors, familial pattern, and differential diagnosis. Typical behaviors, such as unusual response to sound and unusual speech patterns, are listed. Programmatic requirements, including early diagnosis and appropriate intervention, highly structured programs, and comprehensive home programming/parent training, are summarized. A brochure entitled "Questions and Answers," which presents practical questions and answers on autism is attached. (CL) Descriptors: *Autism; Behavior Patterns; Child Development; *Clinical Diagnosis; Elementary Secondary Education; Incidence; Infant Behavior; Parent Materials; *Student Characteristics ED352748 EC301678 A New Way with Autistic and Other Children with Pervasive Developmental Disorders. Miller, Arnold; Eller-Miller, Eileen Language and Cognitive Development Center, Inc., Boston, MA. 1992; 33p. Sponsoring Agency: American Legion Child Welfare Foundation, Inc., Indianapolis, Ind. Available From: Language and Cognitive Development Center, Inc., P.O. Box 270, 11 Wyman St., Boston (JP), MA 02130 ($3). EDRS Price - MF01 Plus Postage. PC Not Available from EDRS. Language: English Document Type: PROJECT DESCRIPTION (141) Geographic Source: U.S.; Massachusetts Journal Announcement: RIEMAY93 This monograph describes the program of the Language and Cognitive Development Center (Massachusetts), which serves toddlers and school-aged children with autism or other pervasive developmental disorders (PDD). An introduction presents incidence figures, the program's philosophy, the program's approach to assessment, intervention with children having limited reality systems, approaches to generalization of training, dealing with behavior problems, and the program's unique approach to teaching language. Next, a discussion of cognitive-developmental systems theory examines child development in terms of the sign stage of development (0-18 months), formation and dynamics of reality systems during the sign stage, and the development of intention during the sign stage. Intervention is then considered, including the program's "Umwelt" approach to the evaluation of reality systems, correcting developmental dysfunctions, developing body schema, coping with surroundings, developing social contact, and developing communication and representation skills. The integration of skills learned in the Center into the home environment is then explained. A final discussion answers questions concerning the curriculum for school-age nonverbal or limited verbal PDD children, examines determinants of child success, and offers evidence of the program's success (48 percent of Center children have returned to the public school mainstream for all or part of their classes). (Contains 53 references.) (DB) Descriptors: *Autism; Behavior Problems; Child Development; *Cognitive Development; Cognitive Restructuring; *Communication (Thought Transfer); *Early Intervention; Educational Philosophy; Elementary Education; Evaluation Methods; Generalization; *Language Acquisition; Preschool Education; Special Schools; Student Evaluation; *Theories; Transfer of Training Identifiers: *Language and Cognitive Development Center MA ED315975 EC222728 Early Intervention and Five Years Later with an Autistic Child and Her Family. Trautman, Retta C.; Ryley, Anderia Trail Sep 1989; 12p.; Paper presented at the National Conference of the Council for Exceptional Children/Council for Children with Behavioral Disorders (Charlotte, NC, September 24-26, 1989). EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: CONFERENCE PAPER (150); RESEARCH REPORT (143) Geographic Source: U.S.; Ohio Journal Announcement: RIEJUL90 A case study of a 3-year-old autistic child and her family is presented, following the child through a 3-year intensive intervention program with a multidisciplinary team in a day treatment program. The day treatment program plan included academic goals, language goals, parental goals, and home training goals. A major component of the program was the family's participation in a behavior-based developmental model training course. The document presents the child's developmental history, school history, and early intervention strategies. A follow-up study 5 years after leaving the day treatment program found that the child had made apparent cognitive and behavioral improvements. Her language skills remained weak and her eye contact limited, and she exhibited little spontaneity. Her parents retained and used the skills learned from their earlier participation in the parent training course. Family counseling was recommended to aid in meeting the challenge of parenting an adolescent and to establish long-term educational and vocational goals. Seven references. (JDD) Descriptors: *Autism; Behavior Development; Case Studies; Cognitive Development; *Early Intervention; Elementary Education; Followup Studies; Home Programs; *Parent Education; *Parent Participation; Preschool Education ED360775 EC302347 Self Talk in Normal and Autistic Children. Kerr, M. Kaye Mar 1993; 17p.; Paper presented at the Society for Research in Child Development (New Orleans, LA, March 25-28, 1993). EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: CONFERENCE PAPER (150); RESEARCH REPORT (143) Geographic Source: Canada; Manitoba Journal Announcement: RIEJAN94 This investigation compared self-talk use in five preschool autistic children (ages 57 to 86 months) and in matched chronological age and mental age peer groups. Videotape recordings of the children during free play with and without an adult were coded for the following self-talk categories: (1) private, mastery speech; (2) stereotypic repetitions; (3) word play; (4) self-regulative speech; (5) utterances; and (6) mouthing of words. All three groups exhibited fewer instances of self-talk in the presence of adults than without an adult. The autistic children demonstrated a similar pattern of self-talk with adults as did their control peers. Autistic children showed less consistency in behaviors between the adult present and adult absent situation than did controls; this was not felt to reflect their lack of response to adults in their environment, but rather to the high production of utterances and private mastery talk when they were not with an adult. (Contains six figures/tables.) (JDD) Descriptors: Adults; *Autism; Foreign Countries; Interpersonal Relationship; Play; Preschool Children; Preschool Education; *Speech; *Speech Habits; Videotape Recordings Identifiers: *Self Talk EJ439391 EC602024 Changes in Cognitive and Language Functioning of Preschool Children with Autism. Harris, Sandra L.; And Others Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders, v21 n3 p281-90 Sep 1991 ISSN: 0162-3257 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); RESEARCH REPORT (143); EVALUATIVE REPORT (142) Journal Announcement: CIJJUN92 Target Audience: Researchers; Practitioners Preschool children with autism (n=9) and their normally developing peers (n=9) were compared before and after one school year. The autistic children had narrowed the gap after treatment--making a nearly 19-point increase in intelligence quotient and an 8-point gain in language quotient. Results support the value of a language enriched early intervention program. (DB) Descriptors: *Autism; *Early Intervention; *Intelligence Quotient; *Language Acquisition; Language Enrichment; Outcomes of Treatment; Preschool Children; Preschool Education; *Program Effectiveness EJ431289 EC601103 Family Characteristics, Family Training, and the Progress of Young Children with Autism. Robbins, Frank R.; And Others Journal of Early Intervention, v15 n2 p173-84 Spr 1991 ISSN: 0885-3460 Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); RESEARCH REPORT (143) Journal Announcement: CIJJAN92 This study analyzed the impact of child and family variables (such as child's functioning level, parent-child interaction, and parent and family adaptation) on the progress of 12 children (ages 2-4) with autism. Analyses showed a strong inverse relationship between mother-reported stress and child progress. (Author/JDD) Descriptors: *Autism; *Child Development; *Family Characteristics; Knowledge Level; Mothers; Parent Child Relationship; Parenting Skills; Parents as Teachers; Preschool Children; Preschool Education; Stress Variables EJ392095 EC220060 Misleading Cues in the Diagnosis of Mental Retardation and Infantile Autism in the Preschool Child. Myers, Beverly A. Mental Retardation, v27 n2 p85-90 Apr 1989 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); NON-CLASSROOM MATERIAL (055) Journal Announcement: CIJNOV89 Difficulties in the differential diagnosis of mental retardation and infantile autism in the preschool child are discussed, and essential components in the assessment of preschool children with behavioral, developmental, or cognitive deviations are identified. (Author/DB) Descriptors: *Autism; *Clinical Diagnosis; *Evaluation Methods; *Handicap Identification; *Mental Retardation; Preschool Children; Student Evaluation EJ352063 CG531883 Behavioral Treatment and Normal Educational and Intellectual Functioning in Young Autistic Children. Lovaas, O. Ivar Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, v55 n1 p3-9 Feb 1987 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); RESEARCH REPORT (143) Journal Announcement: CIJAUG87 Reports the results of behavior modification treatment for two groups of similarly constituted, young autistic children. Pretreatment measures revealed no significant differences between the intensively treated experimental group and the minimally treated control groups. At follow-up, experimental group subjects (N=19) did significantly better than control group subjects (N=40). (Author/ABB) Descriptors: *Autism; *Behavior Modification; *Intelligence Quotient; Mainstreaming; *Preschool Children; Psychosis; *Special Education; Student Placement ED344375 EC301102 Pragmatic Analysis of the Communicative Performance in Autistic Children. Bernard-Opitz, Vera; And Others Aug 1991; 21p.; Paper presented at the Annual Convention of the American Psychological Association (99th, San Francisco, CA, August 16-20, 1991). EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: CONFERENCE PAPER (150); RESEARCH REPORT (143) Geographic Source: Singapore Journal Announcement: RIESEP92 Target Audience: Researchers This study investigated the communicative behavior of five high-level and five low-level autistic children (ages 3-5 years). Differential responses of parents and a clinician to the children's protesting, responses, and initiations were assessed. Findings indicate differential interaction behavior and behavior problems of autistic children with their parents and a clinician. Both groups of autistic children reacted quite sensitively to different interaction partners and their communicative feedback. Low-level autistic children mainly used nonverbal protests when interacting with their parents. Parents tended to respond to appropriate communicative acts with new demands, while the clinician acknowledged the communication. Reassessment of the low-level group after 20 months of daily therapy showed a significant reduction of protests and noncompliance and an increase in parents' positive feedback. (JDD) Descriptors: *Autism; *Communication Skills; Interaction Process Analysis; *Interpersonal Communication; *Nonverbal Communication; Outcomes of Treatment; Parent Child Relationship; Preschool Children; Preschool Education; *Social Behavior Identifiers: Impairment Severity RESOURCES Autism Research International Newsletter Institute for Child Behavior Research 4182 Adams Avenue San Diego, CA 618-281-7165 Autism Hotline Autism Services Center PO Box 507 101 Richmond Street Huntington, WV 25702 304-523-8269 Autism Society of America 7910 Woodmont Avenue, Suite 650 Bethesda, MD 20814 301-657-0881 For information and referral, call 1-800-328-8476. Institute for Child Behavior Research 4182 Adams Avenue San Diego, CA 92116 618-281-7165 Internet Resources Internet Listservs Top of Page Back to ERIC Menu Back to CEC Home Page copyright © 1996 ERIC Clearinghouse on Disabilities and Gifted Education URL: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm WT02-B20-64IA001-000011-B024-43http://www.cec.sped.org:80/faq/aphasia.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101074724 text/html 12667HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 07:47:32 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 09-Sep-96 20:40:00 GMTContent-length: 12475Content-type: text/html  Aphasia Aphasia-FAQ (last updated July 13, 1996) THE ERIC CLEARINGHOUSE ON DISABILITIES AND GIFTEDEDUCATION (ERIC EC) The Council for Exceptional Children 1920Association Drive Reston, VA 20191 Toll Free: 1-800-328-0272 TTY: 703-264-9449 E-mail: ericec@cec.sped.org Internet: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm What can you tell me about aphasia? This file includes information about aphasia. At the end of this file are links to Internet resources and Internet listservs (discussion groups) where you can obtain more specific information on this topic.There may be an ERIC digest that provides further information on this topic. You can read the full text of ERIC EC digests under our listing at the U.S. Department of Education, Office of Educational Research and Improvement . You may also want to contact the National Aphasia Association or Disabilities Access. Enclosed are several citations from the ERIC database. These records are asample of the kind of information you can find in the ERIC database. For morecitations on your topic of interest, you may want to search the ERIC database yourself on the Internet. References with ED (ERIC Document) and EJ (ERIC Journal) identifiers are cited inthe ERIC database; for example, ED333123 or EJ333999. ERIC documents areavailable in microfiche collections at more than 825 locations worldwide (check yourlocal college or public library). They can also be ordered for a fee through the ERICDocument Reproduction Service (EDRS) at 1-800-443-ERIC. References with anEJ (ERIC Journal) number are available for a fee from the originating journal (checkwith your local college or public library), through interlibrary loan services, or fromarticle reproduction clearinghouses, such as UMI: 1-800-248-0360; or ISI:1-800-523-1850. The following definition is from The Encyclopedia of Mental and Physical Handicaps, Tver and Tver (1991): The term aphasic is applied to a person who has had a total loss or lack of language function. Aphasia is only occasionally found in children; but when it is, its subjects are assigned to one of two major categories: either as expressive (motor) aphasic; or receptive (sensory) aphasic. The expressive aphasic: (1) understands but cannot express; (2) knows words but cannot negotiate them; (3) communicates by pulling, pointing, and gesturing; (4) repeats one or two known syllables; (5) evidences no muscular paralysis; (6) possesses adequate intelligence for speech implementation. The receptive aphasic: (1) lacks understanding of speech and ignores sounds; (2) hears at one moment, but not at the next; (3) may be confused with one who is deaf (the child exhibits the same characteristics); (4) has moderate loss of hearing and may tilt head toward the speaker; (5) displays a discrepancy between intelligence and ability to communicate. ERIC descriptors (search terms) used: Aphasia EJ459521 EC605176 A Fluent Language Disorder Following Antepartum Left-Hemisphere Brain Injury Feldman, Heidi M.; And Others Journal of Communication Disorders, v25 n2-3 p125-42 Apr-Jun 1992 ISSN: 0021-9924 Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); PROJECT DESCRIPTION (141) Journal Announcement: CIJJUL93 Target Audience: Researchers This article describes the language development in a left-handed young child with a left middle cerebral artery infarction. Patterns of development observed between 36 and 60 months of age are described as a transient jargon or fluent aphasia possibly resulting from initial reliance on an uninjured right hemisphere. (Author/DB) Descriptors: Aphasia; *Brain Hemisphere Functions; Developmental Stages; Head Injuries; *Language Acquisition; *Neurological Impairments; Young Children EJ458269 SE550594 Sex Differences in the Brain. Kimura, Doreen Scientific American, v267 n3 p118-25 Sep 1992 Special issue on the Mind and Brain. ISSN: 0036-8733 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); REVIEW LITERATURE (070) Journal Announcement: CIJJUN93 Explores the neural and hormonal basis of human intellectual function that gives rise to sex differences in the brain. Discusses behavioral, neurological, endocrinological studies, and studies of the effects of hormones on brain functioning that show a relationship between cognitive variations and sex. (MCO) Descriptors: Aphasia; *Cognitive Processes; Experiments; Homosexuality; Individual Differences; Language Processing; Neurological Organization; *Physiology; Science Education; *Sex Differences Identifiers: Brain; *Brain Development; Brain Functions; Brain Hemispheric Functions; *Brain Research; Cognitive Research EJ444564 FL521761 Are There Distinct Input and Output Buffers? Evidence from an Aphasic Patient with an Impaired Output Buffer. Romani, Cristina Language and Cognitive Processes, v7 n2 p131-62 May 1992 ISSN: 0169-0965 Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); PROJECT DESCRIPTION (141) Journal Announcement: CIJSEP92 An aphasic patient is described as one whose poor repetition of sentences and of lists of words contrasts with his or her surprisingly good performance on immediate problem recognition tasks. This result is interpreted as suggesting a distinction between phonological input and output buffers. (41 references) (Author/LB) Descriptors: *Aphasia; *Communication Disorders; Comparative Analysis; Foreign Countries; *Language Acquisition; Language Processing; *Linguistic Input; Patients; *Phonology; Recognition (Psychology); *Structural Linguistics Identifiers: *Input Output Buffers (Language) EJ429890 EC600953 Serial Processing and the "Phonetic Route": Lessons Learned in the Functional Reorganization of Deep Dyslexia. Matthews, Claire Journal of Communication Disorders, v24 n1 p21-39 Feb 1991 ISSN: 0021-9924 Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); RESEARCH REPORT (143) Journal Announcement: CIJDEC91 A patient with chronic agrammatic Broca's aphasia exhibited deep dyslexia and was treated with functional reorganization of the phonetic route of reading, with the patient learning consciously to control formerly automatic behaviors. The patient's responses indicated that the phonetic route encompasses at least two dissociable functions: grapheme-phoneme conversion and sequential analysis. (Author/JDD) Descriptors: Adults; *Aphasia; Behavior Development; Case Studies; *Decoding (Reading); *Dyslexia; Instructional Effectiveness; Intervention; Language Acquisition; Phoneme Grapheme Correspondence; *Phonetics; Reading Ability; Reading Achievement; *Reading Instruction; Sequential Approach; Teaching Methods Identifiers: Sequential Analysis EJ424485 EC600094 Acquisition and Generalization of Simple Manual Sign Grammars by Aphasic Subjects. Coelho, Carl A. Journal of Communication Disorders, v23 n6 p383-400 Dec 1990 ISSN: 0021-9924 Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); RESEARCH REPORT (143) Journal Announcement: CIJAUG91 Target Audience: Practitioners This study of four moderately to severely aphasic subjects found that success in manual sign training programs is related to severity of aphasia, that aphasic subjects' propositional use of manual signs rarely follows simple acquisition, and that generalization to untrained stimuli or environments does not occur without additional training. (Author/JDD) Descriptors: Adults; *Aphasia; *Generalization; Language Acquisition; *Manual Communication; Outcomes of Education; Performance Factors; *Sign Language; Training Methods Identifiers: Impairment Severity EJ408601 EC230429 Specific Developmental Dyslexia: Retrospective and Prospective Views. Richardson, Sylvia O. Annals of Dyslexia, v39 p3-23 1989 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); CONFERENCE PAPER (150) Journal Announcement: CIJOCT90 Target Audience: Practitioners; Researchers The paper traces the histories of several language disorders and the recommended educational treatment for them. It covers the historical events in medicine and education that have contributed to the confusion in relation to aphasia, dyslexia, and perceptual-motor disorders. (JDD) Descriptors: *Aphasia; *Dyslexia; *Educational History; Elementary Secondary Education; Intervention; Learning Disabilities; Medicine; *Perceptual Handicaps; Remedial Instruction; Teaching Methods EJ405404 FL519933 Recognition of Isolated Words: The Dynamic of Cohort Reduction. Wayland, Sarah C.; And Others Applied Psycholinguistics, v10 n4 p475-87 Dec 1989 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); RESEARCH REPORT (143) Journal Announcement: CIJAUG90 Reports on a study in which subjects heard the beginnings of spoken words, followed by increasingly larger segments of word-onset information until the words could be correctly identified. Results are discussed in terms of word-initial phonology as a trigger for response activation. (34 references) (Author/OD) Descriptors: Aphasia; Discourse Analysis; *Language Acquisition; Language Research; *Phonology; *Speech Communication; Vocabulary; *Word Recognition EJ378823 EC210906 Integrating Drama and Sign Language. Brown, Victoria Teaching Exceptional Children, v21 n1 p4-8 Fall 1988 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); NON-CLASSROOM MATERIAL (055) Journal Announcement: CIJMAR89 The article addresses the use of sign language and drama with young children with such disabilities as mental retardation, aphasia, autism, and other language learning disorders. Examples of activities that integrate creative drama techniques with sign language techniques are offered. (DB) Descriptors: Aphasia; Autism; *Drama; Early Childhood Education; Language Acquisition; *Language Handicaps; Learning Activities; Mental Retardation; *Sign Language EJ375086 EC210427 Language Learning and Retention in Young Language-Disordered Children. Gaines, Rosslyn; And Others Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders, v18 n2 p281-96 Jun 1988 Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); RESEARCH REPORT (143) Journal Announcement: CIJDEC88 Twenty-one language disordered children ages three through seven diagnosed with autism, mental retardation, and/or developmental aphasia received a mean number of 74 signed speech training sessions. Seventeen children learned at least one word, and seven children learned multiple-word phrases. Most language learned was retained in a six-month follow-up evaluation. (JW) Descriptors: *Autism; Communication Skills; *Developmental Disabilities; Interpersonal Communication; *Language Acquisition; Language Handicaps; *Learning Strategies; Preschool Education; *Speech Communication; Young Children Internet Resources Internet Listservs Top of Page Back to ERIC Menu Back to CEC Home Page copyright © 1996 ERIC Clearinghouse on Disabilities and Gifted Education URL: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm WT02-B20-65IA001-000011-B024-64http://www.cec.sped.org:80/faq/apraxia.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101074743 text/html 15289HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 07:47:45 GMTLast-modified: Wednesday, 07-Aug-96 16:46:00 GMTContent-length: 15094Content-type: text/html  Apraxia Apraxia-FAQ (File last updated: 7/14/96) THE ERIC CLEARINGHOUSE ON DISABILITIES AND GIFTEDEDUCATION (ERIC EC) The Council for Exceptional Children 1920Association Drive Reston, VA 20191 Toll Free: 1-800-328-0272 TTY: 703-264-9449 E-mail: ericec@cec.sped.org Internet: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm What can you tell me about apraxia? This file includes information about apraxia, and Internet resources where you can obtain more information. There may be an ERIC digest that provides further information on this topic. You can read the full text of ERIC EC digests under our listing at the U.S. Department of Education, Office of Educational Research and Improvement. Enclosed are several citations from the ERIC database. These records are asample of the kind of information you can find in the ERIC database. For morecitations on your topic of interest, you may want to search the ERIC database yourself on the Internet. References with ED (ERIC Document) and EJ (ERIC Journal) identifiers are cited inthe ERIC database; for example, ED333123 or EJ333999. ERIC documents areavailable in microfiche collections at more than 825 locations worldwide (check yourlocal college or public library). They can also be ordered for a fee through the ERICDocument Reproduction Service (EDRS) at 1-800-443-ERIC. References with anEJ (ERIC Journal) number are available for a fee from the originating journal (checkwith your local college or public library), through interlibrary loan services, or fromarticle reproduction clearinghouses, such as UMI: 1-800-248-0360; or ISI:1-800-523-1850. Apraxia (dyspraxia) refers to a disorder of the nervous system, characterized by an inability to carry out purposeful movements, but not accompanied by a loss of sensory function or paralysis. An individual may have severe difficulty in performing drawing, writing, buttoning, and other tasks requiring fine motor skill, or in sequencing the necessary movements. ERIC descriptors (search terms) used: Disabilities and Apraxia or Speech Handicaps EJ470753 EC606997 The Perception and Production of Rhyme in Normal and Developmentally Apraxic Children. Marion, Michelle J.; And Others Journal of Communication Disorders, v26 n3 p129-60 Sep 1993 ISSN: 0021-9924 Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); RESEARCH REPORT (143) Journal Announcement: CIJFEB94 Target Audience: Researchers The phonological competence of 4 children, ages 5-7 years old, with a diagnosis of developmental apraxia of speech (DAS), was contrasted to that of 4 normal children. The DAS children revealed a severe deficit in rhyming ability.Results suggest that DAS is a fundamental disorder of the segmental phonological level of language. (Author/DB) Descriptors: *Developmental Disabilities; *Language Acquisition; *Language Handicaps; *Phonology; Speech Skills; Young Children Identifiers: *Apraxia (Speech); *Rhyme EJ420031 EC232382 A Child with Signs of Developmental Apraxia of Speech with Whom a Palatal Lift Prosthesis Was Used to Manage Palatal Dysfunction. Hall, Penelope K.; And Others Journal of Speech and Hearing Disorders, v55 n3 p454-60 Aug 1990 Report No: ISSN-0022-4677 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); RESEARCH REPORT (143) Journal Announcement: CIJMAY91 A 7-year-old girl who exhibited characteristics consistent with developmental apraxia of speech, including excessive nasal resonance and nasal emission of air resulting from velopharyngeal port dysfunction, was fitted with a palatal lift prosthesis and followed for 11 years. Results of use of the lift and speech/language remedial programing are presented. (Author/JDD) Descriptors: Case Studies; Dental Health; *Dentistry; Elementary Secondary Education; Language Acquisition; Language Skills; *Prostheses; Remedial Instruction; *Speech Handicaps; *Speech Therapy Identifiers: *Apraxia (Speech); *Nasality EJ399104 EC221196 The Occurrence of Developmental Apraxia of Speech in a Mild Articulation Disorder: A Case Study. Hall, Penelope K. Journal of Communication Disorders, v22 n4 p265-76 Aug 1989 Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); PROJECT DESCRIPTION (141) Journal Announcement: CIJAPR90 Target Audience: Teachers; Practitioners A case study is presented of a fourth-grade girl with a seemingly mild "r" articulation problem. During remediation, it was determined that the girl also presented characteristics consistent with developmental apraxia of speech. A motor-programing remedial model was initiated; following five semesters of remediation, acceptable performance levels were attained. (JDD) Descriptors: *Articulation Impairments; Case Studies; Educational Diagnosis; *Handicap Identification; Intermediate Grades; *Speech Handicaps; Speech Improvement; *Speech Therapy Identifiers: *Apraxia (Speech) EJ390586 EC212736 Developmental Apraxia and Augmentative or Alternative Communication--A Case Example. Culp, Delva M. Augmentative and Alternative Communication, v5 n1 p27-34 Mar 1989 Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); PROJECT DESCRIPTION (141) Journal Announcement: CIJOCT89 The case study involves a developmentally apraxic eight-year-old girl using a multimodal communication system. The Partners in Augmentative Communication Training program was implemented. Results after two months suggested some improvement in communication interaction skills. Issues regarding developmental apraxia and the use of augmentative and alternative communication are addressed. (Author/DB) Descriptors: Case Studies; Children; *Communication Disorders; *Communication Skills; *Interaction; *Language Acquisition; *Language Handicaps; *Teaching Methods; Total Communication Identifiers: *Apraxia (Speech) EJ390584 EC212734 Augmentative and Alternative Communication Applications for Persons with Severe Congenital Communication Disorders: An Introduction. Mirenda, Pat; Mathy-Laikko, Pamela Augmentative and Alternative Communication, v5 n1 p3-13 Mar 1989 Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); REVIEW LITERATURE (070) Journal Announcement: CIJOCT89 The paper presents an overview of issues in augmentative and alternative communication as well as basic information on etiology, prevalence, and associated communication characteristics for the following conditions: cerebral palsy, mental retardation, autism, developmental verbal apraxia, and specific language disorders. (DB) Descriptors: Autism; Cerebral Palsy; *Communication Disorders; Communication Skills; *Disabilities; Incidence; Language Handicaps; Mental Retardation; Therapy Identifiers: *Augmentative Communication Systems EJ380092 EC211142 Management Strategies for Developmental Apraxia of Speech: A Review of Literature. Pannbacker, Mary Journal of Communication Disorders, v21 n5 p363-71 Sep 1988 Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); REVIEW LITERATURE (070) Journal Announcement: CIJAPR89 The paper describes a series of management strategies for developmental apraxia of speech. Numerous unanswered questions about the effects of therapy are posed and pertinent research issues are identified. (Author/DB) Descriptors: *Developmental Disabilities; *Outcomes of Treatment; Research Needs; *Speech Handicaps; *Speech Therapy Identifiers: *Apraxia (Speech) EJ376373 EC210544 Apraxia of Speech: The Effectiveness of a Treatment Regimen. Dworkin, James Paul; And Others Journal of Speech and Hearing Disorders, v53 n3 p280-94 Aug 1988 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); EVALUATIVE REPORT (142) Journal Announcement: CIJJAN89 A treatment program is described which successfully improved the speech of a 57-year-old apraxic patient. The program was composed of physiologic (nonspeech) and phonetic (articulatory) tasks that began with oroneuromotor control activities and progressed to consonant-vowel syllable, word, and sentence drills, with all activities paced by a metronome. (Author/JDD) Descriptors: *Articulation (Speech); Body Language; Case Studies; *Drills (Practice); Language Processing; Language Rhythm; Middle Aged Adults; *Pacing; Physiology; Program Development; Sentences; Skill Development; *Speech Handicaps; Speech Improvement; *Speech Therapy; Syllables; *Teaching Methods Identifiers: *Apraxia (Speech); Metronomes EJ362401 EC201108 An Approach to the Treatment of Mild to Moderately Severe Apraxia. Hagen, Chris Topics in Language Disorders, v8 n1 p34-50 Dec 1987 For related articles, see EC 201 105-111. Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); PROJECT DESCRIPTION (141) Journal Announcement: CIJMAR88 An approach to treating mild to moderately severe cases of the speech disturbance, apraxia, focuses on helping the patient establish a conscious knowledge of how an accurate response is produced through a five-phase training program. (DB) Descriptors: Cognitive Processes; Expressive Language; *Language Handicaps; *Speech Handicaps; *Speech Therapy; *Training Methods Identifiers: *Apraxia EJ318400 EC172606 Use of Visual Techniques in Therapy for Developmental Apraxia of Speech. Shelton, Ivy Skaife; Garves, Mary Mertes Language, Speech, and Hearing Services in the Schools, v16 n2 p129-31 Apr 1985 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); EVALUATIVE REPORT (142) Journal Announcement: CIJSEP85 The paper describes the development of Signed Target Phoneme (STP) Therapy, using the hand shapes of the Americal Manual Alphabet to cue phonemes. Adding STP to traditional therapy methods with a five-year-old boy diagnosed as having developmental apraxia of speech revealed a positive relationship between application of STP procedures and a more rapid acquisition of target phonemes. (Author/CL) Descriptors: *Sign Language; *Speech Handicaps; *Speech Therapy; *Visual Learning; Young Children EJ289816 EC160501 Syntactic Findings in Developmental Verbal Apraxia. Ekelman, Barbara L.; Aram, Dorothy M. Journal of Communication Disorders, v16 n4 p237-50 Jul 1983 Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); RESEARCH REPORT (143) Journal Announcement: CIJMAR84 Analysis of spontaneous language samples of eight children (4-11 years old) diagnosed with developmental verbal apraxia (motor speech disorder) revealed that at least some of the errors could not be attributed to motor speech and/or phonologic limitations but rather indicated concomitant syntactic disorders. (Author/CL) Descriptors: Elementary Education; Language Acquisition; *Language Handicaps; *Speech Handicaps; *Syntax Identifiers: *Verbal Apraxia ED288283 EC200753 The Presence of Word-Retrieval Deficits in Developmental Verbal Apraxia. Hall, Penelope K.; And Others Nov 1986; 22p.; Paper presented at the Annual Convention of the American Speech-Language-Hearing Association (Detroit, MI, November 21-24, 1986). EDRS Price - MF01 Plus Postage. PC Not Available from EDRS. Language: English Document Type: CONFERENCE PAPER (150); RESEARCH REPORT (143) Geographic Source: U.S.; Iowa Journal Announcement: RIEAPR88 Five children, aged 7-10 years, exhibiting Developmental Verbal Apraxia (DVA) were evaluated to determine the presence of word-retrieval problems. DVA is a symptom cluster including at least some of 21 potential symptoms, such as delayed speech development and severe articulation disorder. The Boston Naming Test (a picture confrontation naming task) and the Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test-Revised, Form L, were administered to all subjects. Evidence of word-finding problems was based on the number of correct responses, the speed with which responses were given, and other word-finding behaviors. Results indicated that the DVA children had more restricted receptive vocabularies, expressively identified fewer pictures correctly upon confrontation, identified the pictures more slowly than did normal children of the same age, and exhibited more behaviors often associated with word-finding problems (such as fidgeting and hitting their heads). A year later, two of the DVA children were administered the new German's Test of Word Finding, which confirmed the continuing presence of word-finding problems. It was concluded that children exhibiting DVA are thus at high risk to exhibit significant word-retrieval problems, and remedial objectives addressing these problems should be included in treatment programs of DVA clients so identified. Appended are tables detailing the research results. (JDD) Descriptors: Articulation Impairments; Communication Skills; Elementary Education; *Expressive Language; *Language Handicaps; *Receptive Language; *Speech Handicaps; Speech Skills; *Verbal Ability; Verbal Tests Identifiers: *Apraxia (Speech); *Word Retrieval RESOURCES American Speech-Language-Hearing Association 10801 Rockville Pike Rockville, MD 20852 1-800-638-8255 National Organization for Apraxia and Dyspraxia 7675 Charter Oaks Drive Pensacola, FL 32514 PH: 904/478-4895 (V) 904/494-1444 (TT) FX: 904/478-4895 Adults and especially children with apraxia and dyspraxia, families, research professionals, speech pathologists, members of the medical field, and the general public Internet Resources Internet Listservs Top of Page Back to ERIC Menu Back to CEC Home Page copyright © 1996 ERIC Clearinghouse on Disabilities and Gifted Education URL: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm WT02-B20-66IA001-000011-B024-82http://www.cec.sped.org:80/faq/asperg.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101074753 text/html 17056HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 07:48:01 GMTLast-modified: Wednesday, 07-Aug-96 17:14:00 GMTContent-length: 16861Content-type: text/html  Asperg Asperg-FAQ (File last updated: 7/14/96) THE ERIC CLEARINGHOUSE ON DISABILITIES AND GIFTEDEDUCATION (ERIC EC) The Council for Exceptional Children 1920Association Drive Reston, VA 20191 Toll Free: 1-800-328-0272 TTY: 703-264-9449 E-mail: ericec@cec.sped.org Internet: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm What can you tell me about Asperger's Disorder? This file includes information about Asperger's and Internet resources where you can obtain more information. There may be an ERIC digest that provides further information on this topic. You can read the full text of ERIC EC digests under our listing at the U.S. Department of Education, Office of Educational Research and Improvement. Enclosed are several citations from the ERIC database. These records are asample of the kind of information you can find in the ERIC database. For morecitations on your topic of interest, you may want to search the ERIC database yourself on the Internet. References with ED (ERIC Document) and EJ (ERIC Journal) identifiers are cited inthe ERIC database; for example, ED333123 or EJ333999. ERIC documents areavailable in microfiche collections at more than 825 locations worldwide (check yourlocal college or public library). They can also be ordered for a fee through the ERICDocument Reproduction Service (EDRS) at 1-800-443-ERIC. References with anEJ (ERIC Journal) number are available for a fee from the originating journal (checkwith your local college or public library), through interlibrary loan services, or fromarticle reproduction clearinghouses, such as UMI: 1-800-248-0360; or ISI:1-800-523-1850. The Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fourth Edition (DSM-4) offers five subcategories of Pervasive Developmental Disorder (PDD). They are: Autistic Disorder Rett's Disorder Childhood Disintegrative Disorder Asperger's Disorder Pervasive Developmental Disorder Not Otherwise Specified (Including Atypical Autism) DSM-IV 299.80 - ASPERGER'S DISORDER Diagnostic Features The essential features of Asperger's Disorder are severe andsustained impairment in social interaction and the development ofrestricted, repetitive patterns of behavior, interests, andactivities. The disturbance must cause clinically significantimpairment in social, occupational, or other important areas offunctioning. In contrast to Autistic Disorder, there are noclinically significant delays in language. In addition, there are noclinically significant delays in cognitive development or in thedevelopment of age-appropriate self-help skills, adaptive behavior,and curiosity about the environment in childhood. The diagnosis isnot given if the criteria are met for any other specific PervasiveDevelopmental Disorder or for Schizophrenia. Prevalence Information on the prevalence of Asperger's Disorder is limited,but it appears to be more common in males. Course Asperger's Disorder appears to have a somewhat later onset thanAutistic Disorder, or at least to be recognized later. Motor delaysor motor clumsiness may be noted in the preschool period.Difficulties in social interaction may become more apparent in theschool context. It is during this time that particular idiosyncraticor circumscribed interests (such as a fascination with trainschedules) may appear to be recognized as such. As adults,individuals with the condition may have problems with empathy andmodulation of social interaction. This disorder apparently follows acontinuous course and, in the vast majority of cases, the duration islifelong. Familial Pattern Although the available data are limited, there appears to be anincreased frequency of Asperger's Disorder among family members ofindividuals who have the disorder. Differential Diagnosis Asperger's Disorder is not diagnosed if criteria are met foranother PERVASIVE DEVELOPMENTAL DISORDER or for SCHIZOPHRENIA.Asperger's Disorder must also be distinguished fromOBSESSIVE-COMPULSIVE DISORDER and SCHIZOID PERSONALITY DISORDER.Asperger's Disorder and Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder share repetitiveand stereotyped patterns of behavior. In contrast to OCD, Asperger'sis characterized by a qualitative impairment in social interaction anda more restricted pattern of interests and activities. In contrast toSchizoid Personality Disorder, Asperger's is characterized bystereotyped behaviors and interests and by more severely impairedsocial interaction. Diagnostic Criteria A. Qualitative impairment in social interaction as manifested by at least two of the following: marked impairment in the use of multiple nonverbal behaviors such as eye-to-eye gaze, facial expression, body postures, and gestures to regulate social interaction. failure to develop peer relationships appropriate to developmental level. a lack of spontaneous seeking to share enjoyment, interests, or achievements with other people (for example, by a lack of showing, bringing, or pointing out objects of interest to other people). lack of social or emotional reciprocity. B. Restricted repetitive and stereotyped patterns of behavior, interests, and activities as manifested by at least one of the following: encompassing preoccupation with one or more stereotyped and restricted patterns of interest that is abnormal either in intensity or focus. apparently inflexible adherence to specific, nonfunctional routines or rituals. stereotyped and repetitive motor mannerisms (hand or finger flapping or twisting, or complex whole-body movements). persistent preoccupation with parts of objects. C. The disturbance causes clinically significant impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning. D. There is no clinically significant general delay in language (single words used by age 2 years, communicative phrases used by age 3 years). E. There is no clinically significant delay in cognitive development or in the development of age-appropriate self-help skills, adaptive behavior (other than in social interaction), and curiosity about the environment in childhood. F. Criteria are not met for another specific Pervasive Developmental Disorder or Schizophrenia. ERIC descriptors (search terms) used: Aspergers Syndrome EC613578 The Integration of a Very Able Pupil with Asperger Syndrome into a mainstream school. Barber, Christine British Journal of Special Education, v23 n1 p19-24 Mar 1996 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080) This case study describes the mainstreamed and accelerated educational program being provided to a 15 year old boy in England who is highly gifted and has Asperger syndrome, a condition with many autistic-like characteristics. The boy's special education program to develop his social, communication, and independence skills is highlighted. (DB). Descriptors: Gifted Disabled; Autism; Secondary Education; Acceleration (Education); Case Studies; Inclusive Schools; Interpersonal Competence; Communication Skills; Foreign Countries; Educational Methods. Identifiers: Asperger Syndrome; England EJ508359 EC611767 Thought Disorder in Asperger Syndrome: Comparison with High-Functioning Autism. Ghaziuddin, Mohammad; And Others Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders, v25 n3 p311-17 Jun 1995 ISSN: 0162-3257 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080) Journal Announcement: CIJDEC95 This study compared Rorschach test performance of 12 subjects with Asperger syndrome (AS) and 12 subjects with high-functioning autism (HFA, mean age 12 years). AS subjects demonstrated a trend toward greater levels of disorganized thinking than the HFA group and were more likely to be classified as "introversive." The test did not differentiate the two groups on most variables.(Author/DB) Descriptors: *Autism; *Cognitive Processes; Personality Assessment; Personality Traits; *Projective Measures; Psychological Evaluation Identifiers: *Aspergers Syndrome; *High Functioning Autism; Rorschach Test EJ508319 EC611720 Understanding the Student with Asperger Syndrome: Guidelines for Teachers. Williams, Karen Focus on Autistic Behavior, v10 n2 p9-16 Jun 1995 ISSN: 0887-1566 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); NON-CLASSROOM MATERIAL (055) Journal Announcement: CIJDEC95 Target Audience: Teachers; Practitioners Characteristics of Asperger syndrome are described, and behavioral and academic strategies are offered for addressing these symptoms in the classroom. Suggestions pertain to: insistence on sameness, impairments in social interactions, restricted range of interests, poor concentration, poor motor coordination, academic difficulties, and emotional vulnerability. (SW) Descriptors: *Autism; *Behavior Problems; *Classroom Techniques; Elementary Secondary Education; Student Behavior; *Symptoms (Individual Disorders); Teaching Methods Identifiers: *Aspergers Syndrome EJ485016 EC608699 Cohesive Discourse in Pervasive Developmental Disorders. Fine, Jonathan; And Others Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders, v24 n3 p315-29 Jun 1994 ISSN: 0162-3257 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); RESEARCH REPORT (143) Journal Announcement: CIJOCT94 Individuals with autism without mental retardation (ages 8-18), Asperger syndrome, and nonspecific social problems (controls) engaged in a 10-minute conversation. Compared to controls, the higher functioning autistic group referred less to a previous stretch of the conversation and more to an aspect of the physical environment. The Asperger group was very similar to the controls. (Author/JDD) Descriptors: *Autism; *Communication Skills; *Connected Discourse; Discourse Analysis; Interpersonal Communication; *Interpersonal Competence; Language Usage Identifiers: *Aspergers Syndrome; Conversation; Pervasive Developmental Disorders; *Reciprocity (Communication) EJ462478 EC605528 Nonverbal Expression in Autism of Asperger Type. Tantam, Digby; And Others Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders, v23 n1 p111-33 Mar 1993 ISSN: 0162-3257 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); RESEARCH REPORT (143) Journal Announcement: CIJSEP93 Two experiments evaluated the social interactions of 15 Asperger-type autistic subjects with either normal or schizoid control subjects. Asperger subjects tended to avoid gazing at the interviewer when the interviewer was talking. Results suggest that a lifelong absence of gaze response to social clues including speech may explain some features of autism. (Author/DB) Descriptors: Adults; *Autism; Behavior Patterns; *Eye Contact; *Interpersonal Competence; Interviews; *Listening; Nonverbal Ability; Schizophrenia Identifiers: *Aspergers Syndrome EJ399161 EC221503 Infantile Autism: A Syndrome of Multiple Primary Deficits? Goodman, Robert Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders, v19 n3 p409-24 Sep 1989 Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); POSITION PAPER (120) Journal Announcement: CIJAPR90 Target Audience: Researchers Consideration of underlying neurological and psychological deficits suggests that the autistic syndrome results from the coexistence of at least two distinct constellations of functional impairments: deficits in mechanical language skills, as in the developmental dysphasias; and deficits in social relatedness, play, and nonverbal communication, as in Asperger's syndrome. (Author/DB) Descriptors: *Autism; *Etiology; *Handicap Identification; Interpersonal Competence; Language Handicaps; *Neurological Impairments; Nonverbal Communication; Play; *Psychological Patterns Identifiers: Aspergers Syndrome EJ384040 EC211742 Correlation of Family History with Specific Autistic Subgroups: Asperger's Syndrome and Bipolar Affective Disease. DeLong, G. Robert; Dwyer, Judith T. Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders, v18 n4 p593-600 Dec 1988 Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); RESEARCH REPORT (143) Journal Announcement: CIJJUN89 To assess the possible role of familial psychopathology in the etiology of infantile autism, family histories and neurological status of 51 autistic subjects subgrouped by level of language function were evaluated. Among findings was a high incidence of Asperger's Syndrome in family members of high functioning autistic subjects. (Author/DB) Descriptors: *Autism; *Etiology; Family Characteristics; *Heredity; *Neurology Identifiers: *Aspergers Syndrome ED342156 EC300915 "Crack Kids" in School: What To Do, How To Do It. Pervasively Developmentally Delayed (PDD). Odom-Winn, Danni; Dunagan, Dianne E. 1991; 120p. ISBN: 0-7925-1867-5 Available From: Educational Activities, Inc., 1937 Grand Ave., Baldwin, NY 11510 ($14.95 plus $2.00 shipping and handling). Document Not Available from EDRS. Language: English Document Type: BOOK (010); TEACHING GUIDE (052) Geographic Source: U.S.; Florida Journal Announcement: RIEJUL92 Target Audience: Teachers; Practitioners This book addresses the educational needs of children who are pervasively developmentally delayed (PDD), especially those exposed to drugs prenatally and those with Fetal Alcohol Syndrome, autism, hyperactivity, Asperger Syndrome, other heath impairments, attention deficit disorder, and childhood aphasia. The first chapter recommends the use of the PDD Characteristics Checklist, the Communication/Behavior Prompts Form, and the Developmental Ages Checklist to identify specific target skills and behaviors. The second chapter offers guidance on organizing the classroom including the "quiet chair;" classroom arrangement; instructional materials; use of learning centers; and suggested books, screening instruments, and augmentative communication systems. Classroom management techniques are discussed in the third chapter and include getting control; getting the child to sit down, stay down, and develop on-task behavior; remediating visual/tactile and auditory ultrasensitivity; dealing with aggression; intervening with self-stimulating behaviors; and managing inappropriate behaviors. The fourth chapter considers basics of language acquisition, alternative forms of communication, and the importance of communication skills to socialization. Some useful examples of sign language are illustrated. Sensory development activities are suggested in the fifth chapter. Chapter 6 offers suggestions for working with parents and chapter 7 offers some specific successful techniques in changing behaviors. Sample forms are attached. (40 references) (DB) Descriptors: Aggression; Aphasia; Autism; *Behavior Change; *Behavior Disorders; Behavior Modification; Classroom Design; *Classroom Techniques; Communication Skills; *Developmental Disabilities; Discipline; *Drug Abuse; Elementary Education; Hyperactivity; Instructional Materials; Interpersonal Competence; Intervention; Language Acquisition; Learning Centers (Classroom); Parent Teacher Cooperation; *Prenatal Influences; Remedial Instruction; Sign Language; Special Health Problems; Teaching Methods; Time on Task; Timeout Identifiers: Aspergers Syndrome; *Developmental Delays; Fetal Alcohol Syndrome Internet Resources Internet Listservs Top of Page Back to ERIC Menu Back to CEC Home Page copyright © 1996 ERIC Clearinghouse on Disabilities and Gifted Education URL: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm WT02-B20-67IA001-000011-B024-99http://www.cec.sped.org:80/faq/aud.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101074806 text/html 16215HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 07:48:12 GMTLast-modified: Wednesday, 07-Aug-96 17:24:00 GMTContent-length: 16020Content-type: text/html  AudProc Aud.Proc-FAQ (last updated 7/14/96) THE ERIC CLEARINGHOUSE ON DISABILITIES AND GIFTEDEDUCATION (ERIC EC) The Council for Exceptional Children 1920Association Drive Reston, VA 20191 Toll Free: 1-800-328-0272 TTY: 703-264-9449 E-mail: ericec@cec.sped.org Internet: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm Do you have any information on Central Auditory Processing Disorders (CAPD)? This file includes information about Central Auditory Processing Disorders (CAPD) and Internet resources where you can obtain more information. There may be an ERIC digest that provides further information on this topic. You can read the full text of ERIC EC digests under our listing at the U.S. Department of Education, Office of Educational Research and Improvement. Enclosed are several citations from the ERIC database. These records are asample of the kind of information you can find in the ERIC database. For morecitations on your topic of interest, you may want to search the ERIC database yourself on the Internet. References with ED (ERIC Document) and EJ (ERIC Journal) identifiers are cited inthe ERIC database; for example, ED333123 or EJ333999. ERIC documents areavailable in microfiche collections at more than 825 locations worldwide (check yourlocal college or public library). They can also be ordered for a fee through the ERICDocument Reproduction Service (EDRS) at 1-800-443-ERIC. References with anEJ (ERIC Journal) number are available for a fee from the originating journal (checkwith your local college or public library), through interlibrary loan services, or fromarticle reproduction clearinghouses, such as UMI: 1-800-248-0360; or ISI:1-800-523-1850. ERIC descriptors (search terms) used: Communication Disorders and Auditory Perception EJ489505 EC609441 Speech Time Is All the Time Green, Riki Lerner TEACHING Exceptional Children, v27 n1 p60-61 Fall 1994 ISSN: 0040-0599 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); NON-CLASSROOM MATERIAL (055) Journal Announcement: CIJJAN95 Target Audience: Teachers; Practitioners Teaching techniques that enhance the functional communication skills of children in primary-level classes are presented. The techniques focus on articulation, receptive and expressive language, and auditory processing. The role of the teacher as a communication model is noted. (JDD) Descriptors: Articulation (Speech); Auditory Training; *Communication Disorders; *Communication Skills; Language Acquisition; Language Impairments; Primary Education; *Speech Impairments; Teacher Role; *Teaching Methods ED354667 EC301844 Auditory Processes. Revised Edition. Gillet, Pamela 1993; 118p. ISBN: 0-87879-094-2-R Available From: Academic Therapy Publications, 20 Commercial Blvd., Novato, CA 94949-6191 ($12.50). EDRS Price - MF01 Plus Postage. PC Not Available from EDRS. Language: English Document Type: BOOK (010); TEACHING GUIDE (052) Geographic Source: U.S.; California Journal Announcement: RIEJUL93 Target Audience: Teachers; Practitioners This book presents training activities for special education or regular teachers to use with children having auditory processing disorders. Each chapter begins with a discussion of theory and general intervention guidelines and then presents remedial activities. The first chapter looks at auditory processes overall, lists the normal sequence of auditory skill development, and offers suggestions for helping students with auditory processing problems in the regular classroom. The second chapter considers auditory discrimination and provides a list of appropriate tests and 85 remedial exercises. Next, a list of tests and 71 remedial exercises are provided for improving auditory memory. The fourth chapter considers auditory perception, identifying tests and giving 64 exercises. Remaining chapters provide discussion, suggested tests, and remedial exercises for: auditory-vocal association (60 exercises); auditory synthesis (34 exercises); auditory-vocal automaticity (32 exercises); auditory figure-ground (12 exercises); and reading skills (24 exercises). The last chapter lists commercial materials including books, filmstrips and accompanying records, games, instructional aids, instructional kits, programs, records, tapes, and workbooks and reprint masters. Publishers' addresses are also provided. (DB) Descriptors: Auditory Discrimination; *Auditory Perception; Auditory Tests;Auditory Training; Classroom Techniques; Elementary Secondary Education; *Learning Activities; Listening Comprehension; Memory; Perceptual Development; *Perceptual Handicaps; Reading Instruction; *Remedial Instruction; *Teaching Methods EJ447244 EC603291 Listening Characteristics of Children with Central Auditory Processing Disorders. Smoski, Walter J.; And Others Language, Speech, and Hearing Services in Schools, v23 n2 p145-52 Apr 1992 ISSN: 0161-1461 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); RESEARCH REPORT (143) Journal Announcement: CIJNOV92 Target Audience: Researchers The observed listening performances of 64 children (ages 7-11) with central auditory processing (CAP) disorders were evaluated. Data indicated wide variations in listening performance depending upon the listening conditions and listening functions being rated. Findings suggested that these children had difficulties in both stressful and ideal listening conditions. (Author/DB) Descriptors: Auditory Evaluation; *Auditory Perception; Elementary Education; *Environmental Influences; *Listening; *Perceptual Handicaps; *Performance Factors ED350809 EC301631 Learning Process Skills. Riley, Stanley R. 1992; 123p. ISBN: 0-87879-938-9 Available From: Academic Therapy Publications, 20 Commercial Blvd., Novato, CA 94949-6191 ($15). EDRS Price - MF01 Plus Postage. PC Not Available from EDRS. Language: English Document Type: NON-CLASSROOM MATERIAL (055) Geographic Source: U.S.; California Journal Announcement: RIEMAR93 Target Audience: Teachers; Researchers; Practitioners This book was written to help teachers gain a better understanding of children who are failing in school and to provide a systematic process of attacking their learning problems. The text presents workable principles for determining probable causes of learning problems and for selecting suitable, effective remedial activities. Learning problems dealt with include: visual processing problems (sequencing, memory, abstraction, and discrimination); auditory processing (sequencing, memory, abstraction, and discrimination); verbal processing (production and response); kinesthetic processing (perception, coordination, learning, and memory); and abstract processing (integration, nonverbal concepts, and concentration). For each problem area, the book includes symptoms, instructions for personal observation, tests commonly used to verify and substantiate a specific diagnosis, and suggestions for general classroom assistance and individual remediation. (Contains approximately 80 references.) (JDD) Descriptors: Abstract Reasoning; Auditory Perception; *Diagnostic Teaching; *Educational Diagnosis; Elementary Secondary Education; Etiology; Handicap Identification; High Risk Students; Intervention; Kinesthetic Perception; *Learning Problems; *Remedial Instruction; Skill Development; *Teaching Methods; Verbal Ability; Visual Perception EJ421444 EC232875 Processing Problems and Language Impairment in Children. Watkins, Ruth V. Topics in Language Disorders, v11 n1 p63-72 Nov 1990 Theme Issue: Otitis Media: Implications for Language Learning Report No: ISSN-0271-8294 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); REVIEW LITERATURE (070) Journal Announcement: CIJJUN91 Target Audience: Researchers The article reviews studies on the assessment of rapid auditory processing abilities. Issues in auditory processing research are identified including a link between otitis media with effusion and language learning problems. A theory that linguistically impaired children experience difficulty in perceiving and processing low phonetic substance aspects of ambient language is discussed. (DB) Descriptors: *Auditory Perception; *Child Development; *Language Acquisition; *Language Handicaps; Special Health Problems; Theories Identifiers: *Otitis Media EJ391107 SE544174 Yes You Can...Plan Appropriate Instruction for Learning Disabled Students. Meyers, Marcee J.; Burton, Grace M. Arithmetic Teacher, v36 n7 p46-50 Mar 1989 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); PROJECT DESCRIPTION (141) Journal Announcement: CIJOCT89 Discusses planning lessons for the learning disabled student. Defines four deficits: (1) visual-processing deficit; (2) auditory-processing deficit; (3) kinesthetic deficit; and (4) reasoning disorders. Describes strategies for each of the four deficits. (YP) Descriptors: *Elementary School Mathematics; *Learning Disabilities; *Learning Problems; Mathematics Achievement; *Mathematics Instruction; *Perceptual Handicaps; *Remedial Instruction; Remedial Programs EJ389426 RC507282 Behavioral Indications of Auditory Processing Disorders. Hartman, Kerry McGoldrick Rural Special Education Quarterly, v9 n2 p37-40 Sum 1988 Theme issue with title "Serving the Behavior Disordered Student." Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080) Journal Announcement: CIJSEP89 Identifies disruptive behaviors of children that may indicate central auditory processing disorders (CAPDs), perceptual handicaps of auditory discrimination or auditory memory not related to hearing ability. Outlines steps to modify the communication environment for CAPD children at home and in the classroom. (SV) Descriptors: *Auditory Perception; *Behavior Disorders; Children; Classroom Techniques; *Communication Disorders; *Educational Environment; Elementary Secondary Education; *Perceptual Handicaps; Special Education; *Student Behavior Identifiers: *Central Auditory Processing Disorders EJ370478 EC202680 Strategies for Mainstreamed Students. Moskowitz, Fern C. Academic Therapy, v23 n5 p541-47 May 1988 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); NON-CLASSROOM MATERIAL (055) Journal Announcement: CIJSEP88 Target Audience: Teachers; Practitioners Guidelines are presented for assisting classroom teachers in using the strengths of learning-disabled students to help them learn content area material. Specific suggestions are offered for various disabilities, including attention deficits, organizational deficits, auditory processing deficits, visual and visual-motor deficits, language impairments, and memory deficits. (Author/JDD) Descriptors: Attention Deficit Disorders; Communication Disorders; Elementary Secondary Education; *Learning Disabilities; *Learning Strategies; *Mainstreaming; Organization; Perceptual Handicaps; Student Behavior; *Teacher Role; *Teaching Methods Identifiers: *Content Learning; Memory Deficits EJ362373 EC201079 Early Identification of Children "At Risk" for Auditory Processing Problems. Sanger, Dixie D.; And Others Education and Treatment of Children, v10 n2 p165-74 May 1987 Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); EVALUATIVE REPORT (142) Journal Announcement: CIJMAR88 A 90-minute inservice workshop to facilitate early identification of children "at risk" for auditory processing problems was presented to 44 preschool teachers. Results indicated that, with a relatively brief training experience, preschool teachers can be taught to identify and refer such children. (Author/DB) Descriptors: Cognitive Processes; *Handicap Identification; High Risk Persons;*Inservice Teacher Education; *Learning Disabilities; *Perceptual Handicaps; Preschool Education; Program Effectiveness; *Referral; Teacher Workshops EJ358111 EC200116 An Assessment Technique for Children with Auditory-Language Processing Problems. Sanger, Dixie D.; And Others Journal of Communication Disorders, v20 n4 p265-79 Aug 1987 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); EVALUATIVE REPORT (142) Journal Announcement: CIJDEC87 A technique for evaluating children's auditory-language processing abilities was developed. Teachers were trained in inservice workshops to identify auditory-language processing problems, using the Observational Profile of Classroom Communication. They subsequently referred 46 nonhandicapped first-, second-, and third-graders for evaluation, which indicated that 87% had problems. The technique was considered effective. (KM) Descriptors: Auditory Discrimination; *Auditory Evaluation; Classroom Communication; *Classroom Observation Techniques; *Communication Disorders; Expressive Language; *Handicap Identification; Inservice Teacher Education; *Language Processing; Primary Education; Receptive Language; Teacher Workshops; *Verbal Ability; Verbal Communication Identifiers: Observational Profile of Classroom Communication EJ331583 EC182000 Unresolved Questions, Research Issues and Future Directions in Central Auditory Processing Disorders in Children. Hurley, Raymond M.; Singer, Jay Journal of Childhood Communication Disorders, v9 n1 p83-91 Fall-Win 1985 Special Issue: Central Auditory Processing Disorders in Children. Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); NON-CLASSROOM MATERIAL (055) Journal Announcement: CIJJUN86 Four unresolved issues and research needs in central auditory processing disorders in children are addressed: (1) early identification through screening; (2) relationship between test battery results and auditory behaviors; (3) relationship between test battery results and therapy planning, and (4) new assessment procedures. (Author/CL) Descriptors: *Handicap Identification; *Perceptual Handicaps; Research Needs; Student Evaluation; *Testing; Therapy RESOURCES: American Speech/Language and Hearing Association 10801 Rockville Pike, Rockville, MD 20852 301/897-5700, 800/638-8255 National Association of the Deaf 814 Thayer Avenue, Silver Spring, MD 20910 301/587-1788 Alexander Graham Bell Association for the Deaf, Inc. 3417 Volta Place, NW, Washington, DC 20007 202/337-5220 Internet Resources Internet Listservs Top of Page Back to ERIC Menu Back to CEC Home Page copyright © 1996 ERIC Clearinghouse on Disabilities and Gifted Education URL: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm WT02-B20-68IA001-000011-B024-119http://www.cec.sped.org:80/faq/dysgraph.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101074817 text/html 13517HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 07:48:24 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 09-Sep-96 21:21:00 GMTContent-length: 13325Content-type: text/html Dysgraph Dysgraph-FAQ (last updated July 14, 1996) THE ERIC CLEARINGHOUSE ON DISABILITIES AND GIFTEDEDUCATION (ERIC EC) The Council for Exceptional Children 1920Association Drive Reston, VA 20191 Toll Free: 1-800-328-0272 TTY: 703-264-9449 E-mail: ericec@cec.sped.org Internet: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm What can you tell me about dysgraphia? This file includes information about children who are dysgraphic. At the end of this file are links to Internet resources and Internet listservs (discussion groups) where you can obtain more specific information on this topic. There may be ERIC digests on related topics. You can read the full text of ERIC EC digests under our listing at the U.S. Department of Education, Office of Educational Research and Improvement. Enclosed are several citations from the ERIC database. These records are asample of the kind of information you can find in the ERIC database. For morecitations on your topic of interest, you may want to search the ERIC database yourself on the Internet. References with ED (ERIC Document) and EJ (ERIC Journal) identifiers are cited inthe ERIC database; for example, ED333123 or EJ333999. ERIC documents areavailable in microfiche collections at more than 825 locations worldwide (check yourlocal college or public library). They can also be ordered for a fee through the ERICDocument Reproduction Service (EDRS) at 1-800-443-ERIC. References with anEJ (ERIC Journal) number are available for a fee from the originating journal (checkwith your local college or public library), through interlibrary loan services, or fromarticle reproduction clearinghouses, such as UMI: 1-800-248-0360; or ISI:1-800-523-1850. Dysgraphia is severe difficulty in producing handwriting that is illegible and written at an age-appropriate speed. ERIC descriptors (search terms) used: Dysgraphia EJ477300 CS746987 Operation of the Phoneme-to-Grapheme Conversion Mechanism in a Brain Injured Patient. Sanders, Richard J.; Caramazza, Alfonso Reading and Writing: An Interdisciplinary Journal, v2 n1 p61-82 Apr 1990 ISSN: 0922-4777 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: RESEARCH REPORT (143); JOURNAL ARTICLE (080) Journal Announcement: CIJJUN94 Finds that a dysgraphic patient used nonlexical processes to spell many words. Notes significant correlations between the relative frequency of phoneme-grapheme mapping options and the relative frequency of the patient's use of the same written language options. Concludes that syllable structure is involved in the process of converting phonology to orthography in nonlexical spelling. (RS) Descriptors: Higher Education; *Neurological Impairments; *Phoneme Grapheme Correspondence; *Spelling; *Writing Processes Identifiers: *Dysgraphia; Spelling Research EJ475912 EC607582 A Longitudinal Study on Dysgraphic Handwriting in Primary School. Hamstra-Bletz, Lisa; Blote, Anke W. Journal of Learning Disabilities, v26 n10 p689-99 Dec 1993 ISSN: 0022-2194 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); RESEARCH REPORT (143) Journal Announcement: CIJMAY94 Annual evaluation for 5 years of the handwriting of 121 Dutch primary school children revealed that children with dysgraphic handwriting had lower fine motor ability, exhibited poorer structural performance, and, in higher grades, showed less preference for a personal style, than did other writers. Children with and without dysgraphic handwriting did not differ in writing speed. (Author/JDD) Descriptors: Elementary Education; Foreign Countries; *Handwriting; Longitudinal Studies; Psychomotor Skills; *Writing Ability; *Writing Difficulties; Writing Evaluation; Writing Skills Identifiers: Netherlands EJ422264 UD515651 Chaos on Sesame Street: Does This Carnival of Images Help Students Read? Healy, Jane M. American Educator: The Professional Journal of the American Federation of Teachers, v14 n4 p22-27,39 Win 1990 Report No: ISSN-0148-432X Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); POSITION PAPER (120) Journal Announcement: CIJJUN91 Target Audience: Teachers; Parents; Practitioners The rapid, disjointed, and vivid style of Sesame Street may impede rather than promote progress toward literacy and the development of voluntary attention. It robs children of the ability to create mental pictures. Contends that it is a failure as an instructional medium. (DM) Descriptors: *Attention; *Childrens Television; Early Childhood Education; Early Reading; *Educational Television; Imagination; Perceptual Development; *Preschool Children; *Reading Identifiers: Dysgraphia; Mister Rogers Neighborhood; *Sesame Street EJ379918 CS736943 Relationship of Verbal Ability and Working Memory to Spelling Achievement and Learning to Spell. Ormrod, Jeanne E.; Cochran, Kathryn F. Reading Research and Instruction, v28 n1 p33-43 Fall 1988 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); RESEARCH REPORT (143) Journal Announcement: CIJAPR89 Tests hypotheses that reading styles of good spellers and dysgraphic spellers differs. Concludes that an underlying source of difficulty for dysgraphic spellers, one that may be related to the reading style they exhibit, is a more limited working memory capacity. (MS) Descriptors: Higher Education; *Memory; *Reading Comprehension; Reading Processes; *Reading Rate; Reading Research; *Spelling; *Verbal Ability Identifiers: *Dysgraphia; Reading Spelling Relationship; *Spelling Growth EJ376294 EC210465 Developmental Dyslexia and Dysgraphia Persistence in Middle Age. Temple, Christine M. Journal of Communication Disorders, v21 n3 p189-207 Jun 1988 Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); PROJECT DESCRIPTION (141) Journal Announcement: CIJJAN89 The case study describes a middle-aged man whose developmental dyslexia and dysgraphia have persisted for the 30 years since he left school. The phonological dyslexic appears to operate on too large units with performance on paralinguistic rhyming tasks, and with higher order sound segmentation, analysis, and organization poor. (Author/DB) Descriptors: Adults; Case Studies; *Dyslexia; *Maturity (Individuals); *Persistence; *Phonology Identifiers: Dysgraphia EJ336053 FL517086 Developmental Surface Dysgraphia: A Case Report. Temple, Christine M. Applied Psycholinguistics, v6 n4 p391-405 Dec 1985 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); RESEARCH REPORT (143) Journal Announcement: CIJSEP86 Reports a study that compared the spelling performance of a 17-year-old developmental dysgraphic of normal intelligence to that of an acquired dysgraphic. Findings indicate that both make phonologically valid errors and spell regular words better than irregular words. These performances reflect a phonological routine corresponding to that used by normal children. (Author/SED) Descriptors: *Adolescents; Case Studies; Comparative Analysis; *Dyslexia; Error Patterns; *Language Handicaps; Language Patterns; *Phoneme Grapheme Correspondence; Psycholinguistics; Reading Difficulties; *Spelling; *Verbal Development Identifiers: *Dysgraphia ED352780 EC301710 Learning Disabilities: Glossary of Some Important Terms. ERIC Digest #E517. Lokerson, Jean Council for Exceptional Children, Reston, Va.; ERIC Clearinghouse on Handicapped and Gifted Children, Reston, Va. 1992 3p. Sponsoring Agency: Office of Educational Research and Improvement (ED), Washington, DC. Contract No: RI88062007 Report No: EDO-EC-92-7 Available From: Council for Exceptional Children, 1920 Association Dr., Reston, VA 22091-1589 ($1, minimum order $5 prepaid). EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: ERIC PRODUCT (071); DICTIONARY (134) Geographic Source: U.S.; Virginia Journal Announcement: RIEMAY93 This digest presents definitions of 30 important terms in the field of learning disabilities. They are: accommodations, assistive technology, attention deficit disorder, brain imaging techniques, brain injury, collaboration, developmental aphasia, direct instruction, dyscalculia, dysgraphia, dyslexia, dysnomia, dyspraxia, learned helplessness, learning modalities, learning strategy approaches, learning styles, locus of control, metacognitive learning, minimal brain dysfunction, multisensory learning, neuropsychological examination, perceptual handicap, prereferral process, resource program, self-advocacy, specific language disability, specific learning disability, subtype research, and transition. (DB) Descriptors: *Definitions; Elementary Secondary Education; *Learning Disabilities Identifiers: ERIC Digests ED286339 EC200523 Dysgraphia: Why Johnny Can't Write: A Handbook for Teachers and Parents. Cavey, Diane Walton 1987 48p. ISBN-0-8134-2696-0 Available From: Interstate Printers and Publishers, Inc., 19 N. Jackson St., P.O. Box 50, Danville, IL 61834-0050 ($3.95). EDRS Price - MF01 Plus Postage. PC Not Available From EDRS. Language: English Document Type: NON-CLASSROOM MATERIAL (055) Geographic Source: U.S.; Illinois Journal Announcement: RIEFEB88 Target Audience: Teachers; Parents; Practitioners Intended for teachers and parents, the handbook provides suggestions for diagnosis and remediation of the learning disability dysgraphia (difficulty with handwriting). The seven chapters have the following titles and sample subtopics: (1) "The Student with a Learning Disability" (what causes dysgraphia, the Gerstmann Syndrome); (2) "Parents' Perspective" (early warning signs, do's and don'ts); (3) "Diagnosis and Evaluation" (basic rights of parents and children, evaluation tools, sources of help); (4) "Teacher's Perspective" (recognizing the student with a learning disability); (5) "Developing a Teaching Program" (program planning, teaching basic skills, reinforcement techniques); (6) "Not Working to Ability"? (retention and the fun of writing); and (7) "Creating Successes" (college or vocational training, value of praise, and a case study). (DB) Descriptors: Elementary Secondary Education; *Handicap Identification; *Handwriting; *Learning Disabilities; Parent Role; Program Development; Reinforcement; *Remedial Instruction; Student Evaluation; Teaching Methods Identifiers: *Dysgraphia ED235637 EC160494 A Controlled Single Subject Research Design Utilizing a Sensory Motor Intervention System. Cowden, Joey 1980 26p.; Document may not reproduce well. EDRS Price - MF01/PC02 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: RESEARCH REPORT (143) Geographic Source: U.S.; Louisiana Journal Announcement: RIEMAR84 The study investigated and recorded changes in selected psychomotor skills of an 11-year old gifted male with severe motoric problems identified as dysgraphia. A pre-post test design using videotape evaluation recordings was employed to determine changes in psychomotor performance, and a rating scale was designed to establish baseline and determine performance changes after administration of a sensory motor intervention approach. The approach featured stimulation of vestibular, kinesthetic, tactile, and visual sensory modalities. Correlated tests were applied to factor grouped data as measured by a panel of six raters, indicating that the S improved significantly in body awareness and visual-motor control. The practical value of single-subject designs is emphasized. (Author/CL) Descriptors: Elementary Education; *Gifted Disabled; *Handwriting; Intervention; *Perceptual Handicaps; Perceptual Motor Coordination; *Research Methodology; *Sensory Training; Stimulation; *Writing Skills Identifiers: *Dysgraphia Internet Resources Internet Listservs Top of Page Back to ERIC Menu Back to CEC Home Page copyright © 1996 ERIC Clearinghouse on Disabilities and Gifted Education URL: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm WT02-B20-69IA001-000011-B024-133http://www.cec.sped.org:80/faq/dyslexia.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101074831 text/html 27382HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 07:48:35 GMTLast-modified: Tuesday, 10-Sep-96 14:01:00 GMTContent-length: 27189Content-type: text/html Dyslexia Dyslexia-FAQ (last updated July 9, 1996) THE ERIC CLEARINGHOUSE ON DISABILITIES AND GIFTEDEDUCATION (ERIC EC) The Council for Exceptional Children 1920Association Drive Reston, VA 20191 Toll Free: 1-800-328-0272 TTY: 703-264-9449 E-mail: ericec@cec.sped.org Internet: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm Please provide information on dyslexia. This file includes information about dyslexia. At the end of the file are linksto Internet resources and Internet listservs (discussion groups) where you can obtainmore information on the specific topic. ERIC EC digest E539, "Academic Interventions for Children with Dyslexia Who HavePhonological Core Deficits." provides further information on this topic. You can read the full text of ERIC EC digests under our listing at the U.S. Department of Education, Office of Educational Research andImprovement. Enclosed are several citations from the ERIC database. These records are asample of the kind of information you can find in the ERIC database. For morecitations on your topic of interest, you may want to search the ERIC database yourself on the Internet. References with ED (ERIC Document) and EJ (ERIC Journal) identifiers are cited inthe ERIC database; for example, ED333123 or EJ333999. ERIC documents areavailable in microfiche collections at more than 825 locations worldwide (check yourlocal college or public library). They can also be ordered for a fee through the ERICDocument Reproduction Service (EDRS) at 1-800-443-ERIC. References with anEJ (ERIC Journal) number are available for a fee from the originating journal (checkwith your local college or public library), through interlibrary loan services, or fromarticle reproduction clearinghouses, such as UMI: 1-800-248-0360; or ISI:1-800-523-1850. The following material was excerpted from the Orton Dyslexia Society [PIE Online] WorldWide Web Server The Orton Dyslexia Society has two working definitions of dyslexia: "Dyslexia is a neurologically-based, often familial, disorder which interferes with theacquisition and processing of language. Varying in degrees of severity, it is manifestedby difficulties in receptive and expressive language, including phonological processingin reading, writing, spelling, handwriting, and sometimes in arithmetic. Dyslexia is not aresult of lack of motivation, sensory impairment, inadequate instructional orenvironmental opportunities, or other limiting conditions, but may occur together withthese conditions. Although dyslexia is life-long, individuals with dyslexia frequentlyrespond successfully to timely and appropriate intervention." "Dyslexia is one of several distinct learning disabilities. It is a specific language-baseddisorder of constitutional origin characterized by difficulties in single word decoding,usually reflecting insufficient phonological processing abilities. These difficulties insingle word decoding are often unexpected in relation to age and other cognitive andacademic abilities; they are not the result of generalized developmental disability orsensory impairment.Dyslexia is manifested by variable difficulty with different forms of language, oftenincluding, in addition to problems in reading, a conspicuous problem with acquiringproficiency in writing and spelling." ERIC descriptors (search terms) used: Dyslexia ED385833 CS012240 How To Become a Better Reading Teacher: Strategies for Assessment and Intervention. Putnam, Lillian R., Ed. 1996; 367p. ISBN: 0-02-397045-6 Available From: Merrill, Order Processing, P.O. Box 11071, Des Moines, IA 50336-1071 ($22). Document Not Available from EDRS. Language: English Document Type: TEACHING GUIDE (052); BOOK (010); COLLECTION (020) Geographic Source: U.S.; New Jersey Journal Announcement: RIEJAN96 Target Audience: Teachers; Practitioners Reflecting the diverse philosophies and experiences of clinicians and practitioners, this book presents 30 essays that address the identification of reading strengths and weaknesses, assessment, and instructional strategies for remediation. Chapters in the book are (1) "The Role of Vision in Reading Disability" (Lois B. Bing); (2) "Problems with Auditory Processing" (Robert M. DiSogra); (3) "Emotional Difficulties of Disabled Readers" (Adella C. Youtz); (4) "Process Disorders: Auditory, Visual, and Graphomotor" (Robert C. Andrews); (5) "Neuropsychological Evidence for Subtypes in Developmental Dyslexia" (Margaret Semrud-Clikeman); (6) "Identifying Dyslexic Students" (Ellis Richardson and Barbara DiBenedetto); (7) "Concepts of Dyslexia" (Jack C. Westman); (8) "The Role of Technology in Reading Diagnosis and Remediation" (John E. McEneaney); (9) "Factors Affecting the Choice of Remedial Methods" (Lillian R. Putnam); (10) "Using Standardized Tests, Observations, and Nontraditional Assessment Techniques to Identify Specific Factors in Reading" (Phyllis DiMartino Fantauzzo); (11) "Using Informal Reading Inventories in Classroom and Clinic" (Jerry L. Johns); (12) "Documenting Children's Literacy" (Jeanne R. Paratore and others); (13) "A Model for Assessment and Targeted Instruction for Children with Reading Problems" (Steven A. Stahl and J. Michael Pickle); (14) "Collaborative Assessment in Language and Reading" (Lois A. Bader and Kathleen Balchak Fahey); (15) "Conversations with Children and Other Classroom-Based Assessment Strategies" (Marjorie Youmans Lipson); (16) "Are Decoding and Literature-Based Reading Programs Incompatible?" (Marilyn Jager Adams); (17) "Sample Remediation Techniques" (Catherine Bing Lipkin); (18) "Integrating Approaches to the Remediation of Reading Disability" (Barbara DiBenedetto); (19) "Decoding and Comprehension Instruction" (Marcia K. Henry); (20) "Reading Comprehension Instruction for Disabled Readers" (Katherine Maria); (21) "Intervention for Adolescents 'At-Risk'" (Mary E. Curtis); (22) "Developing At-Risk Readers' Oral Reading Fluency" (D. Ray Reutzel); (23) "Five Lessons to Increase Reading Fluency" (Timothy Rasinski and Nancy Padak); (24) "Five Misconceptions about Effective Remediation" (Barbara J. Walker); (25) "Teaching Dyslexic Students" (Ellis Richardson); (26) "Teaching Mainstreamed Dyslexic Students" (Jo Ann Reinhart and RoseAnn Martinez); (27) "Seven Recommendations for Remediating Writing Difficulties" (Vicki A. Jacobs); (28) "Teaching Disabled Spellers" (Robert Schlagal); (29) "Spelling: The Foundation of Word Knowledge for the Less-Proficient Reader" (Shane Templeton); and (30) Using Computer Technology to Aid the Disabled Reader" (Ernest Balajthy). (RS) Descriptors: Computer Uses in Education; *Decoding (Reading); *Dyslexia; Early Intervention; Elementary Education; *Evaluation Methods; High Risk Students; Informal Reading Inventories; Instructional Effectiveness; Learning Strategies; Reading Comprehension; *Reading Diagnosis; *Reading Difficulties; *Remedial Reading; Spelling; Teaching Methods EJ507764 CE528130 Theme Issue: Dyslexia. Herrington, Margaret; And Others RaPAL Bulletin, n27 p1-36 Sum 1995 Available from RaPAL, c/o Margaret Herrington, 90 Holmefield Rd., Leicester LE2 1SB, England. ISSN: 0269-8854 Language: English Document Type: POSITION PAPER (120); PROJECT DESCRIPTION (141); JOURNAL ARTICLE (080) Journal Announcement: CIJDEC95 Includes "Old Dilemmas and New Policies" (Herrington); "Dyslexia and Adult Basic Education" (Lankshear); "Specific Learning Difficulties" (Walker); "Moving Forward in Further Education (FE)" (Chappell); "An FE Student's Experience of Assessment" (Waterhouse); "Out of the Frying Pan..." (Michelson); "Dyslexia: A Personal Experience" (Smith); "Releasing Potential in the Dyslexic Writer" (Morgan); and "Dyslexia and Higher Education" (Rishworth). (SK) Descriptors: Adult Basic Education; *Adult Students; *Dyslexia; *Educational Diagnosis; Educational Policy; Higher Education; *Learning Problems Identifiers: Voice Recognition EJ505484 JC507014 Professional Development Defeats Dyslexia. Joller, Claire Momentum, v26 n2 p50-52 Apr-May 1995 Issue Theme: "A Catholic Education Response to Goals 2000." ISSN: 0026-914X Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: PROJECT DESCRIPTION (141); JOURNAL ARTICLE (080) Journal Announcement: CIJOCT95 Describes a program designed to educate dyslexic students with above-average intelligence using multisensory teaching methods, such as manipulative teaching aids. Indicates that the program's college preparatory curriculum differs from that of other classes only in the use of the special teaching methods, which can benefit all students. (MAB) Descriptors: *Dyslexia; *Educational Innovation; *High School Students; *Instructional Innovation; *Learning Disabilities; *Multisensory Learning; Program Development; Secondary Education Identifiers: *Vandebilt Catholic High School LA EJ505148 EC611439 Growing up Dyslexic: A Parent's View. Donawa, Wendy Journal of Learning Disabilities, v28 n6 p324-28 Jun-Jul 1995 ISSN: 0022-2194 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); POSITION PAPER (120) Journal Announcement: CIJOCT95 The mother of a son with dyslexia recounts her efforts to help him, by removing the "negatives and stress-makers" from his life, by breaking every piece of information into its smallest components, and by finding something at which he could really excel. Problems and successes during adolescence are recounted, as well as the son's initial year at college. (DB) Descriptors: *Child Rearing; *Coping; *Dyslexia; Elementary Secondary Education; *Family Problems; Higher Education; Mother Attitudes; Mothers; *Parent Child Relationship; Personal Narratives EJ504812 CS749850 Teaching Writing to Students with Learning Disabilities: The Landmark Method. Gaskins, Jacob C. Teaching English in the Two-Year College, v22 n2 p116-22 May 1995 ISSN: 0098-6291 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: TEACHING GUIDE (052); PROJECT DESCRIPTION (141); JOURNAL ARTICLE (080) Journal Announcement: CIJOCT95 Describes a writing instruction project called the "landmark method" that fosters writing skills in students with learning disabilities. Outlines specific strategies that have proven effective in teaching writing to students with dyslexia or other learning disabilities. (HB) Descriptors: Cognitive Processes; *Dyslexia; *English Instruction; Higher Education; *Learning Disabilities; Learning Problems; *Student Problems; Teaching Methods; Writing Difficulties; *Writing Instruction; Writing Skills Identifiers: Landmark College VT ED385095 EC304129 Academic Interventions for Children with Dyslexia Who Have Phonological Core Deficits. ERIC Digest E539. Frost, Julie A.; Emery, Michael J. ERIC Clearinghouse on Disabilities and Gifted Education, Reston, VA. Aug 1995; 4p. Sponsoring Agency: Office of Educational Research and Improvement (ED), Washington, DC. Contract No: RR93002005 Report No: EDO-EC-95-2 Available From: ERIC Clearinghouse on Disabilities and Gifted Education, Council for Exceptional Children, 1920 Association Dr., Reston, VA 22091-1589 ($1 each, minimum order $5 prepaid). EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: ERIC PRODUCT (071); ERIC DIGESTS (SELECTED) (073) Geographic Source: U.S.; Virginia Journal Announcement: RIEDEC95 This digest presents basic information for those providing educational services to children with dyslexia who have phonological core deficits. First it provides a brief overview, noting the incidence of dyslexia and the large number of these children with phonological deficits which result in far less academic progress than experienced by other children with learning disabilities.A definition of phonological core deficits notes the major components of phonemic awareness, sound-symbol relations, and storage and retrieval of phonological information in memory. Several criteria for classification and identification of dyslexia and learning disability are summarized and popular assessment measures are listed. Ten suggested interventions are noted, such as teaching metacognitive strategies, providing direct instruction in language analysis and the alphabetic code, and using techniques that make phonemes more concrete. Also listed are some print resources for teachers, relevant associations, and electronic resources. (DB) Descriptors: Auditory Perception; Auditory Training; Definitions; *Disability Identification; *Dyslexia; Elementary Secondary Education; Incidence; *Intervention; Learning Strategies; Metacognition; *Perceptual Impairments; Phonics; *Phonology; *Remedial Instruction; Remedial Reading Identifiers: ERIC Digests ED384862 CS012213 Understanding Dyslexia: Professional's Guide. Hennigh, Kathleen Anne 1995; 82p. ISBN: 1-55734-848-0 Available From: Teacher Created Materials, Inc., 6421 Industry Way, Westminster, CA 92683 (Order No. TCM 848: $8.95 plus shipping/handling). Document Not Available from EDRS. Language: English Document Type: TEACHING GUIDE (052); NON-CLASSROOM MATERIAL (055); BOOK (010) Geographic Source: U.S.; California Journal Announcement: RIEDEC95 Target Audience: Practitioners; Parents Pointing out that the label of dyslexia carries an acute stigma of mental incompetence (and the researcher/author is herself dyslexic), this booklet intends to provide educators and parents with a frame of reference regarding the topic of dyslexia. Defining dyslexia broadly as "characterized by a consistent difficulty with processing phonological information," the book first discusses some of the ways in which dyslexia operates, how a diagnosis can be made in the classroom, causes of dyslexia, and the necessity of referring the child for testing with a reading specialist if consistent dyslexic reading patterns are noted. Chapter 2 presents a history of dyslexia and proposes a working definition of the term followed by chapters 3 and 4 directed to the parents of the dyslexic child and to the teacher of the dyslexic child. Next chapters 5-8 discuss fundamental reading skills, classroom methods for teaching language arts, classroom methods for teaching content areas, and methods for handling group work. The book concludes with a methodology of assessing the performance and progression of dyslexic students. References and a list of professional organizations which specialize in understanding dyslexia are attached. (NKA) Descriptors: Class Activities; *Dyslexia; Elementary Education; Language Arts;*Parent Role; *Reading Difficulties; *Reading Processes; Reading Skills; Remedial Reading; *Teacher Role; Teaching Methods Identifiers: Content Area Teaching; *Reading Behavior; Reading Management ED384027 CS012193 What Is Dyslexia? Is There a Test for Dyslexia? Hill, Margaret H. International Reading Association. Texas State Council. Texas Reading Report, v18 n1 p1,11-13 Aug 1995 Aug 1995; 5p. EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080) Geographic Source: U.S.; Texas Journal Announcement: RIENOV95 A descriptive study examined how school districts in Texas identify students for dyslexia programs. Of the 300 districts surveyed, one-third responded with a long list of assessment instruments with no clear focus towards a definition of dyslexia, nor were notations cited accounting for discrepancies within learning achievement and other demonstrations of thinking. Districts generally said they followed the guidelines of the Texas Education Agency and used a variety of intelligence tests and achievement tests. The districts did list a number of tests to assess phonological information processed by the individual, but none were of recent publication date. In addition, visual/auditory perception, visual motor integration and listening comprehension were all important areas of assessment linked to success in language development and reading, writing, and spelling. Perhaps what is important in the end is the sense that the learner, not the label, is important. (Contains 16 references.) (RS) Descriptors: Definitions; *Dyslexia; Elementary Secondary Education; *Evaluation Methods; Labeling (of Persons); *Reading Achievement; *Reading Difficulties; Reading Research; School Surveys; *Screening Tests; State Surveys Identifiers: *Texas EJ400611 EC221524 The Phenomenon of Dyslexia in One Public School System. Salas, Beverly Ann Academic Therapy, v25 n1 p59-73 Sep 1989 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); NON-CLASSROOM MATERIAL (055); RESEARCH REPORT (143) Journal Announcement: CIJMAY90 Target Audience: Teachers; Practitioners One school district's effort to develop a specialized reading program for students with dyslexia is described. Discussed are: guidelines for diagnosing dyslexics; primary characteristics of 12 youngsters identified as dyslexic; and recommendations for other school districts concerning definitions, screening, referral, and service delivery. (JDD) Descriptors: Delivery Systems; *Dyslexia; *Educational Diagnosis; Elementary Education; *Handicap Identification; Intervention; *Program Development; Reading Instruction; *Reading Programs; Referral; Student Characteristics ED335813 EC300555 The Effects of Modeling and Repeated Taped Reading Instruction on the Learning Disabled Child as Ways To Improve Reading Comprehension Fluency and Word Recognition. Rokicki, Anne L. Jun 1990 58p.; M.S. Practicum, Nova University. EDRS Price - MF01/PC03 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: PRACTICUM PAPER (043); TEST, QUESTIONNAIRE (160) Geographic Source: U.S.; Florida Journal Announcement: RIEJAN92 Target Audience: Practitioners This practicum focused on the use of repeated taped reading instruction with modeling to improve fluency, comprehension, and automatic word recognition in five students (ages 11-13 years) with learning disabilities for a period of 10 weeks. The instruction also involved the teacher giving corrective feedback and having the students answer story map questions both orally and in written form. Students' pre-intervention and post-intervention performance was compared in oral reading, comprehension, word recognition, and attitude toward reading. Results indicated that students improved in comprehension, fluency, and word recognition. The practicum results supported the need to develop a reading program that is frustration-proof and failure-proof for use with the learning-disabled child. Appendices include the Heatington Attitude Scale, sample story map questions, and samples of students' work. (Includes 14 references.) (JDD) Descriptors: *Audiotape Recordings; Feedback; Intermediate Grades; Intervention; Junior High Schools; *Learning Disabilities; *Modeling (Psychology); Questioning Techniques; Reading Attitudes; Reading Comprehension; *Reading Difficulties; Reading Improvement; *Reading Instruction; Student Attitudes; Teaching Methods; Word Recognition Identifiers: *Repeated Readings; *Story Maps ED316834 CS009959 Working with Slow Readers, Slow Learners. Smith, Carl B. Making Connections, v6 n1 1990 1990 5p.; MacMillan/McGraw-Hill In-Service Bulletin. EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: SERIAL (022); TEACHING GUIDE (052) Geographic Source: U.S.; Indiana Journal Announcement: RIEAUG90 Target Audience: Teachers; Practitioners This article examines the conditions that will help teachers improve the reading comprehension of learning disabled students: (1) allow more time; (2) build a framework for comprehension; (3) intervene in the process; (4) engage the learner; (5) match student and material; and (6) expect students to succeed. Two figures are included. (RS) Descriptors: Elementary Education; High Risk Students; Intervention; *Learning Activities; *Learning Disabilities; *Reading Comprehension; *Reading Instruction; Teaching Methods ED314714 CS009887 Learning Disabilities and Reading. Focused Access to Selected Topics (FAST) Bibliography No. 45. Johns, Jerry; Krickeberg, Sandy ERIC Clearinghouse on Reading and Communication Skills, Bloomington, IN. Feb 1990 5p. Sponsoring Agency: Office of Educational Research and Improvement (ED), Washington, DC. Contract No: RI88062001 EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: BIBLIOGRAPHY (131); ERIC PRODUCT (071) Geographic Source: U.S.; Indiana Journal Announcement: RIEJUN90 Target Audience: Teachers; Practitioners Designed to provide resources for educators who teach reading for students with learning disabilities (LD), this 26-item annotated bibliography contains selections published in the ERIC database between 1987 and 1989. The bibliography is divided into two sections: an overview of reading and research on learning disabilities, and strategies for teaching reading to LD students. (NKA) Descriptors: Annotated Bibliographies; Elementary Secondary Education; *Learning Disabilities; Learning Problems; Reading Comprehension; *Reading Difficulties; *Reading Instruction; Reading Research; *Reading Strategies; Reading Writing Relationship ED306557 CS009656 Reading and the Special Learner. Hedley, Carolyn N., Ed.; Hicks, John S., Ed. 1988 256p. Report No: ISBN-0-89391-495-9 Available From: Ablex Publishing Corporation, 355 Chestnut St., Norwood, NJ 07648 ($39.50). Document Not Available from EDRS. Language: English Document Type: BOOK (010); NON-CLASSROOM MATERIAL (055) Geographic Source: U.S.; New Jersey Journal Announcement: RIEOCT89 Compiled from papers presented at the annual Reading/Special Education Institute at Fordham University, this collection of essays addresses reading problems of special education students. The book is divided into three sections. The first section covers reading assessment and reading intervention; section 2 addresses the specific learner and the reading task; and the third section deals with specific programs for the special learner. Chapters and their authors are as follows: (1) "Theories for Intervention in Reading" (Janet W. Lerner); (2) "A Cognitive Adaptational Interpretation of Reading Disability" (Carl Bereiter); (3) "Ecological Approaches in Reading Assessment" (Corinne Roth Smith); (4) "Prevention of Reading Problems" (Rosa A. Hagin); (5) "The Development of Oral Language and Reading" (Sharon L. James); (6) "Mediating: An Important Role for the Reading Teacher" (Marilyn Cochran-Smith); (7) "Spontaneous and Natural Reading for Daily Living: Implications for the Special Learner" (Carolyn N. Hedley); (8) "Comprehension Strategies for Special Learners" (Patricia A. Antonacci); (9) "A Specific Reading Program for the Nonreader in the Special Education Classroom" (Betty Van Witsen); (10) "The Making of a Writer as a Maker of Worlds" (Janet Emig); (11) "Using Microcomputers to Teach Reading, Writing, and Spelling to the Special Child" (John S. Hicks); and (12) "Learning with QUILL: Lessons for Students, Teachers and Software Designers" (Andee Rubin and Bertram C. Bruce.) (MM) Descriptors: Computer Assisted Instruction; Elementary Secondary Education; Learning Disabilities; Reading Diagnosis; *Reading Difficulties; Reading Instruction; Reading Programs; *Reading Strategies; Reading Teachers; *Special Education; Student Evaluation Identifiers: QUILL (Computer Software) ED227440 CS007008 Reading: Theory, Research, and Practice. Twenty-Sixth Yearbook of the National Reading Conference. Pearson, P. David, Ed.; Hansen, Jane, Ed. National Reading Conference, Inc. 1977 309p.; Proceedings of the annual meeting ofthe National Reading Conference (26th, Atlanta, GA, December 2-4, 1976). EDRS Price - MF01/PC13 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: CONFERENCE PROCEEDINGS (021); RESEARCH REPORT (143);REVIEW LITERATURE (070) Geographic Source: U.S.; South Carolina Journal Announcement: RIEAUG83 The papers in this collection represent a wide spectrum of approaches, philosophies, and viewpoints of scholarly endeavor in their treatment of reading theories, research, and processes. The collection begins with an address by the president of the National Reading Conference concerning the tools for reading researchers. The remaining 53 articles are arranged according to the following categories: (1) reading and study skills, (2) reading and teacher education, (3) reading and program development, (4) reading and the affective domain, (5) reading and learning disability, (6) reading and word identification, (7) reading and comprehension, and (8) reading and language. (HTH) Descriptors: Elementary Secondary Education; Higher Education; Language Processing; Learning Disabilities; *Learning Theories; Program Development; Reading Attitudes; *Reading Comprehension; *Reading Instruction; *Reading Processes; *Reading Programs; *Reading Research; Study Skills; TeacherEducation Identifiers: National Reading Conference (Organization) Internet Resources Internet Listservs Top of Page Back to ERIC Menu Back to CEC Home Page copyright © 1996 ERIC Clearinghouse on Disabilities and Gifted Education URL: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm WT02-B20-70IA001-000011-B024-146http://www.cec.sped.org:80/faq/dyspraxi.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101074840 text/html 13830HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 07:48:48 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 09-Sep-96 21:29:00 GMTContent-length: 13638Content-type: text/html Dyspraxia DyspraxiaFAQ (last updated July 14, 1996) THE ERIC CLEARINGHOUSE ON DISABILITIES AND GIFTEDEDUCATION (ERIC EC) The Council for Exceptional Children 1920Association Drive Reston, VA 20191 Toll Free: 1-800-328-0272 TTY: 703-264-9449 E-mail: ericec@cec.sped.org Internet: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm Do you have information on dyspraxia? This file includes information about dyspraxia. At the end of this file are links to Internet resources and Internet listservs (discussion groups) where you can obtain more specific information on this topic. There may be ERIC digests on related topics that provide further information. You can read the full text of ERIC EC digests under our listing at the U.S. Department of Education, Office of Educational Research and Improvement. Enclosed are several citations from the ERIC database. These records are asample of the kind of information you can find in the ERIC database. For morecitations on your topic of interest, you may want to search the ERIC database yourself on the Internet. References with ED (ERIC Document) and EJ (ERIC Journal) identifiers are cited inthe ERIC database; for example, ED333123 or EJ333999. ERIC documents areavailable in microfiche collections at more than 825 locations worldwide (check yourlocal college or public library). They can also be ordered for a fee through the ERICDocument Reproduction Service (EDRS) at 1-800-443-ERIC. References with anEJ (ERIC Journal) number are available for a fee from the originating journal (checkwith your local college or public library), through interlibrary loan services, or fromarticle reproduction clearinghouses, such as UMI: 1-800-248-0360; or ISI:1-800-523-1850. ERIC descriptors (search terms) used: Dyspraxia EJ496325 EC610200 Feature Analysis of Singleton Consonant Errors in Developmental Verbal Dyspraxia (DVD). Thoonen, G.; And Others Journal of Speech and Hearing Research, v37 n6 p1424-40 Dec 1994 ISSN: 0022-4685 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); RESEARCH REPORT (143) Journal Announcement: CIJMAY95 Target Audience: Researchers This study attempted to quantify diagnostic characteristics related to consonant production of developmental verbal dyspraxia (DVD) in 11 Dutch children (ages 6 and 7). The study was able to quantify diagnostic characteristics but found very few qualitative differences in error patterns between children with DVD and 11 age-matched children with normal speech. (Author/DB) Descriptors: *Clinical Diagnosis; *Consonants; *Error Analysis (Language); Expressive Language; Foreign Countries; Individual Characteristics; *Phonology; *Speech Impairments; Young Children Identifiers: Netherlands; *Verbal Dyspraxia EJ382203 EC211569 Interrelating Reception and Expression in Speechreading Training. van Uden, Antoine M. J. Volta Review, v90 n5 p261-72 Sep 1988 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); REVIEW LITERATURE (070); POSITION PAPER (120) Journal Announcement: CIJMAY89 This paper identifies characteristics of poor speechreaders, defines developmental dyspraxia in profoundly hearing-impaired children, and outlines the speechreading process. An active training method is described in which expressive and receptive skills are integrated, by having hearing-impaired people speechread their own speech via videotape recording and playback. (JDD) Descriptors: Elementary Secondary Education; *Expressive Language; *Hearing Impairments; Integrated Activities; *Lipreading; *Receptive Language; *Training Methods; Videotape Recorders; Videotape Recordings Identifiers: *Dyspraxia EJ360875 EC200607 Evaluation of Praxis in Preschoolers. Parham, L. Diane Occupational Therapy in Health Care, v4 n2 p23-36 Sum 1987 Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); REVIEW LITERATURE (070); NON-CLASSROOM MATERIAL (055) Journal Announcement: CIJFEB88 A rationale and procedures are presented for occupational therapy evaluation of the preschooler whose problems suggest dyspraxia. Two evaluative domains are examined: sensory processing (assessment of tactile, proprioceptive, vestibular, auditory and visual functions) and praxis (ideation, motor planning and execution). Procedures include standardized test items, parent interviews, and behavior observation. (Author/KM) Descriptors: Auditory Perception; Cerebral Palsy; *Clinical Diagnosis; Cognitive Processes; Diagnostic Tests; *Handicap Identification; *Occupational Therapy; *Perceptual Handicaps; *Perceptual Motor Coordination; Perceptual Motor Learning; Physical Disabilities; Preschool Children; Psychomotor Skills; Screening Tests; *Sensory Integration; Visual Perception Identifiers: *Dyspraxia EJ353413 CE518019 Developmental Dyspraxia: Is It a Unitary Function? Ayres, A. Jean; And Others Occupational Therapy Journal of Research, v7 n2 p93-110 Mar-Apr 1987 Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); RESEARCH REPORT (143) Journal Announcement: CIJSEP87 A group of 182 children (ages four through nine) with known or suspected sensory integrative dysfunction were assessed using tests and clinical observations to examine developmental dyspraxia. The study did not justify the existence of either a unitary function or different types of developmental dyspraxia. (Author/CH) Descriptors: Children; Learning Disabilities; Medical Evaluation; *Perceptual Handicaps; *Sensory Integration Identifiers: *Developmental Dyspraxia; *Sensory Integrative Dysfunction EJ325320 EC180804 Adapted Cuing Technique for Use in Treatment of Dyspraxia. Klick, Susan L. Language, Speech, and Hearing Services in the Schools, v16 n4 p256-59 Oct 1985 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); RESEARCH REPORT (143) Journal Announcement: CIJFEB86 The Adapted Cuing Technique (ACT) was created to accompany oral stimulus presentation in treatment of dyspraxia. ACT is consistent with current treatment theory, emphasizing patterns of articulatory movement, manner of production, and multimodality facilitation. A case study describes the use of ACT in the treatment of a five-year-old child. (Author/CL) Descriptors: *Cues; *Speech Handicaps; *Speech Therapy; Young Children Identifiers: *Adapted Cuing Technique; *Dyspraxia ED352780 EC301710 Learning Disabilities: Glossary of Some Important Terms. ERIC Digest #E517. Lokerson, Jean Council for Exceptional Children, Reston, Va.; ERIC Clearinghouse on Handicapped and Gifted Children, Reston, Va. 1992 3p. Sponsoring Agency: Office of Educational Research and Improvement (ED), Washington, DC. Contract No: RI88062007 Report No: EDO-EC-92-7 Available From: Council for Exceptional Children, 1920 Association Dr., Reston, VA 22091-1589 ($1, minimum order $5 prepaid). EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: ERIC PRODUCT (071); DICTIONARY (134); ERIC DIGESTS (SELECTED) (073) Geographic Source: U.S.; Virginia Journal Announcement: RIEMAY93 This digest presents definitions of 30 important terms in the field of learning disabilities. They are: accommodations, assistive technology, attention deficit disorder, brain imaging techniques, brain injury, collaboration, developmental aphasia, direct instruction, dyscalculia, dysgraphia, dyslexia, dysnomia, dyspraxia, learned helplessness, learning modalities, learning strategy approaches, learning styles, locus of control, metacognitive learning, minimal brain dysfunction, multisensory learning, neuropsychological examination, perceptual handicap, prereferral process, resource program, self-advocacy, specific language disability, specific learning disability, subtype research, and transition. (DB) Descriptors: *Definitions; Elementary Secondary Education; *Learning Disabilities Identifiers: ERIC Digests ED327019 EC232666 Developmental Speech and Language Disorders: Hope through Research. National Inst. of Neurological and Communicative Disorders and Stroke (NIH), Bethesda, Md. Mar 1988; 39p. Report No: NIH-88-2757 Available From: National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892. EDRS Price - MF01/PC02 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: NON-CLASSROOM MATERIAL (055) Geographic Source: U.S.; Maryland Journal Announcement: RIEMAY91 Government: Federal Target Audience: Practitioners; Parents This pamphlet presents an overview of speech and language disorders including a description of symptoms, possible causes, identification, intervention, and current research. Description of the disorders includes examples of symptoms; the four components and the physical tools of speech; and the role of the brain, including its hemispheres, problems during maturation, and its language centers. Examples are given of speech disorders (phonological impairment, verbal dyspraxia, and dysarthria); language disorders (form errors, content errors, and use errors) and expressive and receptive language disorders. The concept of delay versus disorder is discussed. The process of handicap identification is described, noting conditions which must be ruled out and stressing the importance of early identification and intervention. Current methods of therapy are described, and research is cited indicating that speech disorders may be outgrown by adolescence but that difficulties involving language use may persist into adulthood. Ongoing research involves investigation of differences in brain organization, investigation of the genetic connection, and the use of computers to train children with language impairments to process speech and language more rapidly. Seven organizations are listed to write or call for additional information. A chart of language milestones for ages one through six is also provided. (BRM) Descriptors: Brain Hemisphere Functions; Clinical Diagnosis; *Communication Disorders; Communication Research; Early Intervention; *Etiology; Expressive Language; *Handicap Identification; Hearing (Physiology); Incidence; *Intervention; Language Acquisition; *Language Handicaps; Parents as Teachers; Physical Development; Physiology; Prenatal Influences; Receptive Language; *Speech Handicaps; Speech Pathology; Speech Therapy Identifiers: National Institutes of Health ED313835 EC221701 Identification of Additional Learning Difficulties in Hearing-Impaired Children. Alpin, D. Yvonne Jul 1989; 26p.; In: Martin, David S., Ed. International Symposium on Cognition, Education, and Deafness (2nd, Washington, DC, July 5-8, 1989). Working Papers: Volume I. EDRS Price - MF01/PC02 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: CONFERENCE PAPER (150); RESEARCH REPORT (143) Geographic Source: United Kingdom; England Journal Announcement: RIEMAY90 Target Audience: Researchers Of particular concern to educational psychologists when assessing hearing-impaired children is the identification of learning difficulties in addition to deafness which might hinder progress with language development. This study sought to replicate research which showed that some deaf children who have difficulty with fine motor movements and body image also have difficulty with speech musculature and thus with language learning by purely oral methods, and research which showed that relatively large percentages of deaf children exhibit dyspraxic features. A battery of diagnostic tests was administered to 106 British school-aged hearing-impaired children to detect dyspraxia. Only a small number of children were identified, and the main profiles emerging on 12 dyspraxia subtests differed from the profiles of former research subjects. The link between fine motor, speech, and certain memory tests was not replicated. The eupraxic/dyspraxic profile did not emerge for the subjects. (Author/JDD) Descriptors: Deafness; *Diagnostic Tests; *Educational Diagnosis; Elementary Secondary Education; Foreign Countries; *Handicap Identification; *Hearing Impairments; *Language Acquisition; Memory; *Multiple Disabilities; Psychomotor Skills; Speech Communication; Speech Handicaps Identifiers: *Dyspraxia; England Internet Resources Internet Listservs Top of Page Back to ERIC Menu Back to CEC Home Page copyright © 1996 ERIC Clearinghouse on Disabilities and Gifted Education URL: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm WT02-B20-71IA001-000011-B024-162http://www.cec.sped.org:80/faq/multdis.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101074853 text/html 24337HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 07:49:00 GMTLast-modified: Tuesday, 10-Sep-96 15:29:00 GMTContent-length: 24144Content-type: text/html Multiple Disabilities MultDis-FAQ (last updated August 15, 1996) THE ERIC CLEARINGHOUSE ON DISABILITIES AND GIFTEDEDUCATION (ERIC EC) The Council for Exceptional Children 1920Association Drive Reston, VA 20191 Toll Free: 1-800-328-0272 TTY: 703-264-9449 E-mail: ericec@cec.sped.org Internet: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm Where can I find information on ways to educate children with multipledisabilities? This file includes information about children with multiple disabilities. Atthe end of the file are links to Internet resources and Internet listservs (discussion groups) where you can obtain more specific information onthe topic. There may be ERIC digests that provide information on related topics. You can read the full text of ERIC EC digests under our listing at the U.S. Department of Education, Office of Educational Research andImprovement. The primary focus of the ERIC system is education. While the ERIC database containsinformation on some medical disorders and related disabilities, you may want to searcha medical database such as MEDLINE/MEDLARS at the National Library of Medicine or MedWeb at Emory University. Enclosed are several citations from the ERIC database. These records are asample of the kind of information you can find in the ERIC database. For morecitations on your topic of interest, you may want to search the ERIC database yourself on the Internet. References with ED (ERIC Document) and EJ (ERIC Journal) identifiers are cited inthe ERIC database; for example, ED333123 or EJ333999. ERIC documents areavailable in microfiche collections at more than 825 locations worldwide (check yourlocal college or public library). They can also be ordered for a fee through the ERICDocument Reproduction Service (EDRS) at 1-800-443-ERIC. References with anEJ (ERIC Journal) number are available for a fee from the originating journal (checkwith your local college or public library), through interlibrary loan services, or fromarticle reproduction clearinghouses, such as UMI: 1-800-248-0360; or ISI:1-800-523-1850. ERIC descriptors (search terms) used: Multiple Disabilities and Mental Retardation EJ508419 EC611862 Family-Centered/Interdisciplinary Team Approach to Working with Families of Children Who Have Mental Retardation. Lubetsky, Martin J.; And Others Mental Retardation, v33 n4 p251-56 Aug 1995 ISSN: 0047-6765 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); PROJECT DESCRIPTION (141) Journal Announcement: CIJDEC95 This paper explains the interdisciplinary team concept blended with the family-centered approach in a psychiatric setting and applies the approach in a case study of a family with a child diagnosed with mental retardation, autism, and severe behavior problems. Practical suggestions for implementing such a family-centered/interdisciplinary team approach are offered. (Author/DB) Descriptors: Agency Cooperation; Autism; Behavior Problems; Case Studies; Family Involvement; *Family Programs; *Interdisciplinary Approach; *Mental Health Programs; *Mental Retardation; *Multiple Disabilities; Psychiatry; Teamwork EJ507185 PS523632 Across the Lifespan: Educational Opportunities for Children with Profound and Multiple Learning Difficulties. Carpenter, Barry Early Child Development and Care, v109 p75-82 May 1995 ISSN: 0300-4430 Language: English Document Type: POSITION PAPER (120); JOURNAL ARTICLE (080) Journal Announcement: CIJNOV95 Discusses the debate on curriculum content and quality for children with profound and multiple learning difficulties. Points out that new and imaginative patterns of teaching and learning need to be explored across thosechildren's lifespans. Suggests that through high quality early intervention and an innovative curriculum, educators must ensure that they deliver adult status and citizenship to these learners. (AA) Descriptors: *Advocacy; Cognitive Development; Curriculum Development; *Early Intervention; *Educational Needs; Educational Planning; Foreign Countries; HumanServices; Interdisciplinary Approach; Learning Disabilities; Multiple Disabilities; *Severe Mental Retardation; *Social Action; *Student Development Identifiers: Great Britain EJ479372 EC607932 A Giving Experience: Using Community Service to Promote Community Living Skills and Integration for Individuals with Severe Disabilities. Everington, Carolina; Stevenson, Thea Teaching Exceptional Children, v26 n3 p56-59 Spr 1994 ISSN: 0040-0599 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); PROJECT DESCRIPTION (141) Journal Announcement: CIJJUL94 Six high school students with multiple disabilities, including mental retardation, were taught community living skills through the establishment of a shopping service for people who were elderly or who had disabilities. Students increased their competence in community survival skills and also experienced a new role as helper. (JDD) Descriptors: Citizen Participation; *Community Services; Consumer Education; *Daily Living Skills; Helping Relationship; High Schools; Instructional Effectiveness; Mental Retardation; *Multiple Disabilities; Program Development; Purchasing; *Severe Disabilities; *Skill Development; Social Integration; Student Projects Identifiers: *Community Based Education ED359692 EC302252 National Symposium on Effective Communication for Children and Youth with Severe Disabilities (2nd, McLean, Virginia, July 10-12, 1992): Topic Papers, Reader's Guide & Videotape. Kupper, Lisa, Ed. Interstate Research Associates, McLean, VA. May 1993 342p.; Videotape not available from ERIC. For selected papers, see EC 302 253-264. Sponsoring Agency: Special Education Programs (ED/OSERS), Washington, DC. Contract No: HO86B10002 Available From: National Archives Fulfillment Center, 8700 Edgeworth Drive, Capital Heights, MD 20743 (videotape only, $75). EDRS Price - MF01/PC14 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: CONFERENCE PROCEEDINGS (021); NON-CLASSROOMMATERIAL (055) Geographic Source: U.S.; Virginia Journal Announcement: RIEDEC93 This combined audiovisual and textual package presents results of a symposium which attempted to identify critical issues and best practices in developing communication skills of children and youth with severe disabilities and to recommend future directions. The package is intended for group use and includes a guide, a videotape, and texts of the two keynote speeches and 10 topic papers. Papers have the following titles and authors: "Assuring Best Practices in Communication for Children and Youth with Severe Disabilities" (James McLean); "Maximizing Family Participation in the Team Process" (Cory Moore); "Facilitating and Measuring the Team Process within More Inclusive Educational Settings" (Bonnie L. Utley); "Maximizing Consumer Participation in the Team Process" (Kim Powers); "Using Functional Communication Training as an Intervention for the Challenging Behavior of Students with Severe Disabilities" (V. Mark Durand); "Communication Intervention for Individuals with Dual Sensory and Intellectual Impairments" (June E. Downing); "Effective Communication Programming for Language Minority Students with Severe Disabilities" (Elva Duran); "Communication Intervention for Persons with Severe and Profound Disabilities: An Overview" (Joe Reichle et al.); "Innovative Assessment Measures and Practices Designed with the Goal of Achieving Functional Communication and Integration" (James W. Halle); "Enhancing Curricular Designs" (Pat Mirenda and Stephen Calculator); "Is Communication Really the Point? Some Thoughts on Where We've Been and Where We Might WantTo Go" (Dianne L. Ferguson); and "Dreams, Schemes, Teams, Flying Machines and Persons with Severe Communication Disabilities" (David E. Yoder). References accompany most papers. The videotape contains interviews with authors and focus group representatives. Appendices include guidelines for meeting the communication needs of persons with severe disabilities, a list of publishers, and a table of contents of the videotape. (DB) Descriptors: Behavior Change; Behavior Problems; *Communication Skills; Curriculum Development; *Educational Practices; Elementary School Students; Elementary Secondary Education; Evaluation Methods; *Interpersonal Communication; Intervention; Mental Retardation; *Multiple Disabilities; Parent Participation; Secondary School Students; *Severe Disabilities; Social Integration; Student Educational Objectives; Teamwork EJ451559 EC604112 Getting the Words Out: Case Studies in Facilitated Communication Training. Crossley, Rosemary Topics in Language Disorders, v12 n4 p46-59 Aug 1992 Theme Issue: Facilitated Communication: Implications for People with Autism and Other Developmental Disabilities. ISSN: 0271-8294 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); RESEARCH REPORT (143) Journal Announcement: CIJFEB93 Case studies are presented of three individuals with severe communication impairments who had been judged to be intellectually impaired but revealed unexpected achievements after training in nonspeech communication. The communication training used facilitation to circumvent hand function impairments. (JDD) Descriptors: Case Studies; *Communication Disorders; *Communication Skills; Interpersonal Communication; Intervention; Language Skills; Mental Retardation; Multiple Disabilities; *Outcomes of Treatment; *Physical Disabilities; Psychomotor Skills; Skill Development; Training Identifiers: *Facilitated Communication ED343346 EC301030 Five Years of Follow-Up of Mentally Retarded School Completers. Goldbach, Robert L. Community Research Associates, Pittsburgh, PA.; Health and Welfare PLANNING Association, Pittsburgh, PA. Nov 1991; 121p.; For a previous report, see ED 334 748. Sponsoring Agency: Edith L. Trees Charitable Trust. EDRS Price - MF01/PC05 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: EVALUATIVE REPORT (142) Geographic Source: U.S.; Pennsylvania Journal Announcement: RIEAUG92 This report documents the fifth year of follow-up of mentally retarded school completers in the Pittsburgh (Pennsylvania) area, begun with parents/ guardians of students who completed their special education programs in 1985-86 (N=73) and in 1986-87 (N=60), 1990 (N=102), and in 1991 continued with completers (N=95), when a preliminary follow-up study was done. Findings for the first two groups are reported in terms of living arrangements, work situations, competitive employment, physical and emotional disabilities, expectations and outcomes (a retrospective), and the hard core idle. The 1990 cohort is discussed in terms of living arrangements, work situations, competitive employment, training and placement, transition planning and outcomes, and comparison of work and living arrangements of three cohorts 1 year after completion. Initial follow-up data for the 1991 school completers are presented for living arrangements, work situations, job placements, post-school training placements, transition planning, and comparison with the 1990 cohort. Conclusions on the oldest group include more movement into a variety of competitive and sheltered work situations, entrenched patterns of idleness by 14 percent of the group, and no progress for those with multiple disabilities. Conclusions for the 1990 cohort include substantial similarities with experiences of the older group at the same stage. Findings for the 1991 cohort included a higher proportion with no work placement. (DB) Descriptors: *Education Work Relationship; Employment; Followup Studies; Graduate Surveys; High School Graduates; High Schools; Housing; *Job Placement; *Mental Retardation; Multiple Disabilities; *Outcomes of Education; Parent Role; Place of Residence; Postsecondary Education; Quality of Life; Special Education; Transitional Programs; Unemployment; *Vocational Adjustment ED342537 RC018489 Students with Severe to Profound Mental Handicaps and Multiple Disabilities in Rural Schools: Can Their Needs Be Met? Cates, Dennis L.; Kinnison, Lloyd 19 Mar 1991; 21p.; In: Reaching Our Potential: Rural Education in the 90's.Conference Proceedings, Rural Education Symposium (Nashville, TN, March 17-20,1991); see RC 018 473. EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: CONFERENCE PAPER (150) Geographic Source: U.S.; South Carolina Journal Announcement: RIEJUL92 The education of students with severe to profound mental handicaps (SPH) or multiple disabilities may be greatly limited in rural settings. A survey investigating this issue in a southwestern state was completed by 136 of 346 directors of special education, 67 of whom worked in rural special education cooperatives. These cooperatives served 393 preschool, 851 elementary, and 828 secondary students with SPH or multiple disabilities. However, only 4 percent of teachers of these students possessed SPH certification, and only 26 percent possessed certification in mental retardation (MR). Figures were similar for individual rural districts and urban areas. The most common service delivery systems used by rural cooperatives were self-contained classrooms: (1) 32.5% of cooperatives for SPH elementary students; (2) 31% for MR elementary students; (3) 20% for SPH secondary students; and (4) 26% for MR secondary students. Developmentally-based program models were reported by 86 percent of rural cooperatives and ecologically-based programs by 29 percent. The fact that few districts used transdisciplinary teaming may indicate a lack of understanding of this model rather than a conscious decision to use other models. Survey results suggest that the quality of services available for SPH and multiply disabled students is limited by lack of qualified teachers, little use of ecological procedures, and a tendency to ignore functional and near-future needs. (SV) Descriptors: *Delivery Systems; Elementary Secondary Education; Mental Disorders; Mental Retardation; *Multiple Disabilities; *Rural Education; Rural Schools; School Districts; *Severe Disabilities; *Special Education; Special Education Teachers; *Teacher Certification Identifiers: *Special Education Cooperatives ED341218 EC300893 Count Me In: Resource Manual on Disabilities. Milota, Cathy; And Others PACER Center, Inc., Minneapolis, MN. 1991 121p.; Available From: PACER Center, 4826 Chicago Ave. S., Minneapolis, MN55417-1055 ($15.00). EDRS Price - MF01 Plus Postage. PC Not Available from EDRS. Language: English Document Type: NON-CLASSROOM MATERIAL (055) Geographic Source: U.S.; Minnesota Journal Announcement: RIEJUN92 Target Audience: Practitioners; Community This resource guide presents general information about disabilities and summaries of relevant federal laws. A question-and-answer format is used to highlight key features of the Education for All Handicapped Children Act (Public Law 94-142, reauthorized in 1990 as the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act); Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973; Public Law 99-457; and the Americans with Disabilities Act. Then individual sections provide information on vision impairments, hearing impairments, speech impairments, physical disabilities, mental retardation, learning disabilities, multiple disabilities, emotional disorders, autism, and other health impairments. Information provided typically includes the nature of the impairment, severity factors, associated problems, aids and appliances, therapeutic or remediation approaches, simulation activities, and resources (books for both children and adults as well as organizations). Specifically discussed under physical disabilities and other health impairments are the following conditions: cerebral palsy, spina bifida, spinal cord injury, muscular dystrophy (Duchene type), juvenile rheumatoid arthritis, multiple sclerosis, brittle bone disease, and amputation. The guide also presents lists of general print and organizational resources, guidelines for use of less stigmatizing terminology, and suggestions for interacting with individuals with disabilities. (DB) Descriptors: Assistive Devices (for Disabled); Autism; *Disabilities; *Educational Legislation; Educational Resources; Elementary Secondary Education; Emotional Disturbances; *Federal Legislation; Hearing Impairments; *Intervention; Learning Disabilities; Mental Retardation; Multiple Disabilities; Physical Disabilities; Preschool Education; Simulation; Special Health Problems; Speech Handicaps; *Symptoms (Individual Disorders); Visual Impairments Identifiers: Americans with Disabilities Act 1990; Education for All Handicapped Children Act; Education of the Handicapped Act Amendments 1986; Impairment Severity; Individuals with Disabilities Education Act; Rehabilitation Act 1973 (Section 504) EJ435855 EC601741 Autism and Mental Retardation: The Planning of a Therapeutic Environment. Verheij, F.; Van Doorn, E. C. International Journal of Rehabilitation Research, v13 n2 p127-36 Jun 1990 ISSN: 0342-5282 Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); POSITION PAPER (120); NON-CLASSROOM MATERIAL (055) Journal Announcement: CIJAPR92 Target Audience: Practitioners This paper offers a model for planning services for children who are both mentally retarded and autistic. The model and recommendations for the residential therapeutic environment are organized according to the main axes of child development (biological, physical, cognitive, and socioemotional). (Author/DB) Descriptors: *Autism; Child Development; Children; Human Services; *Mental Retardation; *Models; *Multiple Disabilities; Program Development; Residential Programs; *Therapeutic Environment EJ421504 EC232962 Teaching Self-Help Skills to Autistic and Mentally Retarded Children. Matson, Johnny L.; And Others Research in Developmental Disabilities, v11 n4 p361-78 1990 Report No: ISSN-0891-4222 Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); RESEARCH REPORT (143) Journal Announcement: CIJJUN91 Target Audience: Teachers; Practitioners Four mentally retarded children (ages 4-11), 3 with autism, were successfully taught various adaptive behaviors for self-care skills. Training procedures involved the whole-task method and included modeling, verbal instructions, prompting, and edible and social reinforcement. (Author/JDD) Descriptors: *Adaptive Behavior (of Disabled); *Autism; Behavior Modification; Elementary Education; *Mental Retardation; Modeling (Psychology); Multiple Disabilities; Preschool Education; Prompting; Reinforcement; *Self Care Skills; *Skill Development; *Training Methods ED333697 EC300453 Parent Handbook: A Curricular Approach To Support the Transition to Adulthood of Adolescents with Visual or Dual Sensory Impairments and Cognitive Disabilities. O'Neill, John; And Others City Univ. of New York, N.Y. Hunter Coll.; Jewish Guild for the Blind. Dec 1990; 111p.; For related documents, see EC 300 449-452. Sponsoring Agency: New York State Education Dept. Albany. Office for the Education of Children with Handicapping Conditions.; Office of Special Education and Rehabilitative Services (ED), Washington, DC. Contract No: G008730415 EDRS Price - MF01/PC05 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: NON-CLASSROOM MATERIAL (055) Geographic Source: U.S.; New York Journal Announcement: RIENOV91 Target Audience: Practitioners This handbook for parents is part of a packet intended to aid educators, families, and adult service providers to facilitate the transition from school to adult life in the community for students with both cognitive disabilities and visual or dual sensory impairments. Emphasis is on preparation of students for adult lifestyles through transition planning and community based instruction, including vocational experiences. Introductory sections describe the handbook and identify goals. The first major section examines the parent's role as children approach adulthood and covers sharing information and participating in goal selection, selection of learning experiences and skills to be developed, exploration of post-school options, and development of more appropriate options. The transition process is explained next, which includes the transition planning team, Individualized Education Programs and Transition Plans, the transition planning meeting, areas for transition planning, and a transition planning form. The last section identifies issues in planning for adulthood including: working with state agencies; vocational options; living arrangements; financial planning; travel; recreation and leisure; family support; legal services; and advocacy. Appendices include three references and lists of locations of parent resource centers, state rehabilitation agencies and resource centers, and state protection and advocacy agencies. Additional appendices list specific agencies in New York State. (DB) Descriptors: Adults; Cooperation; Education Work Relationship; *Mental Retardation; *Multiple Disabilities; Parent Participation; Parent Role; *School Community Relationship; Secondary Education; Student Educational Objectives; *Transitional Programs; *Visual Impairments Identifiers: Community Based Education; *Individualized Transition Plans EJ392153 EC220118 They Too Should Play. Hirst, Cyntha C.; Shelley, Eva Y. Teaching Exceptional Children, v21 n4 p26-28 Sum 1989 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); NON-CLASSROOM MATERIAL(055) Journal Announcement: CIJNOV89 Target Audience: Teachers; Practitioners Children with mental retardation and multiple handicaps can effectively participate in play activities and games, but the experience must be structured for them. Techniques for organizing play activities involving handicapped and nonhandicapped children are offered. Examples of singles play, rotation play, and associative play are described. (JDD) Descriptors: *Childrens Games; Classroom Techniques; Mainstreaming; *Mental Retardation; *Multiple Disabilities; *Play Internet Resources Internet Listservs Top of Page Back to ERIC Menu Back to CEC Home Page copyright © 1996 ERIC Clearinghouse on Disabilities and Gifted Education URL: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm WT02-B20-72IA001-000011-B024-176http://www.cec.sped.org:80/faq/2nd-lang.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101074902 text/html 15661HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 07:49:10 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 09-Sep-96 20:29:00 GMTContent-length: 15469Content-type: text/html 2nd.lang 2nd.lang-FAQ (last updated July 12, 1996) THE ERIC CLEARINGHOUSE ON DISABILITIES AND GIFTEDEDUCATION (ERIC EC) The Council for Exceptional Children 1920Association Drive Reston, VA 20191 Toll Free: 1-800-328-0272 TTY: 703-264-9449 E-mail: ericec@cec.sped.org Internet: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm Should students with learning disabilities be exempt from foreign language requirements? What are some factors to be considered, and is there any research on teaching strategies? This file includes information about students with disabilities and secondlanguage acquisition. At the end of this file are links to Internet resources and Internet listservs (discussion groups) where you can obtain more specific information on this topic. There is an ERIC digest, Foreign Language Requirements and Students with Learning Disabilities, that provides further information on this topic. You can read the full text of ERIC EC digests under our listing at the U.S. Department of Education, Office of Educational Research and Improvement. Enclosed are several citations from the ERIC database. These records are asample of the kind of information you can find in the ERIC database. For morecitations on your topic of interest, you may want to search the ERIC database yourself on the Internet. References with ED (ERIC Document) and EJ (ERIC Journal) identifiers are cited inthe ERIC database; for example, ED333123 or EJ333999. ERIC documents areavailable in microfiche collections at more than 825 locations worldwide (check yourlocal college or public library). They can also be ordered for a fee through the ERICDocument Reproduction Service (EDRS) at 1-800-443-ERIC. References with anEJ (ERIC Journal) number are available for a fee from the originating journal (checkwith your local college or public library), through interlibrary loan services, or fromarticle reproduction clearinghouses, such as UMI: 1-800-248-0360; or ISI:1-800-523-1850. ERIC descriptors (search terms) used: Second Language Learning and Learning Disabilities EJ501513 FL524567 Learning Disabilities: Teaching and Reaching All Learners. Barnett, Harriet; Jarvis-Sladky, Kay Hispania, v78 n1 p163-66 Mar 1995 ISSN: 0018-2133 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: POSITION PAPER (120); JOURNAL ARTICLE (080) Journal Announcement: CIJAUG95 Discusses strategies for teaching Spanish to students with learning disabilities. These strategies include using flexible materials and alternative assessment methods, accepting individual students and ascertaining their disabilities, adapting to student needs, using a multisensory approach, and teaching students study skills particular to Spanish. (CK) Descriptors: Individual Differences; Instructional Materials; *Learning Disabilities; *Learning Strategies; Measurement Techniques; Second Language Instruction; Second Language Learning; Spanish; *Student Motivation; Student Needs; Student Participation; Study Skills; *Teacher Attitudes; *Teaching Methods ED355834 FL021144 Foreign Language Requirements and Students with Learning Disabilities. ERIC Digest. Barr, Vickie ERIC Clearinghouse on Languages and Linguistics, Washington, D.C. Apr 1993; 4p. Sponsoring Agency: Office of Educational Research and Improvement (ED), Washington, DC. Contract No: RI88062010 Report No: EDO-FL-93-04 EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: ERIC PRODUCT (071); ERIC DIGESTS (SELECTED) (073) Geographic Source: U.S.; District of Columbia Journal Announcement: RIEAUG93 This digest discusses the dilemma surrounding foreign language requirements at colleges and universities and students with learning disabilities. Many students and professionals question the reasonableness of foreign language requirements for students with learning disabilities, but, according to Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, colleges and universities are not required to waive such requirements. The digest focuses specifically on the following: waivers and course substitutions, alternatives to waivers and course substitutions, considerations involved in teaching foreign languages to students with learning disabilities, and the Orton-Gillingham Technique. A program designed for teaching Latin to learning disabled students is described, and information on a conference that focuses specifically on foreign language learning and learning disabilities is provided. (VWL) Descriptors: College Students; *Graduation Requirements; Higher Education; Latin; *Learning Disabilities; Program Descriptions; Second Language Instruction; *Second Language Learning; *Teaching Methods Identifiers: ERIC Digests EJ450071 EC603791 Diagnosing and Accommodating the Foreign Language Learning Difficulties of College Students with Learning Disabilities. Sparks, Richard; And Others Learning Disabilities Research and Practice, v7 n3 p150-60 Sum 1992 ISSN: 0938-8982 Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); REVIEW LITERATURE (070) Journal Announcement: CIJJAN93 This paper provides an historical overview of the foreign language learning difficulties of students with learning disabilities; describes a language-based assessment model for diagnosing foreign language learning problems; and discusses the role of diagnosticians, counselors, and academic service providers in the identification, accommodation, and the waiver or course substitution processes. (Author/JDD) Descriptors: College Students; *Educational Diagnosis; Handicap Identification; Higher Education; *Intervention; *Learning Disabilities; Models;*Second Language Instruction; *Second Language Learning; Staff Role; Student Evaluation EJ455880 EC604906 Use of an Orton-Gillingham Approach to Teach a Foreign Language to Dyslexic/Learning-Disabled Students: Explicit Teaching of Phonology in a Second Language. Sparks, Richard L.; And Others Annals of Dyslexia, v41 p96-118 1991 ISSN: 0736-9387 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); POSITION PAPER (120); NON-CLASSROOM MATERIAL (055) Journal Announcement: CIJMAY93 Target Audience: Teachers; Practitioners The Orton-Gillingham method, a multisensory structured language approach which adheres to the direct and explicit teaching of phonology, is presented as an alternative instructional strategy for dyslexic/learning-disabled or other "at risk" students learning a second language. A method for adapting this approach to teaching Spanish is described. (Author/DB) Descriptors: *Dyslexia; High Risk Students; *Learning Disabilities; Multisensory Learning; *Phonology; *Second Language Instruction; Second Language Learning; Sensory Integration; Spanish; *Teaching Methods Identifiers: *Orton Gillingham Method EJ425641 EC600288 Critical Issues in Learning Disabilities: Foreign Language Learning. Lerner, Janet W.; And Others Learning Disabilities Research and Practice, v6 n1 p50-53 1991 ISSN: 0938-8982 Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); REVIEW LITERATURE (070); POSITION PAPER (120) Journal Announcement: CIJSEP91 In this interview, two collaborators in research on teaching foreign languages to learning-disabled students are questioned regarding specific foreign language learning disabilities, possible subtypes, diagnosis, policies of colleges regarding students unable to meet foreign language requirements, and recent research in the field. (PB) Descriptors: Educational Diagnosis; Elementary Secondary Education; *Handicap Identification; Higher Education; Intervention; *Language Aptitude; *Learning Disabilities; School Policy; Second Language Instruction; *Second Language Learning; Teaching Methods EJ410315 EC230550 Cognitive and Academic Performance of College Students with Learning Disabilities: A Synthesis of the Literature. Hughes, Charles A.; Smith, Judith Osgood Learning Disability Quarterly, v13 n1 p66-79 Win 1990 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); REVIEW LITERATURE (070) Journal Announcement: CIJNOV90 Target Audience: Practitioners; Researchers Twenty-six articles including information about the cognitive and academic characteristics of learning-disabled college students are reviewed, focusing on levels of intellectual functioning, reading achievement, mathematics achievement, written expression, and foreign language performance. Research needs and implications for service provision are discussed. (Author/JDD) Descriptors: *Academic Achievement; *Cognitive Ability; College Students; Higher Education; *Learning Disabilities; Mathematics Achievement; *Performance; Reading Ability; Research Needs; Second Language Learning; *Student Characteristics; Writing Ability EJ360993 EC200825 The Foreign Language Requirement. Ganschow, Leonore; Sparks, Richard Learning Disabilities Focus, v2 n2 p116-23 Spr 1987 Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); REVIEW LITERATURE (070) Journal Announcement: CIJFEB88 The article examines the foreign language requirement in college and its impact on universities and students with specific learning disabilities (SLD). Noted are SLD foreign language learning subtypes, factors affecting SLD students' language learning ability, college expectations and requirements, and ways universities are dealing with these issues. (Author/DB) Descriptors: Degree Requirements; Higher Education; *Learning Disabilities; *Second Language Instruction; *Second Language Learning Identifiers: *Specific Learning Disabilities EJ347388 FL517464 Exemptions from the Foreign Language Requirement: A Review of Recent Literature, Problems, and Policy. Freed, Barbara F. ADFL Bulletin, v18 n2 p13-17 Jan 1987 Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); PROJECT DESCRIPTION (141) Journal Announcement: CIJMAY87 Summarizes information on learning disabilities and foreign language learning and details the University of Pennsylvania's policy on exempting learning disabled students from foreign language requirements. The policy for exemption involves the review of students' case histories, evidence of effort made, and satisfactory performance in other courses, interviews, and completion of an alternative requirement. (CB) Descriptors: Case Records; College Students; *Graduation Requirements; Higher Education; Interviews; *Learning Disabilities; *Required Courses; *School Policy; *Second Language Learning; Student Evaluation Identifiers: *University of Pennsylvania; *Waivers ED259557 FL015115 The Foreign Language Learner with Special Needs. A Special Issue. New York State Association of Foreign Language Teachers. Language Association Bulletin, v36 n3 Jan 1985 Jan 1985; 26p. EDRS Price - MF01 Plus Postage. PC Not Available from EDRS. Language: English Document Type: SERIAL (022) Geographic Source: U.S.; New York Journal Announcement: RIEDEC85 Target Audience: Teachers; Practitioners An issue of the journal devoted to teaching foreign languages to students with special educational needs, resulting from a New York State Board of Regents plan to require foreign languages of all students, contains these articles: "A New Challenge: The Foreign Language Learner with Special Educational Needs" (Harriet Barnett, John B. Webb); "Editor's Comments" (John B. Webb); "Teaching the Slower Student" (Lenora McCabe); "Foreign Languages for the Learning Disabled: A Reading Teacher's Perspective" (Harriet Barnett); "Foreign Languages for Special Education Students: A Special Education Teacher Speaks," (Jeff Miller); "Teaching All Students: An Inventory of Teachers, Classroom Strategies for Self-Analysis" (Anthony Papalia); and "Concluding Remarks" (Nancy McMahon, John Underwood). Listings of the New York State Association of Foreign Language Teachers' officers and committee chairpersons for 1985 are also included. (MSE) Descriptors: Classroom Environment; *Classroom Techniques; Course Organization; Interprofessional Relationship; Language Teachers; *Learning Disabilities; Professional Associations; Reading Instruction; *Second Language Instruction; *Second Language Learning; Self Evaluation (Individuals); *Special Education; Student Needs ED235598 EC152550 The Learning Disabled University Student: A Synopsis of Applied Research. Gajar, Anna; And Others Apr 1983; 22p.; Paper presented at the Annual International Convention of The Council for Exceptional Children (61st, Detroit, MI, April 4-8, 1983). EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: CONFERENCE PAPER (150); RESEARCH REPORT (143) Geographic Source: U.S.; Pennsylvania Journal Announcement: RIEMAR84 The paper summarizes four presentations made by members of the Pennsylvania State University Program for Learning Disabled (LD) students. An initial section considers the definition of LD and reviews a study on diagnosing LD in 12 undergraduates. The existence of a foreign language disability in students with good attitudes toward learning a foreign language, but who have repeatedly failed foreign language courses, is discussed, and analysis of scores on the Modern Language Aptitude Test are analyzed. A study to develop norms for evaluating written expression is described. Intervention programing is said to include procedures based on behavioral theories as well as availability of special equipment on a long term basis. Intervention is programed according to the amount of structure needed by the student. (CL) Descriptors: Clinical Diagnosis; *College Students; Handicap Identification; *Intervention; *Learning Disabilities; Program Descriptions; *Second Language Learning; *Written Language Identifiers: Pennsylvania State University Internet Resources Internet Listservs Top of Page Back to ERIC Menu Back to CEC Home Page copyright © 1996 ERIC Clearinghouse on Disabilities and Gifted Education URL: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm WT02-B20-73IA001-000011-B030-495http://www.cec.sped.org:80/faq/homeschl.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101074918 text/html 22520HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 07:49:20 GMTLast-modified: Tuesday, 10-Sep-96 14:22:00 GMTContent-length: 22327Content-type: text/html Homeschl-FAQ Homeschl-FAQ (last updated September 5, 1996) THE ERIC CLEARINGHOUSE ON DISABILITIES AND GIFTEDEDUCATION (ERIC EC) The Council for Exceptional Children 1920Association Drive Reston, VA 20191 Toll Free: 1-800-328-0272 TTY: 703-264-9449 E-mail: ericec@cec.sped.org Internet: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm I have a child with special needs and I'm thinking of home schooling. What kind of resources are available? This file includes information about homeschooling. At the end of the file are links to Internet resources and Internet listservs (discussion groups) where you can obtain more specific information on the topic. There maybe ERIC digests that provide information on related topics. You can read the full text of ERIC EC digests under our listing at the U.S. Department of Education, Office of Educational Research and Improvement. Enclosed are several citations from the ERIC database. These records are asample of the kind of information you can find in the ERIC database. For morecitations on your topic of interest, you may want to search the ERIC database yourself on the Internet. References with ED (ERIC Document) and EJ (ERIC Journal) identifiers are cited inthe ERIC database; for example, ED333123 or EJ333999. ERIC documents areavailable in microfiche collections at more than 825 locations worldwide (check yourlocal college or public library). They can also be ordered for a fee through the ERICDocument Reproduction Service (EDRS) at 1-800-443-ERIC. References with anEJ (ERIC Journal) number are available for a fee from the originating journal (checkwith your local college or public library), through interlibrary loan services, or fromarticle reproduction clearinghouses, such as UMI: 1-800-248-0360; or ISI:1-800-523-1850. ERIC descriptors (search terms) used: Home schooling. ED384174 EC304011 Home Schools, Private Schools, Parochial Schools--What Are A Public School's Special Education Obligations? Opuda, Michael J. Apr 1994 15p.; Paper presented at the Annual International Convention of the Council for Exceptional Children (72nd, Denver, CO, April 6-10, 1994). EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: CONFERENCE PAPER (150); LEGAL MATERIAL (090); NON-CLASSROOM MATERIAL (055) Geographic Source: U.S.; Maine Journal Announcement: RIENOV95 Target Audience: Policymakers This paper examines issues related to the provision of special education services by public schools to students in private, parochial, or home school settings and offers guidelines for local education agencies. First, the paper reviews federal statutory and regulatory obligations, particularly those under the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA), the Education Department General Administrative Regulations (EDGAR), and advisory rulings of the Office of Special Education Programs and the Office for Civil Rights. It also reviews case law, including Zobrest versus Catalina Foothills School District (decided by the U.S. Supreme Court), Goodall versus Stafford County School Board (decided by the Fourth Circuit Court of Appeals), Florence County District Four versus Carter (U.S. Supreme Court), Work versus McKenzie (District Court in the District of Columbia), McNair versus Cardimone (Sixth Circuit Court of Appeals), Wright versus Saco School Department (decided by the Maine Supreme Court), Tribble versus Montgomery County Board of Education (U.S. District Court, Alabama), and Felter versus Cape Girardeau School District (U.S.District Court, Missouri). Noted is the ambiguity of advice from the Department of Education and the tendencies of the court system to rely upon the plain language of the law. The paper concludes with an outline of a public school's obligations for private school children, options for a public school, and parental rights and options. (DB) Descriptors: Compliance (Legal); Court Litigation; *Disabilities; Educational Legislation; Educational Policy; Elementary Secondary Education; Federal Legislation; Federal Regulation; *Home Schooling; *Legal Responsibility; Parochial Schools; *Private Schools; *Public Schools; School Districts; *School Responsibility; Special Education Identifiers: Individuals with Disabilities Education Act ED388318 IR055683 A Guide to Homeschooling for Librarians. Highsmith Press Handbook Series. Brostrom, David C. 1995; 85p. ISBN: 0-917846-46-X Available From: Highsmith Press, W5527 Highway 106, P.O. Box 800, Fort Atkinson, WI 53538-0800 ($15). Document Not Available from EDRS. Language: English Document Type: BOOK (010); NON-CLASSROOM MATERIAL (055) Geographic Source: U.S.; Wisconsin Journal Announcement: RIEMAR96 Target Audience: Media Staff; Parents; Community; Practitioners This book is a guide to providing library resources and services that support homeschooling. The first section contains an overview of the homeschooling movement, statistics that show a nationwide trend toward this form of education, and an examination of the motivations, philosophies and educational styles of homeschoolers. The second section discusses how to determine the needs of homeschoolers and how to establish policies and programs that reflect those needs. Sample programs and services are presented in the words of librarians who have worked with homeschoolers. There is a list of the ten most requested topics for books and materials, lists of what homeschoolers liked the most and the least about their libraries, and suggestions from homeschoolers on how to provide better service. In the third section, critical issues in planning services are described: materials selection, intellectual freedom, balanced collections, and censorship. The fourth section looks at the future role of libraries in terms of the library as a "homeschool laboratory," cooperation between libraries, homeschoolers and school districts, and the onset of online home education. Appendices provide various sources for information on homeschooling including: homeschooling organizations; periodicals, newspapers, newsletters; correspondence schools and instructional service providers; homeschool curriculum and resource suppliers and publishers; suppliers of home education video and audiotapes; educational and/or homeschooling software suppliers; online home education connections; and a bibliography, as well as a homeschooling survey for librarians. (AEF) Descriptors: Elementary Secondary Education; Futures (of Society); *Home Schooling; Information Sources; Intellectual Freedom; Librarian Teacher Cooperation; Library Material Selection; Library Planning; Library Policy; *Library Role; *Library Services; Nontraditional Education; *User Needs (Information) ED387241 PS023589 Guidelines for Parents To Conduct a Home Instructional Program. District of Columbia Public Schools, Washington, D.C. 1995; 48p. EDRS Price - MF01/PC02 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: NON-CLASSROOM MATERIAL (055) Geographic Source: U.S.; District of Columbia Journal Announcement: RIEFEB96 Target Audience: Parents The District of Columbia Board of Education recognizes home schooling as an option for parents. This option allows a parent or guardian to provide instruction to his or her own children, but not for an instructor to teach non-related children in a home setting. This document, compiled by the District of Columbia Public Schools, provides guidelines for parents to conduct a home instructional program. The guidelines include a copy of the "Notice of Intent to Provide Home Instruction Form," along with guidelines for submission. The implications of providing false or misleading information in the process are also addressed, as are procedures for terminating home instruction. Documentation accompanying the guidelines includes the following: (1) "D.C. Law 8-247"; (2) "Final Rulemaking" document; (3) a 1995-96 District of Columbia Public Schools calendar; and (4) "Homeschool Resources," which includes lists of periodicals, organizations, books, and publishers. (BGC) Descriptors: *Educational Legislation; Elementary Secondary Education; *Home Schooling; Information Sources; Parent Materials; Parent Participation; Parent Role; *Parents as Teachers; Parent Student Relationship; Public Policy; State Legislation Identifiers: District of Columbia Public Schools ED381849 EA026536 Home Schooling. ERIC Digest, Number 95. Lines, Patricia M. ERIC Clearinghouse on Educational Management, Eugene, Oreg. Apr 1995 3p.; Sponsoring Agency: Office of Educational Research and Improvement (ED), Washington, DC. Contract No: RR93002006 Report No: EDO-EA-95-3 Available From: ERIC Clearinghouse on Educational Management, University of Oregon, 1787 Agate Street, Eugene, OR 97403 (free; $2.50 postage and handling). EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: ERIC PRODUCT (071); ERIC DIGESTS (SELECTED) (073) Geographic Source: U.S.; Oregon Journal Announcement: RIESEP95 A small but increasing number of school-aged children are engaging in home schooling--pursuing learning at home or elsewhere in the community. This digest summarizes research findings on and issues around home schooling. It describes the historical roots of home schooling, the estimated number of participants, the constitutionality and legal issues surrounding it, and the resources available to home schoolers. The effect of home schooling on children's social development is also examined. Disagreement exists about which is more beneficial to children--spending more time with mixed-age groups or with their peers. Public opinion is divided about home schooling. It is primarily opposed by professional educators' unions and associations; however, the parents' right to homeschool their children is generally upheld by the American Civil Liberties Union, most state legislatures, and the majority of respondents to a Gallup poll. (LMI) Descriptors: Academic Achievement; Child Development; Civil Liberties; Elementary Secondary Education; Family School Relationship; Government School Relationship; Home Programs; *Home Schooling; *Nontraditional Education; Private Education; School Attendance Legislation; Social Development Identifiers: ERIC Digests ED390521 PS023255 Growing without Schooling, December 1993-December 1994. Sheffer, Susannah, Ed. Growing without Schooling, n96-102 1993-94 Oct 1994 281p.; For issues covering December 1992-October 1993, see ED 371 819. ISSN: 0745-5305 Available From: Holt Associates, Inc., 2269 Massachusetts Avenue, Cambridge, MA 02140 (single copy, $6; 1-year subscription, $25). EDRS Price - MF01 Plus Postage. PC Not Available from EDRS. Language: English Document Type: SERIAL (022) Geographic Source: U.S.; Massachusetts Journal Announcement: RIEMAY96 This document consists of a set of seven issues of a bimonthly newsletter that focuses on home schooling, providing parents in the United States and other nations with ideas, activities, research, and resources to teach their children at home. Each issue contains short news items and reports on home schooling, letters from parents, letters on the challenges and concerns of home schooling, a focus topic, book and resource reviews, and a resource and information list. Feature reports and letters from parents include the following: (1) "Homeschoolers in College"; (2) "Watching Children Learn"; (3) "When Kids Ask To Homeschool"; (4) "Russian Homeschoolers"; (5) "Teens Out in the World"; (6) "Competition & Cooperation"; (7) "The Problem of Mandatory Continuing Education"; (8) "Difficult Times"; (9) "Alternatives to College"; (10) "Japanese School Refusers"; (11) "Handling Anxiety"; (12) "Creating Useful Schedules"; (13) "Homeschooling in Australia"; (14) "Grown-Up Homeschoolers with Children"; (15) "Families Making Music"; and (16) "The Trouble with Rewards." (AP) Descriptors: Elementary Secondary Education; Foreign Countries; *Home Schooling; Instructional Material Evaluation; Instructional Materials; *Learning Activities; Newsletters; Nontraditional Education; Organizations (Groups); *Parent Attitudes; *Parents as Teachers; Parent Student Relationship; Resource Materials; *Student Evaluation Identifiers: Home Curriculum ED380187 PS022924 The Successful Homeschool Family Handbook: A Creative and Stress-Free Approach to Homeschooling. Moore, Raymond; Moore, Dorothy 1994; 302p. ISBN: 0-7852-8175-4 Available From: Moore Foundation, P.O. Box 1, Camas, WA 98607. EDRS Price - MF01/PC13 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: TEACHING GUIDE (052); NON-CLASSROOM MATERIAL (055); BOOK (010) Geographic Source: U.S.; Washington Journal Announcement: RIEJUL95 Noting that most home-schooling materials adhere to conventional schooling at the cost of creativity, this handbook provides guidelines for building a successful home school curriculum, one that avoids student resentment and parent burnout, targets children's interest and motivation, and understands how a child's developmental stages contribute to learning. The guide is based on the Moore Formula for home schooling, which emphasizes a creative curriculum, skill-building work, and community or family service, and which results in low stress, low cost, and high achievement and sociability. The chapters in the book are divided into the following five parts: (1) "Can Homeschooling Be Both Successful and Stress-Free?"; (2) "Homeschooling Stress: Prevention and Remedy"; (3) "Making Homeschooling Successful"; (4) "Effective Homeschoolers Share Their Wisdom"; and (5) "Some Encouraging Information for Parents and Educators." A concise description of the Moore Formula for home schooling is presented in an epilogue. (SW) Descriptors: Child Development; Classroom Environment; *Curriculum Development; Educational Strategies; Elementary Secondary Education; *Home Schooling; Instructional Development; Instructional Effectiveness; Nontraditional Education; Parent Child Relationship; *Parents as Teachers; Teacher Burnout Identifiers: Developmentally Appropriate Programs; *Moore Method ED371819 PS022102 Growing Without Schooling, December 1992 - October 1993. Sheffer, Susannah, Ed. Growing Without Schooling, n90-95 1992-93 1993; 193p. ISSN: 0745-5305 Available From: Holt Associates, Inc., 2269 Massachusetts Avenue, Cambridge, MA 02140 (single copy, $4.50; 1-year subscription, $25). EDRS Price - MF01 Plus Postage. PC Not Available from EDRS. Language: English Document Type: SERIAL (022) Geographic Source: U.S.; Massachusetts Journal Announcement: RIENOV94 This document consists of six issues of a bimonthly newsletter that focuses on home schooling, providing parents in the United States and other nations with ideas, activities, research, and resources to teach their children at home. Each issue contains short news items and reports on home schooling, letters from parents, letters on the challenges and concerns of home schooling, book and resource reviews, and a resource and information list. In addition, issue 90 contains a directory of families practicing home schooling and a list of home schooling organizations. Feature reports and letters from parents address such issues as: (1) homeschoolers of color; (2) the transition from homeschooling to college; (3) homeschooling an only child; (4) the transition from school to homeschool; (5) homeschooling for low-income families; (6) homeschooling group activities; (7) an interview with a school superintendent who supports homeschooling; (8) evaluation of homeschool students; and (9) communication with school officials. (MDM) Descriptors: Book Reviews; Elementary Secondary Education; Foreign Countries; *Home Schooling; Instructional Material Evaluation; *Instructional Materials; *Learning Activities; Newsletters; Organizations (Groups); *Parent Attitudes; Parent Rights; *Parents as Teachers; Parent Student Relationship; Resource Materials; Student Adjustment; Student Evaluation; *Students Identifiers: Home Curriculum ED365038 EC302663 Parenting the Gifted. Drum Jean, Ed. California Association for the Gifted. Communicator, v23 n3 Jun 1993 Jun 1993; 36p. Available From: California Association for the Gifted, 23684 Schoenborn Street, Canoga Park, CA 91304 ($15 annual subscription). EDRS Price - MF01 Plus Postage. PC Not Available from EDRS. Language: English Document Type: SERIAL (022) Geographic Source: U.S.; California Journal Announcement: RIEMAY94 Target Audience: Parents This theme issue focuses on techniques for effectively parenting gifted students. In "Parenting the Middle School Gifted Child," Sharon Freitas provides suggestions for communicating with adolescents and understanding their needs as they strive for increasing independence. "In Search of the Owner's Manual" (Terrie Gray) documents the search for a child-rearing formula. "An Adolescent Already Understanding and Meeting the Needs of Your Developing Gifted Child" (Richard Swart) reviews the development of gifted children and describes how these developmental differences often account for school problems, difficulties in family relationships, and emotional problems. "Gifted Kids Don't Come with a Set of Instructions" (Fran Westbrook) discusses the gifted label, the need for permission to fail, the need for a stimulating home environment, teaching responsibility, underachievement, and advocacy. "Self-Concept and the Gifted Child: Executive Summary" (Robert D. Hoge and Joseph S. Renzulli) addresses differences between gifted and average children in their self-concepts, effects on self-concept of labeling a child, and impact on self-concept of placing the child in a separate enriched or accelerated classroom. Other articles include: "How To Build Achievers" (Laura Hathaway); "A Mother's Joy, A Teacher's Reward" (Margaret Gosfield); "Musing on Parental Modeling" (Martha Flournoy); "Advocacy Notes" (Martha Flournoy); "Homeschool: Where Present and Future Meet" (Isabelle Nidever); "Resources for Parents: A GATE Reading List" (Jo Anne Viserta-Galinis); and "Mentoring: It's Not Just for Our Children " (Sue Benzinger). (Most papers contain references.) (JDD) Descriptors: Adolescents; Child Development; Childhood Needs; *Child Rearing; Elementary Secondary Education; *Gifted; Interpersonal Communication; Middle Schools; *Parent Child Relationship; *Parent Student Relationship; Self Concept; Student Needs; *Talent ED351417 UD028927 The Schoolhome. Rethinking Schools for Changing Families. Martin, Jane Roland 1992; 242p. ISBN: 0-674-79265-3 Available From: Harvard University Press, 79 Garden St., Cambridge, MA 02138-9983 ($24.95). Document Not Available from EDRS. Language: English Document Type: BOOK (010); POSITION PAPER (120); PROJECT DESCRIPTION (141) Geographic Source: U.S.; Massachusetts Journal Announcement: RIEMAR93 This book advances a philosophy of education and a vision of elementary schools as institutions that offer a solution that responds to the changing needs of today's families where schools become "schoolhomes" in which learning is animated by an ethic of social awareness. Following an introduction that sketches the sweeping social changes since the 19th Century, chapter 1, "School and Home", describes the ideas of John Dewey and Maria Montessori and argues for an educational approach that brings the domestic and the educational together. Chapter 2, "Culture and Curriculum," describes the challenge to the "homeschool" idea in a diverse and pluralistic society where no common culture binds students together. Chapter 3, "Learning To Live," considers the different educational needs of boys and girls. Chapter 4, "Domesticity Repressed," looks at the general rejection of home and domesticity in current cultures and argues that domesticity and concepts of family and home cannot be separated from educational institutions. Chapter 5, "Home and World," argues for the role of education in changing the world rather then preparing students for the "real world." An epilogue, "The Here and Now," describes the accomplishments of actual schools and individuals implementing programs with "homeschool" approaches. Included is a 146-item bibliography. (JB) Descriptors: Educational Change; *Educational Philosophy; Education Work Relationship; Elementary Education; *Elementary Schools; Family Environment; *Family School Relationship; Parent Student Relationship; Racial Relations; School Community Relationship; *School Role; Socioeconomic Influences; *Student School Relationship Internet Resources Internet Listservs Top of Page Back to ERIC Menu Back to CEC Home Page copyright © 1996 ERIC Clearinghouse on Disabilities and Gifted Education URL: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm WT02-B20-74IA001-000011-B030-509http://www.cec.sped.org:80/faq/ld-faq.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101074930 text/html 24186HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 07:49:37 GMTLast-modified: Tuesday, 10-Sep-96 14:31:00 GMTContent-length: 23993Content-type: text/html LD-FAQ LD-FAQ (last updated July 22, 1996) THE ERIC CLEARINGHOUSE ON DISABILITIES AND GIFTEDEDUCATION (ERIC EC) The Council for Exceptional Children 1920Association Drive Reston, VA 20191 Toll Free: 1-800-328-0272 TTY: 703-264-9449 E-mail: ericec@cec.sped.org Internet: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm Can you provide some information about children with learning disabilities? This file includes information about learning disabilities. At the end of the file are links to Internet resources and Internet listservs (discussion groups) where you can obtain more specific information on the topic. There is an ERIC digestthat provides further information on this topic. You can read the full text of ERIC EC digestsunder our listing at the U.S. Department of Education, Office of Educational Research and Improvement. Enclosed are several citations from the ERIC database. These records are asample of the kind of information you can find in the ERIC database. For morecitations on your topic of interest, you may want to search the ERIC database yourself on the Internet. References with ED (ERIC Document) and EJ (ERIC Journal) identifiers are cited inthe ERIC database; for example, ED333123 or EJ333999. ERIC documents areavailable in microfiche collections at more than 825 locations worldwide (check yourlocal college or public library). They can also be ordered for a fee through the ERICDocument Reproduction Service (EDRS) at 1-800-443-ERIC. References with anEJ (ERIC Journal) number are available for a fee from the originating journal (checkwith your local college or public library), through interlibrary loan services, or fromarticle reproduction clearinghouses, such as UMI: 1-800-248-0360; or ISI:1-800-523-1850. ED352779 EC301709 Learning Disabilities. ERIC Digest #E516. Lokerson, Jean Council for Exceptional Children, Reston, Va.; ERIC Clearinghouse onHandicapped and Gifted Children, Reston, Va. 1992 3p. Sponsoring Agency: Office of Educational Research and Improvement (ED),Washington, DC; Contract No: RI88062007; Report No: EDO-EC-92-6 Available From: Council for Exceptional Children, 1920 Association Dr.,Reston, VA 22091-1589 ($1, minimum order $5 prepaid). EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: ERIC PRODUCT (071); ERIC DIGESTS (SELECTED) (073) Geographic Source: U.S.; Virginia Journal Announcement: RIEMAY93 This digest presents summary information on the characteristics and needs ofchildren with learning disabilities (LD). The federal definition of learningdisabilities is given and the existences of differences at the state levelnoted. Next viewpoints on various issues are briefly considered including thespecial educational needs of students with LD characteristics and low averageintelligence, high intelligence, or from different linguistic, cultural,social, or economic backgrounds. The last section considers principles ofeducation for this population including provision of a continuum of programmodels, transition to the world of work and adulthood, and the need forindividualized instructional strategies. Addresses for six organizationalresources are also provided. (DB) Descriptors: Definitions; Delivery Systems; Educational Methods; *EducationalNeeds; Education Work Relationship; Elementary Secondary Education; *HandicapIdentification; *Learning Disabilities; Special Needs Students; *StudentCharacteristics; Transitional Programs Identifiers: ERIC Digests ED352780 EC301710 Learning Disabilities: Glossary of Some Important Terms. ERIC Digest #E517. Lokerson, Jean Council for Exceptional Children, Reston, Va.; ERIC Clearinghouse onHandicapped and Gifted Children, Reston, Va. 1992 3p. Sponsoring Agency: Office of Educational Research and Improvement (ED),Washington, DC; Contract No: RI88062007; Report No: EDO-EC-92-7 Available From: Council for Exceptional Children, 1920 Association Dr.,Reston, VA 22091-1589 ($1, minimum order $5 prepaid). EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: ERIC PRODUCT (071); DICTIONARY (134); ERIC DIGESTS(SELECTED) (073) Geographic Source: U.S.; Virginia Journal Announcement: RIEMAY93 This digest presents definitions of 30 important terms in the field oflearning disabilities. They are: accommodations, assistive technology,attention deficit disorder, brain imaging techniques, brain injury,collaboration, developmental aphasia, direct instruction, dyscalculia,dysgraphia, dyslexia, dysnomia, dyspraxia, learned helplessness, learningmodalities, learning strategy approaches, learning styles, locus of control,metacognitive learning, minimal brain dysfunction, multisensory learning,neuropsychological examination, perceptual handicap, prereferral process,resource program, self-advocacy, specific language disability, specificlearning disability, subtype research, and transition. (DB) Descriptors: *Definitions; Elementary Secondary Education; *LearningDisabilities Identifiers: ERIC Digests ED368088 EC302833 Learning Disabilities: Best Practices for Professionals. Bender, William N., Ed. 1993; 334p. ISBN: 1-56372-058-2 Available From: Butterworth Heinemann, 80 Montvale Ave., Stoneham, MA 02180 ($45). Document Not Available from EDRS. Language: English Document Type: BOOK (010); COLLECTION (020) Geographic Source: U.S.; Georgia Journal Announcement: RIEAUG94 Target Audience: Practitioners This book is written to assist the reader in understanding current thinking in the field of learning disabilities (LD), as well as current practices in that field. Part I describes the characteristics typically associated with LD, and includes the following chapters: "Neurological Basis of Learning Disabilities" (Richard M. Marshall and George W. Hynd); "Cognitive Abilities" (H. Lee Swanson); and "Social/Behavioral Characteristics" (Terry M. McLeod). Part II describes the measurement of various characteristics of LD in the following chapters: "Assessment and Identification Practices" (Sherri Strawser); "Informal Assessment in the Classroom" (Lisa E. Monda-Amaya and Fran Reed); and "Eligibility and Placement Team Meetings" (Harry L. Dangel). Part III presents information on the best practices currently employed in the treatment and education of individuals with learning disabilities, and includes the following chapters: "Behavioral Interventions" (Cynthia O. Vail and Deborah J. Huntington); "Metacognitive Strategies" (Kristin S. Scott); "Building a Pragmatic Language" (Carol Weller); "Interventions for Attention Problems" (Deborah J. Huntington and William N. Bender); "Social Skills Training: Why, Who, What and How" (Sharon Vaughn and Annette La Greca); "Vocational and Independent Living Skills" (Phillip J. McLaughlin and Margaret A. Martin); and "College-Level Instructional Interventions" (Margaret A. Martin and Phillip J. McLaughlin). Appendices describe a variety of social skills intervention programs and present a sample resume for a hypothetical LD adult. Individual chapters contain references. (PB) Descriptors: Attention Deficit Disorders; Cognitive Psychology; *Daily Living Skills; *Disability Identification; Educational Diagnosis; *Educational Practices; Elementary Secondary Education; Eligibility; Etiology; Higher Education; Independent Living; *Interpersonal Competence; *Learning Disabilities; *Metacognition; Neurology; Socialization; Special Education; Student Evaluation; Student Placement; Teaching Methods; Vocational Education ED370328 EC303060 Learning Disabilities. Neuwirth, Sharyn National Inst. of Mental Health (DHHS), Rockville, MD. Sep 1993 44p. Report No: NIH-93-3611 Available From: National Institute of Mental Health, Information Resourcesand Inquiries Branch, 5600 Fishers Lane, Room 7C02, Rockville, MD 20857 (free). EDRS Price - MF01/PC02 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: REVIEW LITERATURE (070); NON-CLASSROOM MATERIAL(055) Geographic Source: U.S.; Maryland Journal Announcement: RIEOCT94 Government: Federal This booklet uses hypothetical case examples to illustrate the definition,causal theories, and specific types of learning disabilities (LD). Thecognitive and language performance of students with LD is compared to standarddevelopmental milestones, and common approaches to the identification andeducation of children with LD are outlined. Research supporting or refutingthe effectiveness of various medications and diets is summarized and generalsuggestions are provided for families attempting to cope with the stress ofraising a child with LD. The outlook for the future is explored in adiscussion considering whether learning disabilities can be outgrown or cured,a description of services available to adults with LD, and a summary ofresearch being sponsored by the National Institute of Mental Health. Thepamphlet concludes with a list of print resources and support groups relatingto LD. (PB) Descriptors: Clinical Diagnosis; *Coping; *Disability Identification; DrugTherapy; Educational Diagnosis; Elementary Secondary Education; *Etiology; *Intervention;*Learning Disabilities; Special Education; Symptoms (IndividualDisorders) ED367112 EC302819 Learning Disabilities Spectrum: ADD, ADHD, and LD. Proceedings of the AnnualSpectrum of Developmental Disabilities Course (15th, Baltimore, Maryland, March16-18, 1992). Capute, Arnold J., Ed.; And Others 1994 261p. ISBN: 0-912752-33-5 Available From: York Press, P.O. Box 504, Timonium, MD 21094 ($32.50). Document Not Available from EDRS. Language: English Document Type: CONFERENCE PROCEEDINGS (021); RESEARCH REPORT (143);NON-CLASSROOM MATERIAL (055) Geographic Source: U.S.; Maryland Journal Announcement: RIEJUL94 This volume, the proceedings of a 1992 conference, presents 14 papers whichtake a neuropsychological approach to attention deficit disorder, attentiondeficit disorder with hyperactivity, and learning disabilities. Papers havethe following titles and authors: "A New Conceptual Model for Dyslexia" (SallyE. Shaywitz et al.); "Experimental and Clinical Models of Attention DeficitHyperactivity Disorder (Walter E. Kaufmann); "Learning Disability Subtypes:Splitting versus Lumping Revisited" (Stephen R. Hooper and Carl Swartz);"Fragile X Syndrome: A Behavioral Genetics' Window into Understanding SocialEmotional Learning Disability" (Thomas Baumgardner and Allan L. Reiss);"Familial Dyslexia: Genetic, Behavioral, and Imaging Studies" (H. Lubs etal.); "Interrelationships between Reading Disability and Attention Deficit-Hyperactivity Disorder" (Bennett A. Shaywitz et al.); "Early Detection ofLearning Disability" (Bruce K. Shapiro); "The Role of Language in LearningDisabilities" (Elisabeth H. Wiig); "Social Deficits in Children with LearningDisabilities" (Wendy L. Stone and Annette M. La Greca); "Diagnosis andTreatment of Depressive Disorders in Children with Learning Disabilities"(Paramjit T. Joshi); "Conduct Disorder versus Oppositional Defiant Disorder:Endpoint of Learning Disabilities" (Pasquale J. Accardo); "EducationalInterventions in Learning Disabilities: Follow-up Studies and Future ResearchNeeds" (Doris J. Johnson); "The Establishment of Self-Regulation and SocialUnderstanding in Children and Adolescents with ADHD: Family Factors" (James C.Harris); and "Learning Disabilities: Beyond the School Years" (Michael Bender).References accompany individual papers. (DB) Descriptors: *Attention Deficit Disorders; Behavior Disorders; ClinicalDiagnosis; Depression (Psychology); Disability Identification; Dyslexia; Elementary SecondaryEducation; Family Influence; Followup Studies; Genetics; *Hyperactivity; InterpersonalCompetence; Language Acquisition; *Learning Disabilities; Models; Neurology;*Neuropsychology; Outcomes of Education; Reading Difficulties; *Research and Development;Self Management; Social Cognition; Theory Practice Relationship; Therapy Identifiers: Fragile X Syndrome ED368102 EC302856 Frames of Reference for the Assessment of Learning Disabilities: New Views onMeasurement Issues. Lyon, G. Reid, Ed. 1994 650p. ISBN: 1-55766-138-3 Available From: Paul H. Brookes Publishing Co., P.O. Box 10624, Baltimore, MD21285-0624 ($55). Document Not Available from EDRS. Language: English Document Type: COLLECTION (020); BOOK (010) Geographic Source: U.S.; Maryland Journal Announcement: RIEAUG94 Target Audience: Practitioners This book offers 27 papers addressing critical issues in the assessment ofstudents with all kinds of learning disabilities. Papers have the followingtitles and authors: "Critical Issues in the Measurement of LearningDisabilities" (G. Reid Lyon); "A Matrix of Decision Points in the Measurementof Learning Disabilities" (Barbara K. Keogh); "Measurement of Change: AssessingBehavior over Time and within a Developmental Context" (David J. Francis etal.); "Measuring and Analyzing Change" (Bennett A. Shaywitz and Sally E.Shaywitz); "The Assessment of Attention in Children" (Russell A. Barkley);"Attention as a Process and as a Disorder" (Jack M. Fletcher et al.);"Measurement of Executive Function" (Martha Bridge Denckla); "Issues in theAssessment of Executive Function: An Information-Processing Perspective"(Joseph K. Torgesen); "Redefining Learning Disabilities: Moving beyond Aptitude-Achievement Discrepancies to Failure To Respond to Validated TreatmentProtocols" (Virginia W. Berninger and Robert D. Abbott); "Issues in Definitionand Measurement of Learning Disabilities: The Need for Early Intervention"(Jack M. Fletcher and Barbara R. Foorman); "Measurement of Listening andSpeaking" (Doris J. Johnson); "Honing the Concepts of Listening and Speaking: APrerequisite to the Valid Measurement of Language Behavior in Children" (LouisaCook Moats); "Measurement of Word Recognition, Orthographic, and PhonologicalSkills" (Richard Olson et al.); "Components of Reading Ability: Issues andProblems in Operationalizing Word Identification, Phonological Coding, andOrthographic Coding" (Frank R. Vellutino et al.); "Assessment of Spelling inLearning Disabilities Research" (Louisa Cook Moats); "Issues in Researching theLink between Phonological Awareness, Learning Disabilities, and Spelling"(Patricia C. Lindamood); "Measurement of Written Language Expression" (StephenR. Hooper et al.); "Future Directions for Research on Writing Disabilities:Integrating Endogenous and Exogenous Variables" (Virginia W. Berninger);"Diagnosis and Assessment of Mathematics Learning Disabilities" (Jeannette E.Fleischner); "Mathematics Assessment for Students with Learning Disabilities"(Sharon Vaughn and Cynthia Wilson); "Neuropsychological Assessment of Childrenwith Learning Disabilities: Measurement Issues" (Byron P. Rourke);"Multidimensional Neuropsychological Assessment Models: Potential and Problems"(Robin Morris); "Techniques for Measuring Social Competence in Children" (KytjaK. S. Voeller); "The Measurement and Assessment of Social Skills" (SharonVaughn and Diane Haager); "Assessment of Learning Disabilities: The Challengeof Evaluating the Cognitive Strategies and Processes Underlying Learning" (LynnJ. Meltzer); "Strategy Assessment in Perspective" (Louisa Cook Moats); and "AReview of Critical Concepts and Issues in the Measurement of LearningDisabilities" (Robin Morris). An index is included. Most papers includereferences. (DB) Descriptors: Attention Control; Attention Deficit Disorders; CognitiveProcesses; Definitions; Disability Identification; *Educational Diagnosis;Elementary Secondary Education; *Evaluation Methods; Interpersonal Competence;Intervention; Language Tests; *Learning Disabilities; Learning Strategies;Listening; Mathematics Tests; *Measurement Techniques; Neuropsychology; ReadingDiagnosis; Spelling; *Student Evaluation; Trend Analysis; Writing Difficulties ED364004 EC302573 Learning Disabilities: New Directions for Assessment and Intervention. Jordan, Nancy C., Ed.; Goldsmith-Phillips, Josephine, Ed. 1994 290p.Papers originally presented at a Conference held at the RutgersGraduate School of Education (New Brunswick, NJ, 1991). ISBN: 0-205-14124-2 Available From: Allyn and Bacon, Inc., 160 Gould St., Needham Heights, MA. Document Not Available from EDRS. Language: English Document Type: BOOK (010); CONFERENCE PROCEEDINGS (021) Geographic Source: U.S.; Massachusetts Journal Announcement: RIEAPR94 This collection of original papers synthesizes research on learningdisabilities in school-age children, with the theme of connecting learningdisabilities research with assessment and practice. The volume begins with apaper by Howard S. Adelman titled "Learning Disabilities: On InterpretingResearch Translations." Part I of the collection then focuses on cognitive,developmental, and neuropsychological processes and contains the followingpapers: "Executive Function and the Assessment of Attention DeficitHyperactivity Disorder" (Marilyn C. Welsh); "Brain-Behavior Relationships inDyslexia" (Margaret Semrud-Clikeman and George W. Hynd); "Phonological Skillsand the Prediction of Early Reading Problems" (Virginia Mann); "Toward aResearch-Based Dyslexia Assessment: Case Study of a Young Adult" (JosephineGoldsmith-Phillips); "Rapid Syllable Production in Specifically Language-Impaired Children" (Rachel E. Stark and James W. Montgomery); "MorphologicalAwareness, Spelling, and Story Writing: Possible Relationships for Elementary-Age Children with and without Learning Disabilities" (Joanne F. Carlisle); and"Differential Calculation Abilities in Young Children at Risk: Linking Researchwith Assessment and Instruction" (Nancy C. Jordan and others). Part II dealswith instructional issues, in the following papers: "Testing Linked toTeaching" (Jeanne S. Chall); "Integrating Curriculum-Based Measurement withInstructional Planning for Students with Learning Disabilities" (Lynn S.Fuchs); "Mainstream Assistance Teams: Three Years of Research and Developmenton Prereferral Intervention and School Consultation" (Douglas Fuchs); "Parent-Child Attribution Training" (Tanis Bryan and others); and "'Now I'm a RealBoy': Zones of Proximal Development for Those at Risk" (Joseph C. Campione andothers). Most papers contain references. (JDD) Descriptors: Attention Deficit Disorders; Attribution Theory; *CognitiveProcesses; Consultation Programs; Curriculum Based Assessment; Dyslexia;Elementary Secondary Education; *Intervention; Language Handicaps; *LearningDisabilities; Mathematics Skills; Morphology (Languages); NeurologicalOrganization; Phonology; Prereferral Intervention; Spelling; *StudentEvaluation; *Teaching Methods; Theory Practice Relationship; Writing(Composition) Identifiers: Zone of Proximal Development ED333704 EC300472 Systemic Analysis of Brain Mechanisms Underlying Learning Disabilities: AnIntroduction to the Brain Behavior Relationship. Scaramella-Nowinski, Valerie L. 1 Apr 1991 9p. Paper presented at the Conference of the Learning Disabled of AmericaAssociation (Chicago, IL, February 27-March 2, 1991). EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: CONFERENCE PAPER (150); TEST, QUESTIONNAIRE (160) Geographic Source: U.S.; Illinois Journal Announcement: RIENOV91 Target Audience: Practitioners The paper presents a discussion of human mental processes as they relate tolearning disabilities. Pathognomonic symptoms associated with disturbances tobrain areas or functional systems are discussed, as well as treatmentprocedures. This brain behavior relationship is offered as a basis for aclassification system that is seen to more clearly define attention andlearning disabilities and to afford more precise and reliable strategies fordiagnosis and treatment. Ninety-two symptoms are grouped in a screeningchecklist format for the areas of attention, perception, mood, memory, andmovement. A multidisciplinary treatment approach involving medicine,neuropsychology, and education is recommended. (Author/DB) Descriptors: Affective Behavior; Attention; Check Lists; Classification; *Clinical Diagnosis;Cognitive Processes; Elementary Secondary Education; *Interdisciplinary Approach;Intervention; *Learning Disabilities; Memory; Minimal Brain Dysfunction; Motion; Neurology;Neuropsychology; Perception; Screening Tests EJ393712 EC220422 Congenital Syndromes and Mildly Handicapped Students: Implications forSpecial Educators. Smith, Sandra M. Remedial and Special Education (RASE), v10 n3 p20-30 May-Jun 1989 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); PROJECT DESCRIPTION (141); NON-CLASSROOM MATERIAL (055) Journal Announcement: CIJDEC89 Target Audience: Teachers; Practitioners Many learning disabilities or cases of mild retardation are due to medicallydiagnosable, congenital syndromes, such as fetal alcohol syndrome, sexchromosome abnormalities, multiple anomaly syndromes, phenylketonuria, andTourette Syndrome. These syndromes are discussed, and suggestions are givenfor special education management. (Author/JDD) Descriptors: *Clinical Diagnosis; *Congenital Impairments; *EducationalPractices; Elementary Secondary Education; *Learning Disabilities; *Mild MentalRetardation; Preschool Education EJ380132 EC211182 Differential Diagnosis of Learning Disability versus Emotional DisturbanceUsing the WISC-R. Lufi, Dubi; Cohen, Arie Journal of Learning Disabilities, v21 n8 p515-16 Oct 1988 Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); EVALUATIVE REPORT (142) Journal Announcement: CIJAPR89 Target Audience: Researchers; Practitioners The study assessed the utility of different factor structures of the WechslerIntelligence Scale for Children-Revised in differentiating Israeli malestudents (ages 6-16) with learning disability from children with emotionaldisturbance. Based on several comparisons the results indicated that only themodified A.S. Kaufman's factor structure differentiated the two groups. (Author/DB) Descriptors: *Clinical Diagnosis; Elementary Secondary Education; *EmotionalDisturbances; Foreign Countries; *Handicap Identification; *Intelligence Tests;*Learning Disabilities; Males; Scoring; Screening Tests Identifiers: Israel Internet Resources Internet Listservs Top of Page Back to ERIC Menu Back to CEC Home Page copyright © 1996 ERIC Clearinghouse on Disabilities and Gifted Education URL: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm WT02-B20-75IA001-000011-B031-6http://www.cec.sped.org:80/faq/behavdis.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101074940 text/html 14484HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 07:49:47 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 09-Sep-96 21:00:00 GMTContent-length: 14292Content-type: text/html Behavior-Dis-FAQ BehavDis-FAQ (last updated July 22, 1996) THE ERIC CLEARINGHOUSE ON DISABILITIES AND GIFTEDEDUCATION (ERIC EC) The Council for Exceptional Children 1920 Association Drive Reston, VA 20191 Toll Free: 1-800-328-0272 TTY: 703-264-9449 E-mail: ericec@cec.sped.org Internet: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm Please provide information about managing challenging behavior (e,g.,disruptivestudents) in the classroom. This file includes information about behavior disorders. At the end of this file are links to Internet resources and Internet listservs (discussion groups) where you can obtain more specific information on this topic. There is an ERIC digest that provides furtherinformation on this topic. You can read the full text of our ERIC digests under our listingat the U.S.Department of Education, Office of Educational Research and Improvement. Enclosed are several citations from the ERIC database. These records are asample of the kind of information you can find in the ERIC database. For morecitations on your topic of interest, you may want to search the ERIC database yourself onthe Internet. References with ED (ERIC Document) and EJ (ERIC Journal) identifiers are cited inthe ERIC database; for example, ED333123 or EJ333999. ERIC documents areavailable in microfiche collections at more than 825 locations worldwide (check yourlocal college or public library). They can also be ordered for a fee through the ERICDocument Reproduction Service (EDRS) at 1-800-443-ERIC. References with anEJ (ERIC Journal) number are available for a fee from the originating journal (checkwith your local college or public library), through interlibrary loan services, or fromarticle reproduction clearinghouses, such as UMI: 1-800-248-0360; or ISI:1-800-523-1850. ERIC descriptors (search terms) used: Behavior Disorders, Emotional Disturbances, Behavior Change EJ505077 EC611262 Clyde K. and Sheila K. v. Puyallup School District: The Courts, Inclusion, and Students with Behavioral Disorders. Yell, Mitchell L. Behavioral Disorders, v20 n3 p179-89 May 1995 ISSN: 0198-7249 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); NON-CLASSROOM MATERIAL (055); REVIEW LITERATURE (070) Journal Announcement: CIJOCT95 This article reviews the legal basis of inclusion of students with disabilities in regular education settings, focusing on students with behavior disorders. It examines case law and extrapolates principles from these cases, including the Daniel R. R. standard, the Rachel H. standard, and the Clyde K. and Sheila K. versus Puyallup School District case. (Author/JDD) Descriptors: *Behavior Disorders; *Compliance (Legal); *Court Litigation; Elementary Secondary Education; *Inclusive Schools; Mainstreaming; School Responsibility ED381307 RC020028 Managing Troubling Behaviors: A Systems Approach. Whitaker, Angela McPeake; Votel, Christine Brown Mar 1995 8p.; In: Reaching to the Future: Boldly Facing Challenges in Rural Communities. Conference Proceedings of the American Council on Rural Special Education (ACRES) (Las Vegas, Nevada, March 15-18, 1995); see RC 020 016. EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: CONFERENCE PAPER (150); PROJECT DESCRIPTION (141) Geographic Source: U.S.; Maryland Journal Announcement: RIEAUG95 The Mentor Supported School Success Program was developed by the rural school district of Dorchester County, Maryland, as an effort to include students displaying troubling behaviors in regular classroom settings. The program offers supplementary support to current school programming through the use of mentors. In the first year of the program, members of the school-based multidisciplinary team identified students exhibiting troublesome behaviors, with priority given to elementary-aged students previously recommended for expulsion. All students are eligible for participation. Paraprofessionals and substitute teachers who had demonstrated both empathy for students and consistent effective behavioral management strategies were selected as mentors. Mentors assist with individual behavioral management plans, support classroom activities, provide additional monitoring of non-academic activities, and help teach the social skills training program. Program components include integrated behavior management plans for each student; daily orientation and wrap-up; carefully designed mentor schedules; academic assistance; monitoring of medications; crisis intervention; social skills training; and evaluation of changes in students' behavior, attendance, and academic achievement. A mid-year informal review suggests positive results in all four pilot elementary schools. (JAT) Descriptors: *Behavior Disorders; Elementary Education; Elementary School Students; *Individualized Education Programs; Interpersonal Competence; Intervention; *Mainstreaming; *Mentors; Pilot Projects; *Problem Children; Regular and Special Education Relationship; Rural Schools Identifiers: Dorchester County Board of Education MD; Social Skills Training EJ503121 EC611196 Peers' Perceptions of Emotional and Behavioral Disorders: What Are Students Thinking? Safran, Stephen P. Journal of Emotional and Behavioral Disorders, v3 n2 p66-75 Apr 1995 ISSN: 1063-4266 Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); REVIEW LITERATURE (070) Journal Announcement: CIJSEP95 This article analyzes research on children's perceptions of emotional and behavioral difficulties. Virtually all studies concur that peers hold negative views of externalizing behavior problems. Findings suggest that professionals need to target peer-identified behavioral and social skill goals and develop programming aimed at normalization to improve acceptance in integrated settings.(Author/DB) Descriptors: Behavior Change; *Behavior Disorders; *Childhood Attitudes; Elementary Secondary Education; *Emotional Disturbances; Intervention; Mainstreaming; *Peer Acceptance; *Social Integration; Student Attitudes EJ503086 EC611161 How Does Observational Learning Affect the Behavior of Students with Emotional or Behavioral Disorders? A Review of Research. Hallenbeck, Betty A.; Kauffman, James M. Journal of Special Education, v29 n1 p45-71 Apr 1995 ISSN: 0022-4669 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); REVIEW LITERATURE (070) Journal Announcement: CIJSEP95 This paper reviews research on observational learning, including model characteristics and observers' responses, vicarious reinforcement as implicit punishment, vicarious effects on students with problem behavior, observers' other characteristics and vicarious effects, and aggression and vicarious processes. Regular class placement of students with emotional/behavioral disorders is determined to be insufficient in ensuring imitation of appropriate peer models. (Author/JDD) Descriptors: Aggression; Behavior Change; *Behavior Disorders; *Emotional Disturbances; *Imitation; *Mainstreaming; *Observational Learning; *Peer Influence; Reinforcement; Student Placement; Student Reaction EJ506132 CG546851 Behavior Management in the Inclusive Classroom. Mendler, Allen Journal of Emotional and Behavioral Problems, v3 n3 p59-60 1994 ISSN:1064-7023 Language: English Document Type: RESEARCH REPORT (143); JOURNAL ARTICLE (080) Journal Announcement: CIJNOV95 Educators can take several practical steps to increase the success of inclusion fortroubled students and their classmates and teachers. The five basic needs of problemstudents are discussed, along with strategies for meeting their basic needs and dealingwith disruptive classroom behavior. (CC) Descriptors: Behavior Change;*Behavior Disorders; *Classroom Techniques; Mainstreaming; Public Schools; *SpecialNeeds Students; Students; *Teachers; *Teaching Methods EJ494789 EC609997 Evaluation of the Multiple Effects of a Social Skill Intervention. McMahon,Colleen M.; And Others Behavioral Disorders, v20 n1 p35-50 Nov 1994 ISSN: 0198-7249 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); RESEARCH REPORT (143) Journal Announcement: CIJAPR95 Implementation of a social skill training package with three elementary-school childrenwho had behavioral and learning disorders resulted in increasing student acquisition oftargeted social behaviors, which in turn led to lengthier peer interactions. Increases innontargeted social responses were also demonstrated. (Author/JDD) Descriptors: *Behavior Disorders; Elementary Education; *Instructional Effectiveness;*Interpersonal Competence; *Learning Disabilities; Peer Relationship; *SocialBehavior; Teaching Methods Identifiers: *Collateral Effects EJ470689 EC606933 Using Puppets with Students with Emotional and Behavioral Disorders. Caputo,Rosario Anthony Intervention in School and Clinic, v29 n1 p26-30 Sep 1993 ISSN: 0001-396X Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: TEACHING GUIDE (052); JOURNAL ARTICLE (080) JournalAnnouncement: CIJFEB94 Target Audience: Teachers; Practitioners This article suggests ways in which special educators of students with emotional andbehavioral disorders can introduce puppets into their classrooms as educational andtherapeutic instruments. Puppets are able to help students identify problems and findrational solutions in a nonthreatening situation. Two sample applications are included.(DB) Descriptors: *Behavior Disorders; Classroom Techniques; Dramatics; ElementaryEducation; *Emotional Disturbances; *Problem Solving; *Puppetry; Role Playing;*Teaching Methods; Therapy EJ468765 EC606657 Developing Cooperative Learning Behaviors in Students with BehaviorDisorders. Cartledge, Gwendolyn; Cochran, Lessie Preventing School Failure, v37 n3 p5-10 Spr 1993 ISSN: 1045-988X Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); PROJECT DESCRIPTION (141);TEACHING GUIDE (052) Journal Announcement: CIJJAN94 Target Audience: Teachers; Practitioners This article explains how cooperative-learning behaviors can be taught systematicallyand directly to students with behavior disorders using a four-step procedure inconjunction with an enhanced cooperative-learning environment to encouragegeneralization. Application with five primary grade students is reported. (DB) Descriptors: Behavior Change; *Behavior Disorders; Classroom Environment;*Cooperative Learning; Elementary Education; Interpersonal Competence; PrimaryEducation; *Teaching Methods EJ461287 EC605519 A Structured Instructional System for Developing the School Survival Skills ofAdolescents with Behavioral Disorders. Foley, Regina M.; Epstein, Michael H. Behavioral Disorders, v18 n2 p139-47 Feb 1993 ISSN: 0198-7249 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); RESEARCH REPORT (143) Journal Announcement: CIJAUG93 This study examined the effectiveness of an instructional system (a modified versionof the School Survival Skills Curriculum) in developing and improving the schoolsurvival skills of students with behavioral disorders. Using a pretest-posttest groupdesign, subjects demonstrated improvement in overall use of school survival skills butno significant differences in grade point averages. (Author/JDD) Descriptors:*Behavior Disorders; *Behavior Patterns; Curriculum; Daily Living Skills; Grade PointAverage; *Instructional Effectiveness; Secondary Education; Skill Development;*Student Adjustment; *Student Behavior; Teaching Methods Identifiers: *SchoolSurvival Skills Curriculum EJ459468 EC605123 Cognitive Cover, Copy, and Compare: Subvocal Responding to Increase Rates ofAccurate Division Responding Skinner, Christopher H.; And Others Remedial and Special Education (RASE), v14 n1 p49-56 Jan-Feb 1993 ISSN:0741-9325 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); RESEARCH REPORT (143) Journal Announcement: CIJJUL93 Three elementary students with behavioral disorders were trained to use a cognitive"cover, copy, and compare" strategy to learn division facts. Two students increasedtheir rate of correct responding to mastery level, the third student required additionalfeedback and goal setting, and all three students maintained increased rates of correctresponding at follow-up. (Author/JDD) Descriptors: Arithmetic; *BehaviorDisorders; Division; *Drills (Practice); Elementary Education; *InstructionalEffectiveness; *Learning Strategies; Maintenance; Mathematics Instruction; StudentReaction; Study Skills; *Teaching Methods Identifiers: *Cover Copy and Compare Internet Resources Internet Listservs Top of PageBack to ERIC MenuBack to CEC Home Page copyright © 1996 ERIC Clearinghouse on Disabilities and Gifted Education URL: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm WT02-B20-76IA001-000011-B031-20http://www.cec.sped.org:80/faq/pdd-faq.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101074955 text/html 15488HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 07:50:02 GMTLast-modified: Tuesday, 10-Sep-96 14:39:00 GMTContent-length: 15295Content-type: text/html PDD-FAQ PDD-FAQ (last updated August 20, 1996) THE ERIC CLEARINGHOUSE ON DISABILITIES AND GIFTEDEDUCATION (ERIC EC) The Council for Exceptional Children 1920Association Drive Reston, VA 20191 Toll Free: 1-800-328-0272 TTY: 703-264-9449 E-mail: ericec@cec.sped.org Internet: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm What can you tell me about Pervasive Developmental Disorders (PDD)? This file includes information about PDD. At the end of the file are links to Internet resources and Internet listservs (discussion groups) where you can obtain more specific information on the topic. There may be ERIC digests that provide information on related topics. You can read the full text of ERIC EC digests under our listing at the U.S. Department of Education, Office of Educational Research and Improvement. Additional information on PDD is available at the Yale Child Study Center and the the University of Wisconsin Madison Waisman Center. Enclosed are several citations from the ERIC database. These records are asample of the kind of information you can find in the ERIC database. For morecitations on your topic of interest, you may want to search the ERIC database yourself on the Internet. References with ED (ERIC Document) and EJ (ERIC Journal) identifiers are cited inthe ERIC database; for example, ED333123 or EJ333999. ERIC documents areavailable in microfiche collections at more than 825 locations worldwide (check yourlocal college or public library). They can also be ordered for a fee through the ERICDocument Reproduction Service (EDRS) at 1-800-443-ERIC. References with anEJ (ERIC Journal) number are available for a fee from the originating journal (checkwith your local college or public library), through interlibrary loan services, or fromarticle reproduction clearinghouses, such as UMI: 1-800-248-0360; or ISI:1-800-523-1850. The following information was excerpted from the the National Information Center for Children and Youth with Disabilities. Definition Autism and Pervasive Developmental Disorder-NOS (not otherwisespecified) are developmental disabilities that share many of thesame characteristics. Usually evident by age three, autism andPDD-NOS are neurological disorders that affect a child's abilityto communicate, understand language, play, and relate to others. In the diagnostic manual used to classify disabilities, theDSM-IV (American Psychiatric Association, 1994), "autisticdisorder" is listed as a category under the heading of "PervasiveDevelopmental Disorders." A diagnosis of autistic disorder ismade when an individual displays 6 or more of 12 symptoms listedacross three major areas: social interaction, communication, andbehavior. When children display similar behaviors but do not meetthe criteria for autistic disorder, they may receive a diagnosisof Pervasive Developmental Disorder-NOS (PDD not otherwisespecified). ERIC descriptors (search terms) used: Pervasive Developmental Disorders EJ514763 EC612386 Integrated Treatment Approaches for Young Children with Multisystem Developmental Disorder. Wieder, Serena Infants and Young Children, v8 n3 p24-34 Jan 1996 ISSN: 0896-3746 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); POSITION PAPER (120) Journal Announcement: CIJAPR96 An approach to the diagnosis of pervasive developmental disorders is presented that considers the difficulties in relationships and communication secondary to sensory and motor processing deficits. These difficulties are conceptualized as Multisystem Developmental Disorder (MSDD), and case vignettes illustrate typical patterns of MSDD and intervention options. (Author/SW) Descriptors: *Behavior Patterns; Case Studies; *Clinical Diagnosis; Cognitive Processes; Communication Skills; *Disabilities; Disability Identification; *Early Intervention; Family Involvement; Interpersonal Relationship; Sensory Integration; *Symptoms (Individual Disorders); Young Children Identifiers: *Multisystem Developmental Disorder; *Pervasive Developmental Disorders EJ511756 EC612219 Visually Cued Instruction for Children with Autism and Pervasive Developmental Disorders. Quill, Kathleen Ann Focus on Autistic Behavior, v10 n3 p10-20 Aug 1995 ISSN: 0887-1566 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); PROJECT DESCRIPTION (141) Journal Announcement: CIJFEB96 This article discusses the theoretical rationale for visually cued instruction and provides examples of pictographic and written language cues used to enhance the organizational skills, general skill development, academic learning, communication, socialization, and self-control of children with autism and pervasive developmental disorders. (DB) Descriptors: *Autism; *Cues; Interpersonal Communication; Interpersonal Competence; *Language Acquisition; Self Control; Skill Development; *Teaching Methods; Theories; *Visual Stimuli Identifiers: *Pervasive Developmental Disorders EJ493060 EC609924 Parent and Teacher Agreement in the Assessment of Pervasive Developmental Disorders. Szatmari, P.; And Others Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders, v24 n6 p703-17 Dec 1994 ISSN: 0162-3257 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); RESEARCH REPORT (143) Journal Announcement: CIJMAR95 Parents and teachers of 83 young children diagnosed with a pervasive developmental disorder rated each child on the Autism Behavior Checklist (ABC) and the Vineland Adaptive Behavior Scales (VABS). Although there was good agreement between informants on the VABS, there was virtually no agreement on the ABC, with parents reporting more autistic and less adaptive behaviors than teachers. (DB) Descriptors: *Autism; *Behavior Rating Scales; *Check Lists; *Developmental Disabilities; Interrater Reliability; Parent Attitudes; *Student Evaluation; Teacher Attitudes Identifiers: *Autism Behavior Checklist; Pervasive Developmental Disorders; *Vineland Adaptive Behavior Scales EJ485079 EC608762 Pervasive Developmental Disorders: Dilemmas in Diagnosing Very Young Children. Wagner, Ann E.; Lockwood, Sharon L. Infants and Young Children, v6 n4 p21-32 Apr 1994 ISSN: 0896-3746 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); REVIEW LITERATURE (070) Journal Announcement: CIJOCT94 Diagnosis of pervasive developmental disorders relies on the detection of deficits in social, play, and communication skills relative to the child's mental age. A case example illustrates the multidisciplinary process of making the diagnosis in very young children. Psychiatric evaluation criteria are examined, and a developmental framework for differential diagnosis is presented. (Author/JDD) Descriptors: *Autism; Case Studies; *Clinical Diagnosis; Communication Skills; Developmental Disabilities; *Disability Identification; *Evaluation Criteria; Evaluation Problems; Interdisciplinary Approach; Language Acquisition; Young Children Identifiers: *Early Identification; *Pervasive Developmental Disorders EJ485016 EC608699 Cohesive Discourse in Pervasive Developmental Disorders. Fine, Jonathan; And Others Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders, v24 n3 p315-29 Jun 1994 ISSN: 0162-3257 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); RESEARCH REPORT (143) Journal Announcement: CIJOCT94 Individuals with autism without mental retardation (ages 8-18), Asperger syndrome, and nonspecific social problems (controls) engaged in a 10-minute conversation. Compared to controls, the higher functioning autistic group referred less to a previous stretch of the conversation and more to an aspect of the physical environment. The Asperger group was very similar to the controls. (Author/JDD) Descriptors: *Autism; *Communication Skills; *Connected Discourse; Discourse Analysis; Interpersonal Communication; *Interpersonal Competence; Language Usage Identifiers: *Aspergers Syndrome; Conversation; Pervasive Developmental Disorders; *Reciprocity (Communication) EJ475967 EC607637 Sex Differences in Pervasive Developmental Disorders. Volkmar, Fred R.; And Others Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders, v23 n4 p579-91 Dec 1993 ISSN: 0162-3257 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); RESEARCH REPORT (143) Journal Announcement: CIJMAY94 This study of 199 individuals with autism, 74 with pervasive developmental disorder or autistic-like symptoms (PDD-NOS), and 215 with non-PDD developmental disorders found that the 3 groups differed in the various measures of severity of autism. Sex differences were primarily confined to intelligence quotient and were not prominent in other metrics of severity of autism. (Author/JDD) Descriptors: *Autism; *Intelligence Quotient; *Sex Differences Identifiers: *Impairment Severity; *Pervasive Developmental Disorders EJ459478 EC605133 Childhood Disintegrative Disorder: Issues for DSM-IV. Volkmar, Fred R. Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders, v22 n4 p625-42 Dec 1992 ISSN: 0162-3257 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); POSITION PAPER (120) Journal Announcement: CIJJUL93 Target Audience: Researchers This paper presents evidence regarding the validity of the diagnostic concept of "autistic-like" childhood disintegrative disorder, also known as Heller syndrome or as disintegrative psychosis. Its inclusion in the DSM-IV (Diagnostic and Statistical Manual) is supported, and proposed criteria and narrative description are provided. (Author/JDD) Descriptors: *Autism; Classification; *Clinical Diagnosis; Educational Diagnosis; Emotional Disturbances; Handicap Identification; Symptoms (Individual Disorders); *Validity Identifiers: *Childhood Disintegrative Disorder; Diagnostic and Statistical Manual Mental Disorders; Heller Syndrome; Pervasive Developmental Disorders EJ459476 EC605131 The Validity of Autistic Spectrum Disorders: A Literature Review. Szatmari, Peter Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders, v22 n4 p583-600 Dec 1992 ISSN: 0162-3257 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); REVIEW LITERATURE (070) Journal Announcement: CIJJUL93 Target Audience: Researchers This paper reviews 20 studies that investigated the internal or external validity of various subtypes of autistic spectrum disorders. At least three groups could be distinguished from autism on clinical grounds: an Asperger syndrome subtype, and two atypical subtypes characterized by either low intelligence quotient or high intelligence quotient. (Author/JDD) Descriptors: *Autism; *Classification; *Clinical Diagnosis; Handicap Identification; Intelligence Quotient; *Validity Identifiers: Asperger Syndrome; *Autistic Spectrum Disorders; Pervasive Developmental Disorders EJ459474 EC605129 Is Rett Syndrome a Subtype of Pervasive Developmental Disorders? Tsai, Luke Y. Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders, v22 n4 p551-61 Dec 1992 ISSN: 0162-3257 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); POSITION PAPER (120) Journal Announcement: CIJJUL93 Target Audience: Researchers This paper reviews whether Rett syndrome is a subtype of pervasive developmental disorders (PDD). The paper analyzes internal and external diagnostic validity and discusses whether Rett syndrome is a neurological disorder or a mental disorder. The paper concludes that data support the idea of classifying Rett syndrome as a subtype of PDD. (Author/JDD) Descriptors: *Classification; *Clinical Diagnosis; Developmental Disabilities; *Handicap Identification; *Mental Disorders; *Neurological Impairments; Validity Identifiers: *Pervasive Developmental Disorders; *Rett Syndrome EJ459469 EC605124 Classification of Pervasive Developmental Disorders: Some Concepts and Practical Considerations. Rutter, Michael; Schopler, Eric Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders, v22 n4 p459-82 Dec 1992 ISSN: 0162-3257 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); POSITION PAPER (120) Journal Announcement: CIJJUL93 Target Audience: Researchers This essay notes the complexities inherent in classifying pervasive developmental disorders (PDD), especially when a single classification scheme is to be used for clinical, research, and administrative purposes. The paper considers principles of classification, symptomatology, the neuropsychiatric interface, the value of a multiaxial approach, and PDD subcategories. (Author/JDD) Descriptors: *Autism; *Classification; *Clinical Diagnosis; *Developmental Disabilities; Diagnostic Tests; Educational Diagnosis; *Handicap Identification; Neurology; Psychiatry; Test Validity Identifiers: *Pervasive Developmental Disorders RESOURCES Autism Research International Newsletter Institute for Child Behavior Research 4182 Adams Avenue San Diego, CA 618-281-7165 Autism Hotline Autism Services Center PO Box 507 101 Richmond Street Huntington, WV 25702 304-523-8269 Autism Society of America 7910 Woodmont Avenue, Suite 650 Bethesda, MD 20814 301-657-0881 For information and referral, call 1-800-328-8476. Institute for Child Behavior Research 4182 Adams Avenue San Diego, CA 92116 618-281-7165 Internet Resources Internet Listservs Top of Page Back to ERIC Menu Back to CEC Home Page copyright © 1996 ERIC Clearinghouse on Disabilities and Gifted Education URL: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm WT02-B20-77IA001-000011-B031-30http://www.cec.sped.org:80/faq/suspend.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101075005 text/html 23787HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 07:50:13 GMTLast-modified: Tuesday, 10-Sep-96 14:45:00 GMTContent-length: 23594Content-type: text/html Suspend-FAQ Suspend-FAQ (last updated August 28, 1996) THE ERIC CLEARINGHOUSE ON DISABILITIES AND GIFTEDEDUCATION (ERIC EC) The Council for Exceptional Children 1920Association Drive Reston, VA 20191 Toll Free: 1-800-328-0272 TTY: 703-264-9449 E-mail: ericec@cec.sped.org Internet: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm Do you have information on school discipline of students who have disabilities.If possible, please include information on suspension and expulsion policies. This file includes information about school discipline. At the end of the file are links to Internet resources and Internet listservs (discussion groups) where you can obtain more specific information on the topic. There may be ERIC digests that provide further information on related topics. You can read the full text of ERIC EC digests under our listing at the U.S. Department of Education, Office of Educational Research and Improvement. Enclosed are several citations from the ERIC database. These records are asample of the kind of information you can find in the ERIC database. For morecitations on your topic of interest, you may want to search the ERIC database yourself on the Internet. References with ED (ERIC Document) and EJ (ERIC Journal) identifiers are cited inthe ERIC database; for example, ED333123 or EJ333999. ERIC documents areavailable in microfiche collections at more than 825 locations worldwide (check yourlocal college or public library). They can also be ordered for a fee through the ERICDocument Reproduction Service (EDRS) at 1-800-443-ERIC. References with anEJ (ERIC Journal) number are available for a fee from the originating journal (checkwith your local college or public library), through interlibrary loan services, or fromarticle reproduction clearinghouses, such as UMI: 1-800-248-0360; or ISI:1-800-523-1850. The following document is not available from the ERIC DocumentReproduction Service and must be purchased from Policy Information Clearinghouse, National Association of State Boards of Education, 1012 Cameron St., Alexandria, VA 22314. Title: Special Education Discipline. Policy Update, Volume 3 Number 7. Date of Publication: Apr 95; 2+ pages Available from Policy Information Clearinghouse, National Association of State Boards of Education, 1012 Cameron St., Alexandria, VA 22314. Publication Type: 022; 120 OSRC National Association of State Boards Discipline polices for students with disabilities have become a major area of debate among policymakers, advocates, and educators, as efforts to remove "bad kids" from schools are seemingly thwarted by federal legislation requiring districts to provide educational services to students. This policy analysis outlines expulsion and suspension procedures required by the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act as interpreted by court litigation. It then discusses several issues to consider, including: (1) the extent of violence in schools and who is responsible for the acts of violence need clarification; (2) children should not be discriminated against based on their special education label; (3) policies addressing student evaluation for special education services should highlight the need to accurately describe students' behavior as well as their academic achievement; (4) students with disabilities are more likely to be the victims of violence than perpetrators; and (5) no research exists showing that "zero-tolerance" policies improve school order and safety. (JDD) Descriptors: Disabilities; Court Litigation; Federal Legislation; Discipline Policy; Elementary Secondary Education; Behavior Standards; Discipline; School Policy; Student Rights; Suspension; Expulsion Identifiers: Individuals with Disabilities Education Act ERIC descriptors (search terms) used: Compliance or Legal Responsibility or Student Rights and Disabilities and Elementary Secondary Education. ED385055 EC304088 Questions and Answers on Disciplining Students with Disabilities. OSEP Memorandum. Heumann, Judith E.; Hehir, Thomas Office of Special Education and Rehabilitative Services (ED), Washington, DC. 26 Apr 1995; 20p. Report No: OSEP-95-16 EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: LEGAL MATERIAL (090); NON-CLASSROOM MATERIAL (055) Geographic Source: U.S.; District of Columbia Journal Announcement: RIEDEC95 Government: Federal This document, presented in question and answer format, provides guidanceabout legal requirements of the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act(IDEA) concerning the misconduct of students with disabilities and corrects themisunderstanding that students with disabilities are exempt from disciplineunder current law. It discusses recent amendments made to IDEA by theImproving America's Schools Act and the Gun-Free Schools Act as they apply tostudents with disabilities who bring guns to school. The 16 questions andanswers address the following topics: appropriate steps when misconduct firstappears; additional measures allowed; short-term suspensions; obtaining a courtorder for school expulsion or change of placement; group determination of themisconduct's basis; continuing obligations of the school district to thesuspended or expelled student; options when the misconduct is a manifestationof the disability; special provisions concerning firearms; placement in aninterim alternative setting; application of the Gun-Free Schools Act; authorityof the school district's chief administering officer; and immediate steps totake when a student with a disability brings a firearm to school. Twoflowcharts illustrate the appropriate process in the cases of a student withdisabilities who engaged in behavior subject to discipline but does not bring afirearm to school and of a student with disabilities who brings a firearm toschool. (DB) Descriptors: Aggression; *Behavior Problems; *Compliance (Legal); DecisionMaking; *Disabilities; Discipline; *Discipline Policy; Due Process; EducationalLegislation; Elementary Secondary Education; Expulsion; Federal Legislation;Federal Regulation; Legal Responsibility; School Districts; School Safety;Student Placement; Suspension Identifiers: *Gun Free Schools Act 1994; Guns; Improving Americas Schools Act1994; *Individuals with Disabilities Education Act ED385022 EC304050 Violent Students with Disabilities and School Responsibilities. Lee, Young-Yon Feb 1995 14p.; In: The Oregon Conference Monograph 1995. Volume 7; see EC 304 046. The figures contain broken type. EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: CONFERENCE PAPER (150); NON-CLASSROOM MATERIAL (055) Geographic Source: U.S.; Oregon Journal Announcement: RIEDEC95 Target Audience: Policymakers; Administrators; Teachers; Practitioners This paper is intended to provide school officials and teachers with thenecessary legal background, procedural requirements, and guidance forappropriate implementation of individualized educational programs (IEPs) withviolent students with disabilities. Specifically it addresses: (1) the legalbackground of special education under the Individuals with DisabilitiesEducation Act and Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973; (2) requiredprocedures and issues related to discipline, including procedural safeguards,due process, notice, evaluation, IEP development, placement, placement changes,the stay-put provision, the Jeffords amendment, and preliminary injunction; and(3) discipline and proper IEP implementation including long-term suspension andexpulsion, required procedures for the discipline of students, determination ofthe relationship between misconduct and disability, short-term suspension, caselaws regarding discipline and IEP implementation, and discipline and IEPcomponents. Flow charts illustrate appropriate discipline procedures indifferent situations. (Contains 28 references.) (DB) Descriptors: Compliance (Legal); Court Litigation; *Disabilities; *Discipline;*Due Process; Educational Legislation; Elementary Secondary Education;Expulsion; Federal Legislation; *Individualized Education Programs; LegalResponsibility; *School Responsibility; Special Education; Suspension;*Violence Identifiers: Individuals with Disabilities Education Act; Rehabilitation Act1973 (Section 504) ED384192 EC304032 Discipline of Students with Disabilities: An Update. Sorensen, Gail National Association of Secondary School Principals, Reston, Va. Legal Memorandum, Jun 1995 Jun 1995; 10p. ISSN: 0192-6152 Available From: National Association of Secondary School Principals, 1904Association Dr., Reston, VA 22091-1537 ($2, members; $3, nonmembers; quantitydiscounts available). EDRS Price - MF01 Plus Postage. PC Not Available from EDRS. Language: English Document Type: SERIAL (022); NON-CLASSROOM MATERIAL (055) Geographic Source: U.S.; Virginia Journal Announcement: RIENOV95 Practical guidelines are presented for implementing a discipline policy atthe local level for students with disabilities, with suggestions fordistinguishing policies affecting students in general and students withdisabilities. Emphasis is placed on emerging issues and practical consequences.Relevant federal and state court decisions are cited, including the U.S.Supreme Court's decision in Honig versus Doe. Issues of concern include: dueprocess protection for students classified as disabled before expulsion or long-term suspension of more than 10 days; the legal basis stipulating that studentswith disabilities can be treated in the same manner as students withoutdisabilities for short-term suspension and other typical disciplinary measures;petitioning for a court order temporarily changing the student's placement whenthe individual presents a continuing threat of disruption; relationship of thestudent's misbehavior to the disability; continuation of educational servicesfollowing expulsion or long-term suspension; other situations such assuccessive short-term suspensions; use of drugs or alcohol or carrying a weaponby a student classified as disabled and applicable disciplinary procedures.(Contains approximately 50 citations to court cases). (SW) Descriptors: *Behavior Problems; *Compliance (Legal); Court Litigation;*Disabilities; *Discipline Policy; *Due Process; Elementary Secondary Education;Expulsion; Student Behavior; Student Placement; *Student Rights; Suspension EJ503059 EC611134 Disciplining Students with Disabilities and Those at Risk for School Failure: Legal Issues. Yell, Mitchell L.; Peterson, Reece L. Preventing School Failure, v39 n2 p39-44 Win 1995 ISSN: 1045-988X Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); NON-CLASSROOM MATERIAL (055) Journal Announcement: CIJSEP95 Target Audience: Administrators; Practitioners This discussion of the discipline of students with disabilities notes rulesand limitations that are different from those for the discipline of studentswithout disabilities. Legal considerations in disciplining all students aswell as those protected under the Individuals with Disabilities Education Actor Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 are explained. (DB) Descriptors: *Compliance (Legal); *Disabilities; Discipline; *DisciplinePolicy; Educational Legislation; Elementary Secondary Education; *FederalLegislation; *Legal Responsibility; *Student Rights Identifiers: *Individuals with Disabilities Education Act; Rehabilitation Act1973 (Section 504) EJ493094 EC609958 Timeout and Students with Behavior Disorders: A Legal Analysis. Yell, Mitchell L. Education and Treatment of Children, v17 n3 p293-301 Aug 1994 ISSN: 0748-8491 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); REVIEW LITERATURE (070); NON- CLASSROOM MATERIAL (055) Journal Announcement: CIJMAR95 Target Audience: Teachers; Practitioners This article examines the body of case law which has developed over theappropriate use of various timeout procedures (e.g., exclusion,seclusion/isolation) of students with behavior disorders. Seven guidelines forthe legally correct application of timeout procedures are offered. (DB) Descriptors: *Behavior Disorders; Behavior Modification; *Compliance (Legal);*Court Litigation; *Discipline; Expulsion; Guidelines; *Intervention;Suspension; *Timeout EJ483373 EA529391 The Relationship Test in the Discipline of Disabled Students. Dagley, David L.; And Others West's Education Law Quarterly, v3 n2 p319-37 Apr 1994 ISSN: 0744-8766 Language: English Document Type: POSITION PAPER (120); JOURNAL ARTICLE (080) Journal Announcement: CIJSEP94 Records of administrative hearings and court cases involving the expulsion ofdisabled students characteristically discuss the "Relationship Test" thatgenerally inquires whether or not a misbehavior is related to--or is amanifestation of--a student's disability. Traces the source of theRelationship Test, discusses issues arising from its utility, and discussesissues which arise from its application. (MLF) Descriptors: *Compliance (Legal); *Court Litigation; *Disabilities;*Discipline; Elementary Secondary Education; *Expulsion; Public Schools; SchoolLaw Identifiers: *Individuals with Disabilities Education Act; Legal Precedents;*Relationship Test ED378713 EC303609 A Forum on Discipline Challenges and Opportunities Impacting Students withDisabilities (Alexandria, Virginia, September 8-9, 1994). Final Report. ProjectFORUM. National Association of State Directors of Special Education, Alexandria, VA. 22 Nov 1994 33p.; For related documents, see EC 303 607-608. Sponsoring Agency: Special Education Programs (ED/OSERS), Washington, DC. Contract No: HS92015001 EDRS Price - MF01/PC02 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: CONFERENCE PROCEEDINGS (021); POSITION PAPER (120) Geographic Source: U.S.; Virginia Journal Announcement: RIEJUN95 This report presents the outcomes of a policy forum convened to addressissues of disciplining students with disabilities. Summaries of panelpresentations are provided, focusing on legal and policy issues,school/interagency solutions/good practices, and family and community issues.Observations and recommendation of forum workgroups are also summarized, in theareas of: definition/scope of discipline, interagency/community/family issues,systemic reform practices, array of services and intervention strategies, andtraining and empowerment. Forum participants recommended that a range ofdiscipline options be available, and the focus should be on early intervention.The school curriculum should include the development of prosocial behaviors,problem solving, mediation, negotiation, and other skills that lead to positivestudent behaviors. In general, forum participants favored an emphasis ondissemination of information about effective practices and support for systemiccapacity building, rather than the development of additional federal and statelaw and regulation changes. Appendixes provide a participant list and forumagenda. (JDD) Descriptors: Agency Cooperation; *Change Strategies; Compliance (Legal);Curriculum Development; *Disabilities; *Discipline; *Discipline Policy;Educational Practices; Elementary Secondary Education; Family Involvement;Intervention; *Legal Responsibility; *Policy Formation; School CommunityRelationship; Student Behavior ED377623 EC303550 Disciplinary Exclusion of Students with Disabilities under Federal Law: An Overview. Ordover, Eileen L. Harvard Univ., Cambridge, Mass. Center for Law and Education. Apr 1994; 8p. Available From: Center for Law and Education, 955 Massachusetts Ave.,Cambridge, MA 02139 ($2.50, plus postage and handling; $1 for orders up to$9.99, $2.50 for orders of $10 or more). EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: REVIEW LITERATURE (070) Geographic Source: U.S.; Massachusetts Journal Announcement: RIEMAY95 Target Audience: Administrators; Practitioners This paper presents the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA),Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, and the Americans withDisabilities Act (ADA) as statutory frameworks for providing educationalservices for students with disabilities. The paper then addresses the issue ofdisciplinary exclusion as provided for in each of the three laws. IDEA createsan entitlement to a free appropriate public education in the least restrictiveenvironment (LRE) without exception, and so precludes a district from expellingany student with disabilities for alleged misconduct. A school district maychange a student's educational placement to another providing a freeappropriate public education meeting statutory requirements in the LRE. Anyexclusion from school of more than 10 days constitutes a change of placementand may be accomplished only through the change of placement procedures setforth in IDEA and its implementing regulations. Based on Section 504, anevaluation conducted before attempting to exclude a student for more than 10days or expel must include a determination of whether there is a connectionbetween the behavior and the student's disability. Some students may lose someof these protections if they are using illegal drugs or abusing alcohol.References to the United States Code, the Code of Federal Regulations, andcourt cases are provided to support the paper's views. (JDD) Descriptors: Behavior Problems; Court Litigation; *Disabilities; *DisciplinePolicy; Educational Legislation; Elementary Secondary Education; *Expulsion;*Federal Legislation; Federal Regulation; Student Behavior; Student Placement;*Suspension Identifiers: Americans with Disabilities Act 1990; *Individuals withDisabilities Education Act; Rehabilitation Act 1973 (Section 504) ED375473 EA026170 Disciplinary Sanctions for Students with Special Needs. Osborne, Allen G., Jr. 1994; 26p. EDRS Price - MF01/PC02 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: LEGAL MATERIAL (090) Geographic Source: U.S.; Massachusetts Journal Announcement: RIEMAR95 One of the more controversial issues that has come before the courts sincethe implementation of the Individuals with Disabilities Act (IDEA) concerns theimposition of disciplinary sanctions on students with disabilities. Becausethis issue is not directly addressed by the act, school administrators mustturn to case law for guidance. This paper reviews court litigation and IDEAprovisions to develop guidelines for administrators in this situation.Although IDEA does not directly refer to discipline, its provisions haveimplications for the application of disciplinary sanctions on special educationstudents. The case law of the last 2 decades clearly strikes a balance betweenstudents' rights and school administration authority. School officials mayimpose disciplinary sanctions as long as they follow procedures that will notdeprive special-education students of their rights. Restrictions are placed onschool authorities, however, when they wish to expel the student or change thestudent's placement for disciplinary reasons. In these situations, the due-process procedures outlined in IDEA usually replace the normal due-processprotections. In conclusion, it is better to anticipate a problem and preventone from escalating. An appropriate individual education program (IEP) shouldbe developed that contains goals, objectives, and methods for behaviormodification. Contains 49 end notes. (LMI) Descriptors: *Behavior Disorders; *Compliance (Legal); Court Litigation;*Disabilities; Discipline; *Discipline Policy; Discipline Problems; Due Process;Elementary Secondary Education; Emotional Disturbances; Expulsion; LegalProblems; Legal Responsibility; Special Needs Students; *Student Rights;Suspension Identifiers: *Individuals with Disabilities Education Act EJ468628 EA528278 Update on Legal Issues in Special Education Discipline. Sorenson, Gail West's Education Law Quarterly, v2 n3 p447-58 Jul 1993 ISSN: 0744-8766 Language: English Document Type: NON-CLASSROOM MATERIAL (055); POSITION PAPER (120); JOURNAL ARTICLE (080) Journal Announcement: CIJJAN94 Target Audience: Administrators; Practitioners Focuses on practical guidelines for the implementation of discipline policyat the local level, including suggestions for distinguishing discipline policyfor disabled students from discipline policy affecting students in general.(MLF) Descriptors: *Disabilities; Discipline; *Discipline Policy; ElementarySecondary Education; *Expulsion; Federal Regulation; *Special Education;Student Placement; *Suspension EJ459347 EA527682 Discipline of Students with Disabilities: A Decision-Making Model for Principals. Golden, Diane Cordry NASSP Bulletin, v77 n550 p12-20 Feb 1993 ISSN: 0192-6365 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); EVALUATIVE REPORT (142); LEGAL MATERIAL (090) Journal Announcement: CIJJUL93 Reviews current legal interpretations regarding discipline of handicappedstudents. Proposes a model for fostering compliance with legal mandates whenconsidering disciplinary procedures for such students. Principals shouldemploy behavior management options (such as time-out techniques, use of schoolcounseling and social workers, in-school suspension, Saturday school, and after-school detention) when suspension and expulsion are inappropriate. (21references) (MLH) Descriptors: Administrator Responsibility; *Behavior Problems; *Disabilities;*Discipline; Elementary Secondary Education; *Expulsion; *Legal Problems;Principals; *Suspension Identifiers: *Education for All Handicapped Children Act Internet Resources Internet Listservs Top of Page Back to ERIC Menu Back to CEC Home Page copyright © 1996 ERIC Clearinghouse on Disabilities and Gifted Education URL: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm WT02-B20-78IA001-000011-B031-39http://www.cec.sped.org:80/faq/sch2wrk.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101075017 text/html 23028HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 07:50:25 GMTLast-modified: Tuesday, 10-Sep-96 14:42:00 GMTContent-length: 22835Content-type: text/html School to Work Sch2work (last updated August 28, 1996) THE ERIC CLEARINGHOUSE ON DISABILITIES AND GIFTEDEDUCATION (ERIC EC) The Council for Exceptional Children 1920Association Drive Reston, VA 20191 Toll Free: 1-800-328-0272 TTY: 703-264-9449 E-mail: ericec@cec.sped.org Internet: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm What can you tell me about teaching life skills or vocational skills to students with disabilities? This file includes information about transition issues. At the end of the file are links to Internet resources and Internet listservs (discussion groups) where you can obtain more specific information on the topic. There may be ERIC digests that provide information on related topics. You can read the full text of ERIC EC digests under our listing at the U.S. Department of Education, Office of Educational Research and Improvement. Enclosed are several citations from the ERIC database. These records are asample of the kind of information you can find in the ERIC database. For morecitations on your topic of interest, you may want to search the ERIC database yourself on the Internet. References with ED (ERIC Document) and EJ (ERIC Journal) identifiers are cited inthe ERIC database; for example, ED333123 or EJ333999. ERIC documents areavailable in microfiche collections at more than 825 locations worldwide (check yourlocal college or public library). They can also be ordered for a fee through the ERICDocument Reproduction Service (EDRS) at 1-800-443-ERIC. References with anEJ (ERIC Journal) number are available for a fee from the originating journal (checkwith your local college or public library), through interlibrary loan services, or fromarticle reproduction clearinghouses, such as UMI: 1-800-248-0360; or ISI:1-800-523-1850. ERIC descriptors (search terms) used: Education Work Relationship and Disabilities and "Secondary Education" and Transition EJ517925 EC612774 Transition and Students with Learning Disabilities: Creating Sound Futures. Blalock, Ginger; Patton, James R. Journal of Learning Disabilities, v29 n1 p7-16 Jan 1996 ISSN: 0022-2194 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); POSITION PAPER (120) Journal Announcement: CIJJUN96 This article on transition for students with learning disabilities (LD) reviews the transition concept from a life-span perspective and considers transition planning, including the role of the planning team, the importance of timing, and forces influencing transition programs. It then provides background information, themes, and highlights for transition articles in this journal issue. (DB) Descriptors: *Educational Planning; Educational Trends; *Education Work Relationship; *Learning Disabilities; Secondary Education; *Transitional Programs; Trend Analysis EJ517926 EC612775 A Status Report on Transition Planning for Individuals with Learning Disabilities. Dunn, Caroline Journal of Learning Disabilities, v29 n1 p17-30 Jan 1996 ISSN: 0022-2194 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); PROJECT DESCRIPTION (141) Journal Announcement: CIJJUN96 This article reviews transition as it relates to students with learning disabilities (LD). Specifically, it provides a discussion of transition planning for individuals with LD, an overview of state and federal mandates and initiatives that influence transition practices, and a discussion of transition practices. (Author/DB) Descriptors: Compliance (Legal); Educational Legislation; *Educational Planning; Educational Practices; *Education Work Relationship; Individualized Education Programs; *Learning Disabilities; Secondary Education; State Legislation; *Transitional Programs ED385071 EC304104 Annotated Bibliography on Secondary Special Education and Transitional Services. Volume 10 (and Integrated Master Index for Volumes 7-10). Leach, Lynda Nash; Harmon, Adrienne Seccia Illinois Univ., Champaign. Transition Research Inst. 1995 208p.; For volumes 1-9, see ED 279 115, ED 291 168, ED 303 026, ED 318 166, ED 332 428, ED 342 195, ED 353 718, ED 366 125, and ED 375 590, respectively. For Master Index for volumes 1-6, see ED 342 196. Sponsoring Agency: Special Education Programs (ED/OSERS), Washington, DC. Contract No: H158T00001 EDRS Price - MF01/PC09 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: BIBLIOGRAPHY (131) Geographic Source: U.S.; Illinois Journal Announcement: RIEDEC95 This is the last volume of a 10-volume annotated bibliography documenting the literature in the field of secondary special education and transitional services. The 179 documents cited and abstracted include journal articles, conference proceedings, project reports and products, videocassette recordings, presentations, pamphlets, dissertations, bibliographies, ERIC (Educational Resources Information Center) documents, and research reports. Each citation provides enough bibliographic information to facilitate finding the item through local library services. An integrated master index of titles, authors, and descriptors for Volumes 7-10 is provided. Additional listings include a list of Transition Institute documents in ERIC and a list of products developed by Office of Special Education and Rehabilitation Services (OSERS) projects. (DB) Descriptors: *Disabilities; *Education Work Relationship; Federal Aid; Federal Programs; Secondary Education; Special Education; *Transitional Programs Identifiers: ERIC; Office of Special Educ Rehabilitative Services EJ503043 EC611118 How to Avoid the Seven Pitfalls of Systematic Planning: A School and Community Plan for Transition. Smith, Garnett J.; And Others TEACHING Exceptional Children, v27 n4 p42-47 Sum 1995 ISSN: 0040-0599 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); NON-CLASSROOM MATERIAL (055) Journal Announcement: CIJSEP95 Target Audience: Practitioners Seven pitfalls of transition planning for students with disabilities are identified: (1) planning at an inappropriate level; (2) confusing means with ends; (3) failing to involve all relevant educational partners; (4) selecting programs before identifying goals; (5) failing to consider future community realities; (6) being unaware of the process elements of strategic planning; and (7) assuming all planning approaches are the same. (DB) Descriptors: *Disabilities; Educational Planning; *Education Work Relationship; Long Range Planning; Secondary Education; *Strategic Planning; *Transitional Programs ED381924 EC303870 Multi-District Outreach Projects--School-to-Work Transition Initiatives. OSERS Project Activities. Halloran, William Illinois Univ., Champaign. Transition Research Inst. InterChange, v13 n3 Win 1995 10p.; Available From: InterChange, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 113 Children's Research Center, 51 Getty Dr., Champaign, IL 61820. EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: SERIAL (022); PROJECT DESCRIPTION (141) Geographic Source: U.S.; Illinois Journal Announcement: RIESEP95 The Multi-District Outreach Projects for Services for Youths with Disabilities include 14 federally funded projects that assist in the adoption of proven models, components of models, or other exemplary practices. The projects are designed to improve secondary education and transition services in areas such as continuing education, self-determination, vocational education and training, supported or competitive employment, leisure and recreation, or other aspects of independent living. The projects are felt to serve a need for dissemination and replication of exemplary practices, as state and local education agencies work to implement federal transition services requirements and school-to-work opportunity requirements. The 14 funded projects are described. Outreach projects newly funded in 1994 focus on a self-determination transition curriculum, transition planning for adolescents with serious emotional disturbance, employability assessment, natural supports in employment, collaboration transition teams, and a collaboration and networking project. Expiring outreach projects addressed statewide transition inservice, a workshop series assisting families to prepare for the transition from school to adult life, various transition programs, and job training and work experience programs. (Contains 13 references.) (JDD) Descriptors: Demonstration Programs; *Disabilities; *Educational Practices; *Education Work Relationship; Federal Programs; *Outreach Programs; Program Descriptions; School Districts; Secondary Education; Teaching Models; *Transitional Programs EJ497599 EC610299 An Analysis of Exemplary Transition Programs: How and Why Are They Selected? Kohler, Paula D.; And Others Career Development for Exceptional Individuals, v17 n2 p187-202 Fall 1994 ISSN: 0885-7288 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); EVALUATIVE REPORT (142) Journal Announcement: CIJJUN95 The Transition Institute at the University of Illinois analyzed 15 studies that had identified effective or exemplary transition programs for students with disabilities. The analysis revealed 107 key elements associated with effectiveness or exemplary program status, including variables in career/vocational training, systematic interdisciplinary transition planning, curricula, integration, interagency collaboration, support services, and other program variables. (DB) Descriptors: Demonstration Programs; *Disabilities; *Education Work Relationship; Evaluation Methods; *Program Effectiveness; *Program Evaluation; Secondary Education; *Transitional Programs EJ497598 EC610298 Preservice and Inservice Professional Development for School to Adult Life Transition. Taymans, Juliana M.; DeFur, Sharon Hall Career Development for Exceptional Individuals, v17 n2 p171-86 Fall 1994 ISSN: 0885-7288 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); PROJECT DESCRIPTION (141); NON-CLASSROOM MATERIAL (055) Journal Announcement: CIJJUN95 This article presents a framework for preservice or inservice development of transition personnel. The framework focuses on working with others, knowledge of agencies and influencing systems, development of individualized services, professionalism, job training and support, assessment, administrative functions, philosophical considerations, career counseling, program evaluation, and curriculum and instruction. (DB) Descriptors: Delivery Systems; *Disabilities; *Education Work Relationship; *Inservice Teacher Education; *Models; *Preservice Teacher Education; Professional Development; School Personnel; Secondary Education; *Transitional Programs EJ497593 EC610293 The Transition of Youth with Disabilities to Adult Life: A Position Statement of the Division on Career Development and Transition, The Council for Exceptional Children. Halpern, Andrew S. Career Development for Exceptional Individuals, v17 n2 p115-24 Fall 1994 ISSN: 0885-7288 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); POSITION PAPER (120); NON-CLASSROOM MATERIAL (055) Journal Announcement: CIJJUN95 This position statement reviews the history of the transition concept; defines it; identifies components of transition planning; and considers issues important in the delivery of transition services, including a focus on student preferences, inclusion of the student with disabilities within regular school programs, and provision of community-based learning opportunities. (DB) Descriptors: Delivery Systems; *Disabilities; *Education Work Relationship; Inclusive Schools; Long Range Planning; Personal Autonomy; *Position Papers; Professional Associations; Secondary Education; Student Educational Objectives; *Transitional Programs Identifiers: *Council for Exceptional Children ED380946 EC303820 Youth with Disabilities and the School-to-Work Opportunities Act of 1994. National Transition Network, Minneapolis, MN. Policy Update, Sum 1994 11p.; Sponsoring Agency: Office of Special Education and Rehabilitative Services (ED), Washington, DC.; Contract No: H158G20002 Available From: National Transition Network, Institute on Community Integration, University of Minnesota, 6 Pattee Hall, 150 Pillsbury Dr. S.E., Minneapolis, MN 55455 (available in alternative formats). EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: SERIAL (022); REVIEW LITERATURE (070) Geographic Source: U.S.; Minnesota Journal Announcement: RIEAUG95 This policy update presents key aspects of the statutory language of the School-to-Work Opportunities Act of 1994 (Public Law 103-239), which provides states and localities with federal funds to be used as venture capital to underwrite the initial costs of planning and establishing statewide School-to-Work Opportunities systems. The paper focuses on: (1) purpose of the Act; (2) program components, including general program requirements such as equal access and participation of youth with disabilities, followed by descriptions of the school-based learning component, the work-based learning component, and the connecting activities component; (3) school-to-work opportunities development and implementation grants to states; (4) grants to local partnerships; and (5) strategies for ensuring participation of youth with disabilities. Potential implications for youth with disabilities are described. The paper also analyzes the relationship between the School-to-Work Opportunities Act of 1994 and the transition service requirements of the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act of 1990. (JDD) Descriptors: *Disabilities; Educational Legislation; Educational Opportunities; Educational Policy; *Education Work Relationship; Employment Opportunities; Federal Aid; *Federal Legislation; *Federal Programs; Public Policy; Secondary Education; State Federal Aid; Student Participation; *Transitional Programs Identifiers: Individuals with Disabilities Education Act; *School to Work Opportunities Act 1994 ED372247 CE066859 Equity and Excellence in School-to-Work Transitions of Special Populations. Mithaug, Dennis E. National Center for Research in Vocational Education, Berkeley, CA. Centerfocus, n6 Aug 1994; 5p. Sponsoring Agency: Office of Vocational and Adult Education (ED), Washington, DC.; Available From: NCRVE, 2150 Shattuck Ave., Suite 1250, Berkeley, CA 94704-1058. EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: SERIAL (022) Geographic Source: U.S.; California Journal Announcement: RIEDEC94 Two problems confront the school-to-work (STW) transition initiative: the quality of STW transitions and the equity with which those experiences are distributed among different student groups, including those with disabilities. In the past, the goals of equity and quality seemed to conflict. Many persons advocating increases in quality appeared to be unconcerned with equity and vice versa. The following criteria for developing STW transitions in which equity and excellence coexist have been identified: (1) access to all; (2) individualization; (3) generic problem-solving; (4) community settings; and (5) guaranteed benefits (recognized and accepted credentials authorizing entry into career opportunities or postsecondary educatcation programs; placement or acceptance in postsecondary vocational and educational programs; placement in competitive or supported employment; and participation in continuing and adult education, adult servic and independent living in community settings). Studies have confirmed the positive effects that participation in vocational education and work experience programs have on the employment outcomes of secondary school students in special education. The identified criteria for developing/evaluating STW programs for students with disabilities can be used to design equitable STW programs emphasizing community-based training and experience. (Contains 15 references.) (MN) Descriptors: Access to Education; *Disabilities; Educational Quality; *Education Work Relationship; *Equal Education; *Evaluation Criteria; *Excellence in Education; Postsecondary Education; Program Evaluation; Secondary Education; Special Needs Students; Transitional Programs; *Vocational Education ED371521 EC303108 Employment of Youths with Disabilities: Outcomes, Activities, and Indicators. Kohler, Paula D.; Rusch, Frank R. Illinois Univ., Champaign. Transition Research Inst. 1994 156p.; For selected papers, see EC 303 109-110. Sponsoring Agency: Special Education Programs (ED/OSERS), Washington, DC. Contract No: H158T00001 EDRS Price - MF01/PC07 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: COLLECTION (020); PROJECT DESCRIPTION (141) Geographic Source: U.S.; Illinois Journal Announcement: RIENOV94 Four articles comprise this monograph on interventions which lead to employment of youths with disabilities. Articles are based on investigations and demonstrations sponsored by the Office of Special Education and Rehabilitative Services (OSERS). In "Promoting Employment for Youths in Transition: Outcomes, Activities, and Indicators," Paula D. Kohler and Frank R. Rusch present a model for systems change based on outcomes, activities, and indicators for promoting employment in this population. The article presents an overview of the OSERS investigations leading to the model's development. The second article, "An Analysis of OSERS'-Sponsored Secondary Special Education and Transitional Services Research" (Frank Rusch et al.), contains the findings from an analysis of five federal funding competitions focusing on transition to work or postsecondary education, in an effort to identify quality indicators and outcomes. In a further extension of this line of research, Frank Rusch et al. in "Employment Outcomes and Activities for Youths in Transition," identified 22 outcomes and 65 related activities associated with employment. Of these, OSERS project directors ranked the following as the most important outcomes: utilizing individualized education plans, educating students alongside their nondisabled peers, and documenting progress in employment-related skill areas. Finally, in "School-to-Work Transition: Identification of Employment Related Outcome and Activity Indicators," Paula Kohler and Rank Rusch identify measures to serve as indicators for each outcome and activity identified earlier by project directors. The listing of outcome and activity indicators is appended. Individual papers contain references. (DB) Descriptors: Activities; *Disabilities; *Education Work Relationship; *Employment Potential; Federal Aid; Intervention; Models; *Outcomes of Education;*Program Development; Secondary Education; Student Educational Objectives; Systems Approach; Transitional Programs Identifiers: Indicators; *Office of Special Educ Rehabilitative Services ED366754 CE065589 School Transition Bibliography. Pautler, Albert Feb 1994 22p.; Contains light type throughout document. EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: BIBLIOGRAPHY (131) Geographic Source: U.S.; New York Journal Announcement: RIEJUL94 This bibliography on school transition includes 240 entries of books, journal articles, papers, reports, bibliographies, and dissertations. These entries deal with transitions of the following populations: adult learners, youth, Plains Indian women, high school students, people with learning disabilities, disadvantaged youth, high school equivalents, handicapped adolescents, young black men, severely disabled high school students, students at risk, minorities, noncollege bound, American Indian high school dropouts, Hispanic youth, dropouts, school dropouts in general, rural youth, urban youth, and females. Although the majority of the items deal with the United States, other countries referred to include Great Britain, Australia, New Zealand, Canada, the Netherlands, Denmark, Germany, and Israel. (YLB) Descriptors: Adult Education; American Indians; Bibliographies; Blacks; *Disabilities; *Disadvantaged; Dropouts; *Education Work Relationship; *Employment Potential; Females; Foreign Countries; High Risk Students; High School Equivalency Programs; High School Graduates; *Job Placement; Secondary Education; Vocational Education RESOURCES National Transition Alliance for Youths with Disabilities Contact: Transition Research Institute at Illinois University of Illinois 113 Children's Research Center 51 Getty Drive Champaign, IL 61820 Tel: (217)333-2325 (voice/TT) Fax: (217)244-0851 Internet: leachlyn@uxl.cso.uiuc.edu GTE-INS: ILUOFITI National Transition Network (NTN) Institute on Community Integration University of Minnesota 430 Wulling Hall 86 Pleasant Street SE Minneapolis, MN 55455 Tel: (612)626-8200 Fax: (612)626-7956 Internet Resources Internet Listservs Top of Page Back to ERIC Menu Back to CEC Home Page copyright © 1996 ERIC Clearinghouse on Disabilities and Gifted Education URL: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm WT02-B20-79IA001-000011-B031-50http://www.cec.sped.org:80/faq/sensinte.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101075122 text/html 16266HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 07:51:31 GMTLast-modified: Tuesday, 10-Sep-96 14:44:00 GMTContent-length: 16073Content-type: text/html SensInteg-FAQ SensInteg-FAQ (last updated August 27, 1996) THE ERIC CLEARINGHOUSE ON DISABILITIES AND GIFTEDEDUCATION (ERIC EC) The Council for Exceptional Children 1920Association Drive Reston, VA 20191 Toll Free: 1-800-328-0272 TTY: 703-264-9449 E-mail: ericec@cec.sped.org Internet: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm My child has multiple disabilities and problems with sensory integration. What type of intervention might work? This file includes information about sensory integration. At the end of the file are links to Internet resources and Internet listservs (discussion groups) where you can obtain more specific information on the topic. There may be an ERIC digest that provides further information on this topic. You can read the full text of ERIC EC digests under our listing at the U.S. Department of Education, Office of Educational Research and Improvement. Enclosed are several citations from the ERIC database. These records are asample of the kind of information you can find in the ERIC database. For morecitations on your topic of interest, you may want to search the ERIC database yourself on the Internet. References with ED (ERIC Document) and EJ (ERIC Journal) identifiers are cited inthe ERIC database; for example, ED333123 or EJ333999. ERIC documents areavailable in microfiche collections at more than 825 locations worldwide (check yourlocal college or public library). They can also be ordered for a fee through the ERICDocument Reproduction Service (EDRS) at 1-800-443-ERIC. References with anEJ (ERIC Journal) number are available for a fee from the originating journal (checkwith your local college or public library), through interlibrary loan services, or fromarticle reproduction clearinghouses, such as UMI: 1-800-248-0360; or ISI:1-800-523-1850. The following information was excerpted from P.A.R.E.N.T.S. News, a newsletter from Parents As Resources Engaged in Networking and Training Statewide. The process of organizing, interpreting and utilizing sensoryinformation from our touch, movements, sight, sound and other systems,and from body awareness and the pull of gravity is called sensoryintegration. This concept was developed and refined by the research ofthe late A. Jean Ayres, PhD, OTR. Sensory integration helps us movethrough space (walking, running), react to danger (recoil from a sharpobject or extreme heat), and coordinate the movements of our head,eyes and hands (lifting our head to read from a black board and thenwriting on paper on a desktop.) ERIC descriptors (search terms) used: Sensory Integration EJ514763 EC612386 Integrated Treatment Approaches for Young Children with Multisystem Developmental Disorder. Wieder, Serena Infants and Young Children, v8 n3 p24-34 Jan 1996 ISSN: 0896-3746 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); POSITION PAPER (120) Journal Announcement: CIJAPR96 An approach to the diagnosis of pervasive developmental disorders is presented that considers the difficulties in relationships and communication secondary to sensory and motor processing deficits. These difficulties are conceptualized as Multisystem Developmental Disorder (MSDD), and case vignettes illustrate typical patterns of MSDD and intervention options. (Author/SW) Descriptors: *Behavior Patterns; Case Studies; *Clinical Diagnosis; Cognitive Processes; Communication Skills; *Disabilities; Disability Identification; *Early Intervention; Family Involvement; Interpersonal Relationship; Sensory Integration; *Symptoms (Individual Disorders); Young Children Identifiers: *Multisystem Developmental Disorder; *Pervasive Developmental Disorders ED389104 EC304389 Dealing with Sensory Integrative Dysfunction in the Classroom: A Guide for Early Elementary Teachers. Chan, Christina 25 Feb 1995 22p.; Paper presented at the American University College of Arts and Sciences Student Research Conference (Washington, DC, February 25, 1995). EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: NON-CLASSROOM MATERIAL (055); CONFERENCE PAPER (150) Geographic Source: U.S.; District of Columbia Journal Announcement: RIEAPR96 Target Audience: Teachers; Practitioners This paper offers teachers basic information about sensory integration and suggests strategies for managing classrooms which include children with sensory integrative dysfunction. The first section looks at what sensory integration is, noting especially the roles of the three "near senses": the vestibular system, the proprioceptive system, and the tactile system. Next, sensory integrative dysfunction in children is considered, including the hyporesponsive child and the hyperresponsive child. Specific ways that sensory integration dysfunction can become a problem in the classroom are considered, including problems with peers, with controlling aggression, with motor planning, and with maintaining alertness. Suggestions for classroom management while managing a child with sensory integrative dysfunction are offered, including suggestions for setting up the classroom, managing instructional time, and being flexible in teaching styles. Teachers are urged to seek the support of colleagues, administrators, parents, and providers of support services. (Contains 21 references.) (DB) Descriptors: Attention Control; *Classroom Techniques; Early Childhood Education; *Perceptual Impairments; Perceptual Motor Learning; *Sensory Integration ED384156 EC303986 Historical Overview of Nonstandard Treatments. Hulme, Pamela 1 May 1995; 149p. EDRS Price - MF01/PC06 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: REVIEW LITERATURE (070) Geographic Source: U.S.; New Jersey Journal Announcement: RIENOV95 This review of nonstandard treatments as they relate to individuals with mental retardation reveals attempts to increase intelligence and make individuals "normal." Covering the early 1930s through the present, the review addresses: cell therapy, electric shock, behavior modification, vitamin B-6 therapy, Doman-Delacato treatment, auditory training, sensory integration, the Feingold diet, Candida Albicans yeasts, facial screening, Dolphin therapy, facilitative communication, and water-misting. The treatments are grouped according to their decade of initial presentation, with major developments briefly highlighted to illustrate their significance in special education. Issues underlying the arguments of advocates and opponents of the treatments are discussed. The role of studies pertaining to each issue is analyzed, and in some cases, the involvement of the U.S. mass media, legislature, and judicial system is mentioned. The following therapies that are professionally accepted and promoted by the education system are also briefly reviewed: art, music, and dance therapy; equine and pet therapy; recreation and play therapy; and physical and occupational therapy. Appendices include a diagnostic checklist for children with behavior disturbances and information on dosages and outcomes of studies of high-dose vitamin B6 and magnesium for individuals with autism. (Contains 151 references.) (SW) Descriptors: Auditory Training; Autism; Behavior Modification; *Experimental Programs; *Intervention; *Mental Retardation; Sensory Integration; *Therapy Identifiers: Dolphins; Doman Delacato Method; Facilitated Communication; Feingold Diet; Vitamins; Yeasts EJ491066 EC609596 The Effectiveness of Sensory Integration Activities on Language Processing in Preschoolers Who Are Sensory and Language Impaired. Fallon, Moira A.; And Others Infant-Toddler Intervention: The Transdisciplinary Journal, v4 n3 p235-43 Sep 1994 ISSN: 1053-5586 Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); RESEARCH REPORT (143) Journal Announcement: CIJFEB95 Target Audience: Researchers Nine children participated in one of three groups: children diagnosed as both sensory and language impaired, children diagnosed as language impaired, and normally developing children matched for language level. Sensory integration activities prior to language intervention resulted in significant changes on the Battelle Developmental Inventory for the children diagnosed as both sensory and language impaired. (Author/DB) Descriptors: Child Development; Hearing Impairments; Intervention; *Language Acquisition; *Language Impairments; *Language Processing; *Multiple Disabilities; *Sensory Integration; Sequential Learning; Visual Impairments; Young Children Identifiers: Battelle Developmental Inventory EJ426633 CE522651 The Effect of a Sensory Integration Program on Academic Achievement, Motor Performance, and Self-Esteem in Children Identified as Learning Disabled: Results of a Clinical Trial. Polatajko, Helene J.; And Others Occupational Therapy Journal of Research, v11 n3 p155-76 May-Jun 1991 ISSN: 0276-1599 Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); RESEARCH REPORT (143) Journal Announcement: CIJOCT91 A study assigned children aged 6-8 with sensory integration (SI) dysfunction to 3 groups: 35 used sensory modalities, 32 received psychomotor (PM) training, and 13 no intervention. SI and PM administered one hour per week for six months proved equally effective in improving academic and motor performance but had little effect on self-esteem. (SK) Descriptors: *Academic Achievement; Learning Disabilities; Occupational Therapy; *Perceptual Motor Coordination; *Self Esteem; *Sensory Integration; *Young Children EJ465370 EC606141 Reexamination of Sensory Integration Treatment: A Combination of Two Efficacy Studies. Kaplan, Bonnie J.; And Others Journal of Learning Disabilities, v26 n5 p342-47 May 1993 ISSN: 0022-2194 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); RESEARCH REPORT (143) Journal Announcement: CIJNOV93 This study analyzed the efficacy of sensory integration treatment by combining data from a study of 96 Canadian children (29 from Alberta and 67 from Ontario children and all aged 5-8). Results indicate that the therapeutic effect of sensory integration treatment is not greater than other, more traditional methods of intervention. (Author/JDD) Descriptors: *Intervention; *Learning Disabilities; Mathematics Achievement; *Outcomes of Treatment; Perceptual Development; Primary Education; *Program Effectiveness; Psychomotor Skills; Reading Achievement; *Sensory Integration EJ465023 CE525285 Clinical Evaluation of the Effectiveness of Sensory Integrative and Perceptual Motor Therapy in Improving Sensory Integrative Function in Children with Learning Disabilities. Humphries, Thomas W.; And Others Occupational Therapy Journal of Research, v13 n3 p163-82 Sum 1993 ISSN: 0276-1599 Language: English Document Type: RESEARCH REPORT (143); JOURNAL ARTICLE (080) Journal Announcement: CIJNOV93 After 72 sessions for 3 hours per week, significantly more children aged 5-9 receiving sensory integration (SI) therapy (n=35) and perceptual motor training (n=35) showed improvement in SI functioning compared to 33 receiving no treatment. Similar effects were found for subgroups with vestibular dysfunction only (n=11, 13, and 11 respectively). (Author/SK) Descriptors: Children; Clinical Diagnosis; *Learning Disabilities; *Occupational Therapy; *Outcomes of Treatment; *Perceptual Motor Learning; *Sensory Integration EJ455302 CE524450 Sensory Integration Treatment for Children with Learning Disabilities: Its Status 20 Years Later. Polatajko, Helene J.; And Others Occupational Therapy Journal of Research, v12 n6 p323-41 Nov-Dec 1992 ISSN: 0276-1599 Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); REVIEW LITERATURE (070) Journal Announcement: CIJMAY93 A review of research since Ayers' (1972) report on sensory integration (SI) concludes that SI is not supported as an effective treatment for academic problems of children with learning disabilities. It is not clear whether SI is more effective than perceptual-motor approaches or maturation alone. (SK) Descriptors: *Academic Achievement; Children; *Learning Disabilities; *Perceptual Motor Learning; *Sensory Integration EJ360879 EC200611 A Sensory-Integrative Approach to the Education of the Autistic Child. King, Lorna Jean Occupational Therapy in Health Care, v4 n2 p77-85 Sum 1987 Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); PROJECT DESCRIPTION (141) Journal Announcement: CIJFEB88 The Developmental Day School, a 4-year-old demonstration school in Phoenix, is described. The curriculum is based on neurodevelopmental, sensory integrative principles. An interdisciplinary staff integrates communication, daily living, academic, sensorimotor and music components. Self-stimulating behaviors are handled by analyzing the child's stressors and sensory modalities.(Author/KM) Descriptors: *Autism; Children; Communication Problems; Demonstration Programs; Interdisciplinary Approach; Learning Modalities; Music; Neurological Impairments; *Occupational Therapy; Perceptual Motor Learning; Play; Program Descriptions; Psychomotor Skills; Self Mutilation; *Sensory Integration; Sign Language; Verbal Communication Identifiers: Arizona (Phoenix); Developmental Day School EJ360878 EC200610 Sensory Integration and Play Behavior: A Case Study of the Effectiveness of Occupational Therapy Using Sensory Integrative Techniques. Schaaf, Roseann C.; And Others Occupational Therapy in Health Care, v4 n2 p61-75 Sum 1987 Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); RESEARCH REPORT (143) Journal Announcement: CIJFEB88 This case study describes a developmentally delayed 4-year-old and examines behavioral changes that occurred in occupational therapy using sensory integration (SI) techniques. The use of play observation to measure change following SI treatment is discussed, and the relevance of qualitative methodologies to collecting data on play is demonstrated. (Author/KM) Descriptors: *Behavior Change; Case Studies; Data Collection; *Developmental Disabilities; *Neurological Impairments; Observation; *Occupational Therapy; Perceptual Handicaps; Perceptual Motor Coordination; Perceptual Motor Learning; *Play; Preschool Children; Psychomotor Skills; Self Care Skills; *Sensory Integration Identifiers: *Sensory Integrative Dysfunction RESOURCES Sensory Integration International P. O. Box 9013 Torrance, CA 90508 USA Internet Resources Internet Listservs Top of Page Back to ERIC Menu Back to CEC Home Page copyright © 1996 ERIC Clearinghouse on Disabilities and Gifted Education URL: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm WT02-B20-80IA001-000011-B031-61http://www.cec.sped.org:80/faq/blind.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101075134 text/html 26152HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 07:51:41 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 09-Sep-96 22:04:00 GMTContent-length: 25960Content-type: text/html Blind Blind-FAQ (last updated August 12, 1996) THE ERIC CLEARINGHOUSE ON DISABILITIES AND GIFTEDEDUCATION (ERIC EC) The Council for Exceptional Children 1920Association Drive Reston, VA 20191 Toll Free: 1-800-328-0272 TTY: 703-264-9449 E-mail: ericec@cec.sped.org Internet: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm Do you have any information on children who are blind or have visualimpairments? This file includes information about children who are blind or visuallyimpaired. At the end of this file are links to Internet resources and Internet listservs (discussion groups) where you can obtain more specific information on the topic. ERIC EC digest E511, "Visual Impairments" provides further information.You can read the full text of ERIC EC digests under our listing at the U.S. Department of Education, Office of Educational Research and Improvement. An ERIC Infoguide is also available. Enclosed are several citations from the ERIC database. These records are asample of the kind of information you can find in the ERIC database. For morecitations on your topic of interest, you may want to search the ERIC database yourself on the Internet. References with ED (ERIC Document) and EJ (ERIC Journal) identifiers are cited inthe ERIC database; for example, ED333123 or EJ333999. ERIC documents areavailable in microfiche collections at more than 825 locations worldwide (check yourlocal college or public library). They can also be ordered for a fee through the ERICDocument Reproduction Service (EDRS) at 1-800-443-ERIC. References with anEJ (ERIC Journal) number are available for a fee from the originating journal (checkwith your local college or public library), through interlibrary loan services, or fromarticle reproduction clearinghouses, such as UMI: 1-800-248-0360; or ISI:1-800-523-1850. ERIC descriptors (search terms) used: Blind or Visual Impairments EJ506722 EC611591 Visual Impairment in Infants and Young Children. Teplin, Stuart W. Infants and Young Children, v8 n1 p18-51 Jul 1995 ISSN: 0896-3746 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); PROJECT DESCRIPTION (141) Journal Announcement: CIJNOV95 This article reviews the structure, development, function, and assessment ofthe visual system and then considers: common eye problems of young childrenwith visual impairment; impacts of severe impairment on child development; andthe roles of early intervention professionals, ophthalmologists, andpediatricians in working with these children and their families. (Author/DB) Descriptors: Anatomy; *Child Development; Delivery Systems; *DisabilityIdentification; *Early Intervention; Etiology; Evaluation Methods;Interdisciplinary Approach; Physicians; Physiology; Role; *Vision; Vision Tests;*Visual Impairments ED384176 EC304015 Social Skills Development for Preschool Children with Visual Impairments. Farrenkopf, Carol; And Others Apr 1995; 32p.; Paper presented at the Annual International Convention of the Council for Exceptional Children (73rd, Indianapolis, IN, April 5-9, 1995). EDRS Price - MF01/PC02 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: CONFERENCE PAPER (150); REVIEW LITERATURE (070) Geographic Source: U.S.; Texas Journal Announcement: RIENOV95 Social skills development of preschool children with visual impairments isdiscussed. A review of the literature considers the field of child developmentand social cognition, the effect of blindness on child development, and theeffects of blindness on social cognition. Three areas concerning thedevelopment of social skills for children with visual impairments areaddressed: social interactions and development within the home; social skillsin the preschool, with particular emphasis on play research; and early socialskills intervention programs. It is concluded that children with visualimpairments develop differently than children without visual impairments. Theirpassage through the various stages of development is usually delayed. Thedevelopment of socialization skills may also be delayed if the earlyexperiences of the child are not enhanced or mediated through the environment.It is important to teach parents how to interact with their child, identifytheir needs, and encourage interaction with siblings. Encouraging appropriateplay skills is also important to the early acquisition of social skills. Thechild who is visually impaired must develop play skills in order to maintaininteractions with peers. The direction for future research in preschool socialskills development is briefly considered. (Contains 54 references). (SW) Descriptors: Blindness; Child Development; Developmental Delays; DevelopmentalStages; *Early Intervention; Family Environment; *InterpersonalCompetence; Peer Relationship; *Play; Preschool Children; Preschool Education;*Skill Development; Social Behavior; *Social Cognition; Social Development;Social Experience; *Visual Impairments ED381306 RC020027 Resourcing Visually Impaired Children and Youth in Rural Settings. Bull, Kay S.; Rupard, Jane M. Mar 1995; 9p.; In: Reaching to the Future: Boldly Facing Challenges in RuralCommunities. Conference Proceedings of the American Council on Rural SpecialEducation (ACRES) (Las Vegas, Nevada, March 15-18, 1995); see RC 020 016. EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: CONFERENCE PAPER (150); NON-CLASSROOM MATERIAL (055) Geographic Source: U.S.; Oklahoma Journal Announcement: RIEAUG95 This report discusses the community-based resources that may be available toregular and special education teachers serving visually impaired students inrural areas. It notes the national shortage of teachers qualified to teachchildren with visual impairments and suggests that rural teachers will have todevote some effort to seeking out appropriate educational resources.Communicating with the community can uncover resources useful in transitionaltraining that involves daily living skills, job training, or job placement.Procedures for the productive use of volunteers and volunteer organizations areconsidered, and local cooperatives are recommended as potential sources foremployment experience. The report concludes that ready-made resources forvisually impaired students are unlikely to exist in rural areas and thatregular and special education teachers will need to create them. A tableidentifies local/community and regional/county organizations and personnel thatcurrently exist in some settings or that might be created to provide servicesin the areas of employment, family support and advocacy, recreation, social andinterpersonal development, and medical or financial needs. A second tablelists addresses and phone numbers for national organizations that focus on theeducation of visually impaired and blind students. (RAH) Descriptors: Blindness; *Community Based Instruction (Disabilities);Community Resources; Daily Living Skills; *Educational Resources; ElementarySecondary Education; Job Skills; Organizations (Groups); *Rural Education;School Community Relationship; Shared Resources and Services; *SpecialEducation; *Transitional Programs; *Visual Impairments; Volunteers EJ491009 EC609539 Visually Impaired Children in Regular Classrooms: A Guide for Resource andClassroom Teachers. B.C. Journal of Special Education, v18 n2 p173-80 1994 ISSN: 0704-7509 Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); NON-CLASSROOM MATERIAL (055) Journal Announcement: CIJFEB95 Target Audience: Teachers; Practitioners This guide provides information on serving students with visual impairmentsin the regular classroom setting. It discusses types of visual impairments,behaviors that may indicate visual problems, important classroom environmentfactors, optical aids, special educational needs, and suggestions forcurriculum adaptations. (JDD) Descriptors: Classroom Environment; *Classroom Techniques; ElementarySecondary Education; *Mainstreaming; *Teaching Methods; *Visual Impairments EJ491004 EC609534 Art Education and Children with Visual Impairments. Wellman, Carla B.C. Journal of Special Education, v18 n2 p132-39 1994 ISSN: 0704-7509 Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); NON-CLASSROOM MATERIAL (055) Journal Announcement: CIJFEB95 Target Audience: Teachers; Practitioners This article discusses how art activities can be adapted for students withvisual impairments, focusing on textural art, sculpture, sound art, smell,taste, kinetic art, dioramas and maps, and computer art. Suggestions foradapting visual arts are also offered, by using good contrast in projects or byenlarging or simplifying pictures. (JDD) Descriptors: *Art Activities; *Art Education; Art Materials; Childrens Art;Classroom Techniques; Elementary Secondary Education; *Teaching Methods;*Visual Impairments EJ481544 EC608462 Cognitive and Metacognitive Interventions: Important Trends for Teachers ofStudents Who Are Visually Impaired. Van Reusen, Anthony K.; Head, Daniel N. RE:view, v25 n4 p153-62 Win 1994 ISSN: 0899-1510 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); NON-CLASSROOM MATERIAL (055) Journal Announcement: CIJAUG94 Target Audience: Practitioners This article addresses teaching students with visual impairmentsmetacognitive learning strategies to improve their academic performance.Topics discussed include intrinsic motivation and self-concept; structuring andactivating schemata; using cognitive modeling and verbal self-instructionalprocedures; teaching self-regulatory procedures; and promoting strategyacquisition, proficiency, maintenance, and generalization. (DB) Descriptors: Academic Achievement; *Blindness; Cognitive Processes;Generalization; *Learning Strategies; Maintenance; *Metacognition; Self Concept;Self Management; Student Motivation; *Study Skills; Teaching Methods; *VisualImpairments ED377653 EC303581 Tools for Selecting Appropriate Learning Media. Caton, Hilda, Ed. American Printing House for the Blind, Louisville, Ky. 1994; 190p. Available From: American Printing House for the Blind, 1839 Frankfort Ave., Louisville, KY 40206 (large type and braille also available). EDRS Price - MF01/PC08 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: NON-CLASSROOM MATERIAL (055) Geographic Source: U.S.; Kentucky Journal Announcement: RIEMAY95 Target Audience: Practitioners This manual assists in developing educational goals and Individual EducationPlans for children with visual impairments, by providing guidelines forselecting appropriate learning media for optimum literacy development. Part 1describes the target populations, the members of the interdisciplinary team,and the team members' responsibilities. Part 2 outlines and describes theactual assessment procedure and part 3 provides a detailed set of instructionsfor evaluating child attributes and environmental attributes (educationalenvironment, family, and home attributes). Appendices contain questionnaires,report forms, and checklists which reflect each stage of the assessmentprocedure. In addition, a list of assessment instruments with addresses ofpublishers is provided, as is a glossary of eye terms. (Contains 56references.) (DB) Descriptors: Blindness; Braille; Check Lists; Decision Making; *EducationalMedia; Elementary Secondary Education; *Evaluation Methods; IndividualizedEducation Programs; Large Type Materials; Literacy; Low Vision Aids; *MediaSelection; Partial Vision; Reading Instruction; *Student Evaluation; TactileAdaptation; *Visual Impairments ED375835 IR055211 The Sole Source. Library of Congress, Washington, D.C. National Library Service for the Blindand Physically Handicapped. 1994; 18p. EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: PROJECT DESCRIPTION (141) Geographic Source: U.S.; District of Columbia Journal Announcement: RIEMAR95 Government: Federal The National Library Service for the Blind and Physically Handicapped (NLS),an arm of the Library of Congress, leads a highly successful national programto produce and distribute books and magazines for blind, visually impaired, andphysically handicapped individuals. A fostering relationship exists betweenNLS and a network of 143 regional and local libraries that serve blind andhandicapped readers directly. By developing and disseminating centralizedpolicies and procedures at the national level, NLS is able to sustain a uniformquality of service throughout the library system. Each year NLS receivespermission to reproduce, with no royalties charged, more than 2,000 book titlesfor loan. In addition, NLS has systematically developed a collection thatprovides access to some 220,000 recorded and embossed titles in 16 millioncopies for a variety of blind and handicapped users. Copyright clearance,which is vital for a program that reproduces so many titles, and cataloging areimportant features of the NLS approach: both cassette and flexible discrecordings can be used only with special playback equipment. NLS also has arole in the narrative reproduction or braille embossing of materials and thedistribution of discs, cassettes, and playback equipment. The NLS serves as aresource for a clientele of extremely varied tastes and needs. (SLD) Descriptors: Audio Equipment; Audiotape Cassettes; *Blindness; Books; Braille;Cataloging; *Centralization; Copyrights; Floppy Disks; Government Role; LibraryAdministration; Library Networks; *Library Services; National Programs; PhysicalDisabilities; *Policy Formation; Program Descriptions; *User Needs(Information) Identifiers: *National Library Service for the Blind EJ464096 EC605999 The Consultative-Collaborative Teacher for Students with Visual Handicaps. Flener, Betsy Settle RE:view, v24 n4 p173-82 Win 1993 ISSN: 0899-1510 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); POSITION PAPER (120); PROJECTDESCRIPTION (141) Journal Announcement: CIJOCT93 Target Audience: Practitioners This article reviews the history of traditional service delivery systems forstudents with visual handicaps, demonstrates the need for change, and definesand describes the structure of the consultative/collaborative teacher model.The model stresses shared communication and joint problem solving betweenteachers and vision specialists. (DB) Descriptors: *Consultants; *Delivery Systems; Models; *Regular and SpecialEducation Relationship; Resource Teachers; *Special Education Teachers;Specialists; *Visual Impairments ED366126 EC302720 How Do I Do This When I Can't See What I'm Doing? Information Processing forthe Visually Disabled. Jahoda, Gerald Library of Congress, Washington, D.C. National Library Service for the Blindand Physically Handicapped. 1993; 104p. ISBN: 0-8444-0785-2 Available From: U.S. Government Printing Office, Superintendent of Documents,Mail Stop: SSOP, Washington, DC 20402-9328 (ISBN-0-16-041749-X). EDRS Price - MF01/PC05 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: NON-CLASSROOM MATERIAL (055) Geographic Source: U.S.; District of Columbia Journal Announcement: RIEJUN94 Government: Federal Target Audience: Community This book, by an author with a visual impairment, is written for people witha visual disability who wish to learn about alternate ways of processinginformation, including reading, writing, organizing notes, and doing everydaytasks. The first chapter describes ways of adjusting to the loss of sight andmanaging everyday living skills. The second chapter deals with the use ofcomputers by people with visual impairments and covers the basics of computeroperations, adaptive computer input and output devices, and commonly usedapplication programs. Chapter 3 discusses personal information managementsystems. Chapter 4 lists types of jobs held by people with visual disabilitiesand reviews steps needed to enter or re-enter the job market. Leisureactivities are discussed in the fifth chapter. These activities are groupedinto three categories: those requiring physical effort, those that emphasizemental effort, and volunteer activities. The last chapter is on the blindnesssystem--organizations of and for people with visual impairments. Benefitsprovided by these and other organizations are discussed. The text of eachchapter is followed by a list of references and resources, including books,magazine articles, and recorded books. Also listed are some government andprivate organizations that provide services to people with visual impairments.(DB) Descriptors: *Adaptive Behavior (of Disabled); Adjustment (to Environment);Adults; Blindness; *Computer Oriented Programs; *Daily Living Skills;*Employment Opportunities; Employment Potential; Individual Development;Information Management; Information Sources; Job Search Methods; *Leisure Time;Organizations (Groups); Partial Vision; Recreational Activities; *VisualImpairments ED357530 EC302072 Selecting a Program: A Guide for Parents of Infants & Preschoolers withVisual Impairments. Chen, Deborah; McCann, Mary Ellen Blind Childrens Center, Los Angeles, CA.1993; 33p.; Photographs will not reproduce well. EDRS Price - MF01/PC02 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: NON-CLASSROOM MATERIAL (055) Geographic Source: U.S.; California Journal Announcement: RIEOCT93 Target Audience: Parents Intended for parents of infants and preschoolers with visual impairments,this booklet encourages parent involvement in all aspects of educationalprogramming for their children and provides guidelines for selection of asuitable program. The first section examines the stresses involved duringtransitions from one program to another. Parents are urged to be activemembers of the child's educational team by making observations, creating a"snapshot" of the child for the team, identifying what the family thinks isimportant, keeping records, planning for meetings, and dealing effectively withprofessionals. The relationship of program choice to the overall familysituation is noted. General and specific guidelines in selecting a program areaddressed, including general atmosphere; social environment; physicalenvironment; learning environment; and specific features of infant programs,preschool programs, and kindergarten programs. Specific guidelines are alsooffered to help evaluate a program from the child's point of view. Theseinclude looking at the learning environment, teacher competency, and transitionissues. Also included are some suggestions for helping the child during thefirst few weeks of a new program. (DB) Descriptors: Classroom Environment; *Early Intervention; *Evaluation Criteria;Guidelines; Infants; *Parent Participation; Preschool Children; PreschoolEducation; *Program Evaluation; *Selection; Teamwork; Toddlers; *VisualImpairments EJ451643 EC604199 The Specificity of Colored Lenses as Visual Aids in Retinal Disease. Gawande, A.; And Others Journal of Visual Impairment and Blindness, v86 n6 p255-57 Jun 1992 ISSN: 0145-482X Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); RESEARCH REPORT (143) Journal Announcement: CIJFEB93 This study of the effects of lenses of different colors on the visualabilities and comfort of 20 patients with retinal disease found that, in hometrials, the critical issue was density more than color. Office tests of visualacuity and contrast sensitivity with colored lenses did not predict subjectivebenefit. (Author/JDD) Descriptors: Color; *Equipment Evaluation; *Low Vision Aids; *Optometry;Partial Vision; Visual Acuity; Visual Aids; *Visual Impairments Identifiers: *Retinal Diseases EJ442912 EC602731 Teaching Braille Reading to Students with Low Vision. Holbrook, M. C.; Koenig, A. J. Journal of Visual Impairment and Blindness, v86 n1 p44-48 Jan 1992 Special Issue on Low Vision. ISSN: 0145-482X Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); NON-CLASSROOM MATERIAL (055) Journal Announcement: CIJAUG92 Target Audience: Teachers; Practitioners This article discusses ways to teach low vision students to read braille,including both parallel instruction (the student learns to read print andbraille simultaneously) and nonparallel instruction (the print-reading studentlearns braille). The following approaches are briefly described: basal reader,language experience, whole language, patterns, and "read again." (DB) Descriptors: Adult Education; Basal Reading; *Braille; Elementary SecondaryEducation; Language Experience Approach; *Partial Vision; Pattern Recognition;*Reading Instruction; *Teaching Methods; *Visual Impairments; Whole LanguageApproach ED349774 EC301520 Visual Impairments.ERIC Office of Educational Research and Improvement (ED),Washington, DC. Contract No: RI88062007 Report No: EDO-EC-92-1 Available From: Council for Exceptional Children, 1920 Association Dr.,Reston, VA 22091-1589 ($1 each, minimum order $5 prepaid). EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: ERIC PRODUCT (071); ERIC DIGESTS (SELECTED) (073) Geographic Source: U.S.; Virginia Journal Announcement: RIEFEB93 This digest provides basic information and resources on visual impairments.Legal and educational definitions are given for "legally blind," "partiallysighted," "visually handicapped," "blind," and "low vision". Typicalcharacteristics of individuals with visual impairments in the areas ofcognitive and social development are noted. Educational implications areidentified, including mainstreaming, special services needed, and effects ofadditional disabilities. Fourteen organizational resources are listed and abibliography of six items is provided. (DB) Descriptors: *Blindness; Child Development; Cognitive Development;Definitions; *Educational Needs; Elementary Secondary Education; IndividualCharacteristics; *Partial Vision; Social Development; *Student Characteristics;*Visual Impairments Identifiers: ERIC Digests EJ432809 EC601428 Guidelines for Integrating Young Children with Visual Impairments in GeneralEducational Settings. Erwin, E. J. Journal of Visual Impairment and Blindness, v85 n6 p253-60 Jun 1991 ISSN: 0145-482X Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); NON-CLASSROOM MATERIAL (055) Journal Announcement: CIJFEB92 Target Audience: Practitioners This article offers seven guidelines for best practices in integratingyoungsters who are blind or visually impaired with their age-appropriate peers.Guidelines are based on the literature on early childhood special education andeducation of children with visual impairments. (Author/DB) Descriptors: *Blindness; Early Childhood Education; Educational Practices;*Mainstreaming; *Social Integration; Teaching Methods; *Visual Impairments EJ423026 EC233197 Parenting a Visually Impaired Child: The Mother's Perspective. Hancock, K.; And Others Journal of Visual Impairment and Blindness, v84 n8 p411-13 Oct 1990 ISSN: 0145-482X Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); PROJECT DESCRIPTION (141) Journal Announcement: CIJJUL91 Semistructured interviews with six mothers of visually impaired childrenfound three dominant themes emerging: (1) emotional issues (e.g., the time ofdiagnosis); (2) coping strategies (e.g., use of support networks); and (3)problems and concerns about relationships with professionals, the child'seducation, people's attitudes, and the amount of time involved in parenting.(DB) Descriptors: Attitudes; Children; *Coping; Educational Needs; *EmotionalAdjustment; Interviews; *Mothers; *Parent Attitudes; *Visual Impairments Internet Resources Internet Listservs Top of Page Back to ERIC Menu Back to CEC Home Page copyright © 1996 ERIC Clearinghouse on Disabilities and Gifted Education URL: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm WT02-B20-81IA001-000011-B031-71http://www.cec.sped.org:80/faq/cerebpal.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101075145 text/html 20962HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 07:51:51 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 09-Sep-96 21:11:00 GMTContent-length: 20770Content-type: text/html CerebPals-FAQ CerebPals (last updated July 14, 1996) THE ERIC CLEARINGHOUSE ON DISABILITIES AND GIFTEDEDUCATION (ERIC EC) The Council for Exceptional Children 1920Association Drive Reston, VA 20191 Toll Free: 1-800-328-0272 TTY: 703-264-9449 E-mail: ericec@cec.sped.org Internet: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm Do you have any information on cerebral palsy? This file includes information about cerebral palsy. At the end of this file are links to Internet resources and Internet listservs (discussion groups) where you can obtain more specific information on this topic. There may be ERIC digests on related topics that provide further information. You can read the full text of ERIC EC digests under our listing at the U.S. Department of Education, Office of Educational Research and Improvement. The primary focus of the ERIC system is education. While the ERIC database contains information on some medical disorders, you may want to search a medical database such as MEDLINE/MEDLARS at the National Library of Medicine or MedWeb at Emory University. Enclosed are several citations from the ERIC database. These records are a sample of the kind of information you can find in the ERIC database. For morecitations on your topic of interest, you may want to search the ERIC database yourself onthe Internet. References with ED (ERIC Document) and EJ (ERIC Journal) identifiers are cited inthe ERIC database; for example, ED333123 or EJ333999. ERIC documents areavailable in microfiche collections at more than 825 locations worldwide (check yourlocal college or public library). They can also be ordered for a fee through the ERICDocument Reproduction Service (EDRS) at 1-800-443-ERIC. References with anEJ (ERIC Journal) number are available for a fee from the originating journal (checkwith your local college or public library), through interlibrary loan services, or fromarticle reproduction clearinghouses, such as UMI: 1-800-248-0360; or ISI:1-800-523-1850. The following information is exerpted from the National Information Center for Children and Youth withDisabilitiesfact sheet Number 2 (FS2), 1995. DEFINITION OF CEREBRAL PALSY Cerebral palsy is a condition caused by damage to the brain,usually occurring before,during or shortly following birth."Cerebral" refers to the brain and "palsy" to a disorder ofmovement or posture. It is neither progressive nor communicable.It is also not "curable" in the accepted sense, althougheducation, therapy and applied technology can help persons withcerebral palsy lead productive lives. It is not a disease andshould never be referred to as such. It can range from mild tosevere. The causes of cerebral palsy include illness duringpregnancy, premature delivery, or lack of oxygen supply to thebaby; or it may occur early in life as a result of an accident,lead poisoning, viral infection, child abuse, or other factors.Chief among the causes is an insufficient amount of oxygen orpoor flow of blood reaching the fetal or newborn brain. This canbe caused by premature separation of the placenta, an awkwardbirth position, labor that goes on too long or is too abrupt, orinterference with the umbilical cord. Other causes may beassociated with premature birth, RH or A-B-O blood typeincompatibility between parents, infection of the mother withGerman measles or other viral diseases in early pregnancy, andmicroorganisms that attack the newborn's central nervous system.Lack of good prenatal care may also be a factor. A less commontype is acquired cerebral palsy: head injury is the most frequentcause, usually the result of motor vehicle accidents, falls, orchild abuse. ERIC descriptors (search terms) used: Cerebral Palsy EJ499231 EC610474 Thomas the Writer: Case Study of a Child with Severe Physical, Speech, and Visual Impairments. Blischak, Doreen M. Language, Speech, and Hearing Services in Schools, v26 n1 p11-20 Jan 1995 ISSN: 0161-1461 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); RESEARCH REPORT (143) Journal Announcement: CIJJUL95 A case study is presented of a nine-year-old boy with quadriplegic cerebral palsy and vision impairment, chronicling his development of augmentative and alternative communication (AAC) and literacy skills from birth to second grade. Development and use of his AAC system is described, along with activities for language and literacy development. (Author/JDD) Descriptors: *Augmentative and Alternative Communication; Case Studies; Cerebral Palsy; Communication Aids (for Disabled); *Communication Disorders; Early Childhood Education; Intermediate Grades; *Language Acquisition; *Literacy Education; Multiple Disabilities; Physical Disabilities; Severe Disabilities; *Visual Impairments ED361943 EC302410 The School Experience for Gifted Students with Cerebral Palsy. Willard-Holt, Colleen Apr 1993; 12p.; Paper presented at the Annual Conference of the American Educational Research Association (Atlanta, GA, April 12-16, 1993). EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: CONFERENCE PAPER (150); RESEARCH REPORT (143) Geographic Source: U.S.; Indiana Journal Announcement: RIEFEB94 This paper presents a study of two intellectually gifted students (ages 6 and 14) who have cerebral palsy and are unable to communicate orally. Results of participant observation, interviews, and document analysis revealed that: (1) gifted students who have cerebral palsy and do not speak exhibit indicators of cognitive ability that are similar to those exhibited by nondisabled gifted students, though the expression and recognition of these indicators are inhibited by communication barriers; (2) classroom atmosphere, structures, and instructional activities differentially impact the intellectual development of gifted students with physical disabilities; (3) gifted students with physical disabilities are able, with some modifications, to integrate and succeed academically and socially in regular classrooms; and (4) many barriers must be overcome by gifted students with physical disabilities in order to reach their goals. The study demonstrates the importance of looking beyond the obvious external manifestations of intellectual talent and illustrates some unique behaviors that may appear given appropriate circumstances. (Contains 22 references.) (JDD) Descriptors: Ability Identification; Case Studies; *Cerebral Palsy; *Cognitive Ability; Communication Disorders; Communication Problems; Educational Experience; Elementary School Students; Elementary Secondary Education; *Gifted Disabled; *Intellectual Development; Mainstreaming; Performance Factors; Physical Disabilities; Secondary School Students ED353713 EC301744 Cerebral Palsy: General Information. Fact Sheet Number 2 = La Paralisis Cerebral: Informacion General. Fact Sheet Number 18. Interstate Research Associates, McLean, VA.; National Information Center for Children and Youth with Disabilities, Washington, DC. 1993; 5p. Sponsoring Agency: Special Education Programs (ED/OSERS), Washington, DC. Contract No: H030A00002 EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. Language: English; Spanish Document Type: REVIEW LITERATURE (070); MULTILINGUAL/BILINGUAL MATERIALS (171) Geographic Source: U.S.; District of Columbia Journal Announcement: RIEJUN93 This fact sheet on cerebral palsy is offered in both English and Spanish. First, it provides a definition and considers various causes (e.g., an insufficient amount of oxygen reaching the fetal or newborn brain). The fact sheet then offers incidence figures and explains characteristics of the three main types of cerebral palsy: spastic, athetoid, and ataxic. It briefly discusses developmental, educational, and employment implications. These include the value of early identification and intervention. (DB) Descriptors: *Cerebral Palsy; Definitions; Early Intervention; *Educational Needs; Elementary Secondary Education; Etiology; Incidence; Preschool Education;*Symptoms (Individual Disorders) EJ508353 EC611761 How Technology Assists My Daughter to Compete in the Mainstream of Life. Lode, Carol Exceptional Parent, v22 n8 p34,41 Nov-Dec 1992 Journal availability: Psy-Ed Corp., 209 Harvard St., Suite 303, Brookline, MA 02146-5005. ISSN: 0046-9157 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); POSITION PAPER (120) Journal Announcement: CIJDEC95 A mother recounts how her kindergarten-aged daughter (who has severe cerebral palsy and is quadriplegic and nonverbal) is able to participate in mainstream school life with the assistance of an electrically powered wheelchair, an electronic speech output device, and a computer. (DB) Descriptors: *Assistive Devices (for Disabled); *Cerebral Palsy; Communication Aids (for Disabled); Computers; *Mainstreaming; Personal Narratives; Primary Education; *Severe Disabilities; Wheelchairs EJ404894 CG537125 Family Strengths in the Care of Handicapped Children: Targets for Intervention. McCubbin, Marilyn A.; Huang, S. T. Tina Family Relations, v38 n4 p436-43 Oct 1989 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); RESEARCH REPORT (143) Journal Announcement: CIJAUG90 Investigated 130 2-parent families with children who had mild, moderate, or severe cerebral palsy to examine the critical family strengths which contributed to the overall health and health improvement of these children. Used the Typology Model of Adjustment and Adaptation to examine the relationships between family stress, family types, resources, and parental coping to improvement in the child's health. (Author/TE) Descriptors: *Adjustment (to Environment); *Cerebral Palsy; *Coping; Family Attitudes; *Family Characteristics; Family Financial Resources; Family Involvement; Models; Stress Management Identifiers: Typology Model of Adjustment and Adaptation EJ399530 PS517036 How Do I Help Jacob? Heitz, True Young Children, v45 n1 p11-15 Nov 1989 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); RESEARCH REPORT (143); TEACHING GUIDE (052) Journal Announcement: CIJAPR90 Target Audience: Practitioners Presents one teacher's experience with a student with minimal cerebral palsy in an open classroom from kindergarten to the third grade. Addresses questions that arose concerning ways to help a child with special needs in the classroom. (BB) Descriptors: Case Studies; *Cerebral Palsy; *Classroom Environment; *Kindergarten Children; *Mainstreaming; Parent Teacher Cooperation; Peer Relationship; Primary Education; Public Schools; *Student Adjustment; *Teacher Role; Teacher Student Relationship; Teaching Guides EJ399061 EC221153 Early Interference. Cooper, Marianne Leone Exceptional Parent, v19 n6 p34-37 Sep 1989 Special Issue: 17th Annual Education Issue. Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); POSITION PAPER (120); PROJECT DESCRIPTION (141) Journal Announcement: CIJAPR90 Target Audience: Parents A mother recounts her negative experiences with an early intervention program for her cerebral palsied infant and encourages parents to assert themselves if a program is not meeting their child's needs. (DB) Descriptors: *Cerebral Palsy; *Early Intervention; Infants; *Parent Attitudes;Parent School Relationship; Personal Narratives; *Program Attitudes EJ385461 EC212048 He Opened His Eyes and Smiled. Dixon, Harrison A. Exceptional Parent, v19 n1 p18-20,22-23 Jan-Feb 1989 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); PROJECT DESCRIPTION (141) Journal Announcement: CIJJUL89 Target Audience: Parents A father relates his family's efforts to provide early stimulation to a son diagnosed with cerebral palsy and visual impairments. As the boy developed, he listened to audiotape recordings of music and nursery rhymes, explored household objects, watched television, played computer games, and was eventually enrolled in a mainstreamed kindergarten. (JDD) Descriptors: Case Studies; *Cerebral Palsy; *Child Development; *Family Influence; Family Involvement; Intervention; Outcomes of Education; Parent Influence; Parent Participation; Personal Narratives; Premature Infanlooking for materials to help inform, educate, or challenge them regarding the issues surrounding disabilities. This directory of audiovisual materials available from the State Library of Florida includes materials that present ideas ad personal experiences covering a range of disabling conditions, including autism, cerebral palsy, epilepsy, hearing impairment, loss of limbs, mental illness, mental retardation, paraplegia, spina bifida, and visual impairment. Issues that relate to these conditions include assistive devices, attitudes, independent living, institutionalization, motivation, physical accessibility, rehabilitation, and sign language. Each entry in the directory includes information on target audience, format (audiocassette, 16mm film, slides, 3/4" videocassette, or VHS videocassette), length of time, producer, and year of release; a brief annotation; and a list of subjects covered (including an indication of the type of disability addressed). Instructions for requesting materials from the State Library of Florida are provided. (GL) Descriptors: Amputations; *Audiovisual Aids; Autism; Catalogs; Cerebral Palsy;*Disabilities; Epilepsy; Hearing Impairments; Instructional Materials; Mental Disorders; Mental Retardation; Neurological Impairments; Visual Impairments Identifiers: *Florida State Library EJ380102 EC211152 Nutritional Assessment of the Young Child with Cerebral Palsy. Fee, Maureen A.; And Others Infants and Young Children, v1 n1 p33-40 Jul 1988 Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); NON-CLASSROOM MATERIAL (055); PROJECT DESCRIPTION (141) Journal Announcement: CIJAPR89 Children with cerebral palsy sometimes display nutritional inadequacy, as evaluated through anthropometric measurements and laboratory values. Causes of poor nutritional status include inadequate calories offered or adequate calories offered but not consumed. Inadequate caloric retention may be due to vomiting, rumination, or gastroesophageal reflux. Refeeding is a possible intervention effort. (Author/JDD) Descriptors: Body Weight; *Cerebral Palsy; Child Development; *Clinical Diagnosis; *Eating Habits; Health Conditions; *Intervention; *Nutrition; Physical Health; Young Children Identifiers: *Early Intervention; *Nutritional Therapy EJ363429 EC201126 Physical Education Activities for Children with Severe Cerebral Palsy. Miller, Sue Ellen; Schaumberg, Ken Teaching Exceptional Children, v20 n2 p9-11 Win 1988 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); NON-CLASSROOM MATERIAL (055) Journal Announcement: CIJAPR88 Severe cerebral palsied children require adapted physical education activities, and teachers' consultation with physical therapists can help in planning appropriate activities for them. Gross motor activities (such as sitting T-ball and wheelchair knockdown) that have been successfully used with elementary and middle school students are suggested. (JDD) Descriptors: *Adapted Physical Education; *Cerebral Palsy; Cooperative Planning; Elementary Education; *Physical Activities; Physical Therapists; Psychomotor Skills; *Severe Disabilities ED312814 EC221272 It's Your Turn at Bat: Featuring Mark Riley. The Kids on the Block Book Series. Aiello, Barbara; Shulman, Jeffrey 1988; 51p.; For related books, see EC 221 270-277. Report No: ISBN-0-941477-02-9 Available From: Twenty-First Century Books, 38 South Market St., Frederick, MD 21701 ($12.95). EDRS Price - MF01 Plus Postage. PC Not Available from EDRS. Language: English Document Type: INSTRUCTIONAL MATERIAL (051); CREATIVE WORK (030); BOOK (010) Geographic Source: U.S.; Maryland Journal Announcement: RIEAPR90 Target Audience: Students One of a series of children's books written from the point of view of an elementary grade child with a disability or other problem, the stories emphasize similarities in childhood experience while providing information specific to the disability. In this book, Mark, a fifth grader with cerebral palsy, has been reluctantly doing research on sewing machines for a school report. He discovers that the money for his team's baseball jerseys that he has been responsible for is missing, and he finds himself feeling more friendly toward sewing machines. After the story, a question and answer section provides answers (by Mark) of typical questions children often have about cerebral palsy. These include: "Why are you in a wheelchair?" "What is cerebral palsy?" "What is it like to have CP?" "Does having CP mean that you're crippled or handicapped? Does it matter what people call you?" "But how can you play baseball in a wheelchair?" "Can you play other sports?" "Isn't it hard to get around in a wheelchair?" "Can you go real fast in your wheelchair?" "Why do you talk funny?" "Why do you wear a helmet?" "Will you get better?" "Are you sad that you have CP?" (DB) Descriptors: Books; *Cerebral Palsy; *Childhood Attitudes; Childrens Literature; Elementary Education; Fiction; Peer Acceptance; Self Concept ED252036 EC171193 The Early Needs of Children with Cerebral Palsy: A Comprehensive View. Blackman, James A.; Healy, Alfred Iowa Univ., Iowa City. Div. of Developmental Disabilities. 1983; 38p. Sponsoring Agency: Health Resources and Services Administration (DHHS/PHS), Rockville, MD. Office for Maternal and Child Health Services. Grant No: HDDS-PHS-07-X-194000-81 EDRS Price - MF01/PC02 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: NON-CLASSROOM MATERIAL (055) Geographic Source: U.S.; Iowa Journal Announcement: RIEMAY85 Target Audience: Parents; Practitioners Intended for professionals and parents, this monograph focuses on the service needs of young children with cerebral palsy. Section I presents an overview of cerebral palsy, including etiology, incidence, and history of management. Section II describes service needs in the following areas: prevention; early identification; treatment; the interdisciplinary team; primary, secondary, and tertiary care; community support services; links with educational services; and training for health professionals. Section III discusses coordination of services in the context of decision-making and prevention planning. A short appendix lists references for further reading. (JW) Descriptors: *Agency Cooperation; *Cerebral Palsy; Clinical Diagnosis; *Community Coordination; *Community Services; Handicap Identification; Health Personnel; Young Children Internet Resources Internet Listservs Top of Page Back to ERIC Menu Back to CEC Home Page copyright © 1996 ERIC Clearinghouse on Disabilities and Gifted Education URL: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm WT02-B20-82IA001-000011-B031-85http://www.cec.sped.org:80/faq/chromabn.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101075156 text/html 41357HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 07:52:02 GMTLast-modified: Tuesday, 10-Sep-96 14:01:00 GMTContent-length: 41164Content-type: text/html  ChromAbn-FAQ ChromAbn-FAQ (last updated July 5, 1996) THE ERIC CLEARINGHOUSE ON DISABILITIES AND GIFTEDEDUCATION (ERIC EC) The Council for Exceptional Children 1920Association Drive Reston, VA 20191 Toll Free: 1-800-328-0272 TTY: 703-264-9449 E-mail: ericec@cec.sped.org Internet: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm This file includes information about several different types of chromosome abnormalitiesor genetic disorders. At the end of this file are links to Internet resources and Internetlistservs (discussion groups) where you can obtain more specific information on thetopic. Disabilities that are included in this file are: Chromosome Abnormalities - General Angelman Syndrome Fragile-X Syndrome Kabuki Make-Up Syndrome Klinefelter's Syndrome Lesch-Nyhan Disease Lowe's Syndrome Prader-Willi Syndrome Williams Syndrome Enclosed are several citations from the ERIC database. These records are a sample ofthe kind of information you can find in the ERIC database. For more citations on yourtopic of interest, you may want to search the ERIC database yourself on the Internet. The primary focus of the ERIC system is education. While the ERIC database containsinformation on some medical disorders, you may want to search a medical databasesuch as MEDLINE/MEDLARS at the NationalLibrary of Medicine or MedWeb at Emory University. References with ED (ERIC Document) and EJ (ERIC Journal) identifiers are citedin the ERIC database; for example, ED333123 or EJ333999. ERIC documents areavailable in microfiche collections at more than 825 locations worldwide (checkyour local college or public library). They can also be ordered for a feethrough the ERIC Document Reproduction Service (EDRS) at 1-800-443-ERIC. References with an EJ (ERIC Journal) number are available for a fee from theoriginating journal (check with your local college or public library), throughinterlibrary loan services, or from the article reproduction clearinghouses,such as UMI: 1-800-248-0360; or ISI: 1-800-523-1850. CHROMOSOME ABNORMALITIES - General ED266563 EC181726 A Guide to Selected National Genetic Voluntary Organizations. National Center for Education in Maternal and Child Health, Washington, DC. Nov 1985; 137p. Sponsoring Agency: Health Resources and Services Administration(DHHS/PHS), Rockville, MD. Office for Maternal and Child Health Services. EDRS Price - MF01/PC06 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: DIRECTORY (132) Geographic Source: U.S.; District of Columbia Journal Announcement: RIEJUL86 The directory lists approximately 120 mutual support groups concerned withthe medical and psychological impacts of genetic disorders and birth defects onindividuals and their families. The groups are dedicated to serving theongoing emotional, practical, and financial needs of these populations. Theentries are arranged alphabetically and include information on name oforganization, address, phone number, executive director, contact person,chapters/satellites, purpose, and educational materials (publications,audiovisuals, newsletters). Among conditions represented are acoustic neuroma,Alzheimer's disease, arthritis, autism, cerebral palsy, cystic fibrosis, Down'ssyndrome, epilepsy, Friedreich's ataxia, hemophilia, Huntington's disease,hydrocephalus, leukemia, lupus, multiple sclerosis, Parkinson's disease, Prader-Willi syndrome, scoliosis, spina bifida, and Tourette syndrome. (CL) Descriptors: *Congenital Impairments; *Genetics; Organizations (Groups);*Social Support Groups EJ481086 CS747418 Cognitive and Academic Skills in Children with Sex Chromosome Abnormalities. Bender, Bruce G.; And Others Reading and Writing: An Interdisciplinary Journal, v3 n3-4 p315-27 Dec 1991 Special Issue: Genetic and Neurological Influences on Reading Disability. ISSN: 0922-4777 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: RESEARCH REPORT (143); JOURNAL ARTICLE (080) Journal Announcement: CIJAUG94 Follows 46 unselected children with various sex chromosome abnormalitiesusing intellectual, language, and achievement testing. Notes that, althoughmost children were not mentally retarded, most received special education help.Finds support for the inference that learning disorders were geneticallymediated in this group. (RS) Descriptors: *Academic Achievement; Developmental Stages; Early ChildhoodEducation; Elementary Education; *Genetics; Heredity; Language Skills;*Learning Disabilities; Thinking Skills Identifiers: *Chromosome Abnormalities EJ467145 HE531414 Scientific Goals of the Human Genome Project. Wills, Christopher National Forum: Phi Kappa Phi Journal, v73 n2 p9-11 Spr 1993 ISSN: 0162-1831 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: PROJECT DESCRIPTION (141); JOURNAL ARTICLE (080) Journal Announcement: CIJDEC93 The Human Genome Project, an effort to sequence all the DNA of a human cell,is needed to better understand the behavior of chromosomes during celldivision, with the ultimate goal of understanding the specific genescontributing to specific diseases and disabilities. (MSE)Descriptors: *DNA; *Genetic Engineering; Objectives; *Research Needs;*Research Projects; *Scientific Research Identifiers: *Human Genome Project EJ393712 EC220422 Congenital Syndromes and Mildly Handicapped Students: Implications forSpecial Educators. Smith, Sandra M. Remedial and Special Education (RASE), v10 n3 p20-30 May-Jun 1989 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); PROJECT DESCRIPTION (141); NON-CLASSROOM MATERIAL (055) Journal Announcement: CIJDEC89 Target Audience: Teachers; Practitioners Many learning disabilities or cases of mild retardation are due to medicallydiagnosable, congenital syndromes, such as fetal alcohol syndrome, sexchromosome abnormalities, multiple anomaly syndromes, phenylketonuria, andTourette Syndrome. These syndromes are discussed, and suggestions are givenfor special education management. (Author/JDD) Descriptors: *Clinical Diagnosis; *Congenital Impairments; *EducationalPractices; Elementary Secondary Education; *Learning Disabilities; *Mild MentalRetardation; Preschool Education EJ356791 EC200006 Genetic Counseling. Exceptional Parent, v17 n5 p44-45,47,49 Jul-Aug 1987 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); POSITION PAPER (120); PROJECTDESCRIPTION (141) Journal Announcement: CIJNOV87 Target Audience: Parents Information is presented on a number of tests used in genetic counseling(e.g., genetic evaluation, chromosome evaluation, consideration ofmultifactorial conditions, prenatal testing, and chorionic villus sampling)which help parents with one disabled child make family planning decisions. (CB)Descriptors: *Congenital Impairments; Decision Making; *Disabilities; *FamilyPlanning; *Genetics; *High Risk Persons; Medical Services; *Parent Attitudes;Personal Narratives Identifiers: *Genetic Counseling EJ327107 PS513592 X Chromosome Abnormalities and Cognitive Development: Implications forUnderstanding Normal Human Development. Walzer, Stanley Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry and Allied Disciplines, v26 n2p177-84 Mar 1985 Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); RESEARCH REPORT (143) Journal Announcement: CIJMAR86 Argues that knowledge from studies of individuals with sex chromosomeabnormalities can further understanding of aspects of normal human development.Studies of XO girls, XXY boys, XXX girls, and males with a fragile Xchromosome are summarized to demonstrate how results contribute to knowledgeabout normal cognitive development and about developmental problems of childrenhaving no sex chromosome abnormalities. (RH) Descriptors: *Children; *Cognitive Development; *Cognitive Processes;*Developmental Disabilities; *Females; Genetics; Learning Disabilities; *Males;Pathology Identifiers: *Chromosome Abnormalities; Developmental Patterns; NormalChildren ED296515 EC210283 Social and Psychological Aspects of Genetic Disorders: A SelectedBibliography. National Center for Education in Maternal and Child Health, Washington, DC. Sep 1986; 55p. Available From: National Center for Education in Maternal and ChildHealth, 38th and R Streets, N.W., Washington, DC 20057. EDRS Price - MF01/PC03 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: BIBLIOGRAPHY (131) Geographic Source: U.S.; District of Columbia Journal Announcement: RIEDEC88 Government: Federal This bibliography addresses the social and psychologicalaspects of genetic disorders. The entries are organized by the followingtopics: adoption, chromosomal anomalies, clergy involvement and pastoral care,coping, decision making, disabilities and chronic illness, education, ethicaland legal issues, family dynamics, genetic counseling, genetic screening,mourning and grieving, prenatal diagnosis, siblings, social work intervention,specific disorders, and support groups. For each of the almost 500 items, theauthor, publication date, title, and other bibliographic information areprovided. Appendices include an explanation of the computerized literatureretrieval services of the National Library of Medicine, a description ofselected databases available on the MEDLARS network, and a list of the sevenRegional Medical Libraries across the United States which coordinate onlinesearch services with the National Library of Medicine. (JDD) Descriptors: Adoption; Audiovisual Aids; Clergy; Clinical Diagnosis;Congenital Impairments; Coping; Counseling; Decision Making; *Disabilities;Diseases; Ethics; Family Life; Genetic Engineering; *Genetics; Grief; HandicapIdentification; *Heredity; Intervention; Legal Problems; Library Services;Medicine; *Prenatal Influences; *Psychology; Screening Tests; Siblings; *SocialInfluences; Social Support Groups; Social Work Identifiers: Chromosome Abnormalities ANGELMAN SYNDROME EJ496206 EC610081 Angelman Syndrome: Genetic Mechanisms and Relationship to Prader-WilliSyndrome. Smith, Arabella Australia and New Zealand Journal of Developmental Disabilities, v19 n4 p259-68 1994 ISSN: 0726-3864 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); REVIEW LITERATURE (070) Journal Announcement: CIJMAY95 Research points to two distinct regions within the Prader-Willi chromosomeregion: one for Prader Willi syndrome and one for Angelman syndrome. Geneticmechanisms in Angelman syndrome are complex, and at present, three mechanismsare recognized: maternal deletion, paternal uniparental disomy, and anondeleted nondisomic form. (Author/JDD) Descriptors: Congenital Impairments; Cytology; *Developmental Disabilities; *Disability Identification; *Genetics; Heredity Identifiers: *Angelman Syndrome; Prader Willi Syndrome FRAGILE-X SYNDROME EJ454007 CE524395 The Most Common Cause of Learning Difficulties: A Profile of Fragile-XSyndrome and Its Implications for Education. Gibb, Charles Educational Research, v34 n3 p221-28 Win 1992 ISSN: 0013-1881 Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); REVIEW LITERATURE (070) Journal Announcement: CIJAPR93 Fragile X Syndrome, a common inherited disorder involving a fragile site onthe x-chromosome, results in significant speech and language problems anddiminished cognitive/intellectual functioning. Improved accuracy of diagnosisand the strong heritability component means that schools increasingly will befaced with the issues involved in educating students who have the syndrome. (SK) Descriptors: *Cognitive Ability; Congenital Impairments; *LearningDisabilities; *Mental Disorders; Teaching Methods Identifiers: *Fragile X Syndrome EJ406603 CG537288 School Psychology and Medical Diagnosis: The Fragile X Syndrome. Simensen, Richard J.; Rogers, R. Curtis Psychology in the Schools, v26 n4 p380-89 Oct 1989 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); PROJECT DESCRIPTION (141) Journal Announcement: CIJSEP90 A fragile site on the X chromosome has been implicated in developmentaldisabilities among both males and females. Data are presented on thecharacteristics and treatment of fragile X syndrome patients that can assistthe school psychologist in program planning and appropriate referral.(Author/TE) Descriptors: Clinical Diagnosis; *Developmental Disabilities; Genetics;Interdisciplinary Approach; *Medical Evaluation; Referral; *SchoolPsychologists;*Student Needs Identifiers: *Fragile X Syndrome EJ405345 EC222825 Cytogenetic Survey for Autistic Fragile X Carriers in a Mental RetardationCenter. Cantu, Eduardo S.; And Others American Journal on Mental Retardation, v94 n4 p442-47 Jan 1990 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); RESEARCH REPORT (143) Journal Announcement: CIJAUG90 Target Audience: Researchers The cytogenetic survey of 67 individuals previously identified as havingmental retardation and autistic behaviors revealed only 1.5 percent with thefragile X chromosome. The finding suggests that most persons with fragile Xsyndrome do not have autistic behaviors severe enough to be identified as asecondary psychiatric diagnosis. (Author/DB) Descriptors: *Autism; Clinical Diagnosis; Congenital Impairments; Genetics;*Incidence; Institutionalized Persons; *Mental Retardation; *MultipleDisabilities; Psychiatry Identifiers: *Fragile X Syndrome ED376631 EC303458 Male-Female Characteristics of Fragile X Syndrome. Caron, Jackie Jan 1994; 21p. EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: REVIEW LITERATURE (070); PROJECT DESCRIPTION (141) Geographic Source: U.S.; New Mexico Journal Announcement: RIEAPR95 Fragile X syndrome is the most common cause of mental retardation next toDown syndrome. The syndrome is more prevalent in males because they only haveone X chromosome, where the gene for fragile X is carried, while women have twoX chromosomes and the normal gene can compensate for the affected chromosome.Certain physical features are associated with the syndrome, such as elongatedfaces and hyperextensible finger joints. Children with fragile X have IQs thatdecline as they become adults. Language problems affect all males with fragileX, even those that have a normal IQ. Many prepubertal males may haveborderline IQs, learning disabilities, attention deficits, and hyperactivity.Primary weaknesses include arithmetic, short-term memory, and signs of autisticbehavior that lasts into adulthood. Women with fragile X show milder symptomsthan men, both in physical and cognitive problems. One of the main treatmentsfor fragile X is folic acid, along with special education, language therapy,occupational therapy, and psychotherapy. Genetic counseling is very importantfor anyone who is aware of having or being a carrier of the fragile X syndrome.(Contains 12 references.) (JDD) Descriptors: Adults; Autism; Children; *Cognitive Development; *CongenitalImpairments; Elementary Secondary Education; Females; Genetics; Heredity;Incidence; Intervention; Males; *Mental Retardation; *Sex Differences; *Symptoms(Individual Disorders) Identifiers: *Fragile X Syndrome KABUKI MAKE-UP SYNDROME The name describes the prominent facial characteristics of children with thisdisorder. The following are excerpts from the info in the NORD databaseregarding Kabuki Make-up Syndrome. Symptoms One of the most distinguishing features of Kabuki Make-Up Syndrome is theunusual facial features. The opening between the upper and lower eyelids isabnormally long and one third of the lower eyelid is turned outward. The tipof the nose may be broad and depressed and the ears may be large and malformed.The eyebrows of patients with Kabuki Make-Up Syndrome may be high and arched.The palate of the mouth may be cleft or have a high arch, and the upper andlower teeth may not meet properly (malocclusion). These unusual facial features resemble the make-up of actors in a Japanesetraditional play called "Kabuki". Many patients with Kabuki Make-Up Syndromehave a sideways curvature of the spine, a short fifth finger that curves inward,and abnormalities of the vertebrae, hands and hip joint. All patients withKabuki Make-Up Syndrome have mental retardation ranging from mild to severe.Short stature and abnormal skin ridge patterns on the fingers, toes, palms ofthe hands and soles of the feet are common. Early development of breasts infemales and heart defects have been found in a few patients with Kabuki Make-UpSyndrome. Causes The majority of cases of Kabuki Make-Up Syndrome are thought to occur for noapparent reason (sporadic). Three patients recorded in the medical literaturehad abnormalities on the Y chromosome leading researchers to believe it may beinherited as an autosomal dominant trait. Affected Populations Kabuki Make-Up Syndrome is a very rare disorder that affects males and femalesin equal numbers. There have been 70 cases reported in the medical literature.The majority of cases have occurred in people of Japanese ancestry. Cases ofKabuki Make-Up Syndrome have also been reported in Canada, Italy, Latin America,Germany, Libya, and the United States. Therapies: Standard Patients with Kabuki Make-Up Syndrome may benefit from orthopedic care forprevention of scoliosis. Physical therapy and cosmetic surgery may also behelpful. Physical therapy may benefit in the prevention of scoliosis. Geneticcounseling may be of benefit for patients and their families. KLINEFELTER'S SYNDROME EJ377445 CS736623 Developmental Arrest at the Logographic Stage: Impaired Literacy Functions inKlinefelter's XXXY Syndrome. Seymour, Philip H. K.; Evans, Henryka M. Journal of Research in Reading, v11 n2 p133-51 Sep 1988 Special Issue: Cognitive Processes in Reading Disability. Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); RESEARCH REPORT (143) Journal Announcement: CIJFEB89 Reports a case study of the reading and spelling processes of adevelopmentally disabled child indicating that there was almost a complete lackof alphabetic functions, that reading appeared to be based on a "logographiclexicon," and that spelling was based on a letter sequence generator. (RS)Descriptors: Case Studies; Cognitive Processes; *Developmental Disabilities;Dyslexia; Elementary Education; Phoneme Grapheme Correspondence; ReadingDifficulties; Reading Research; Reading Skills; *Sight Vocabulary; *Spelling;*Word Recognition Identifiers: *Chromosome Abnormalities; Logographs; Spelling Growth; SpellingResearch LESCH-NYHAN DISEASE ED370289 EC303020 Lesch-Nyhan Disease. Barabas, Gabor, Ed. Matheny School and Hospital, Peapack, NJ. Matheny Bulletin, v3 n2 spec iss Fall 1993 11p.; Funding was provided by NYCOR, Inc. EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: SERIAL (022) Geographic Source: U.S.; New Jersey Journal Announcement: RIEOCT94 This special edition explores the serious genetic disorder, Lesch-NyhanDisease (LND), which is characterized by severe dystonia, spasticity, speechimpairment, renal disease, varying degrees of cognitive deficit, and,especially, compulsive self-injury. The information provided is based onexperience at the Matheny School and Hospital (New Jersey) and reflects thatinstitution's philosophy of individualized treatment and development of skillsnecessary to self-direct one's life, regardless of the degree of disability. Inthe first section, an overview of LND is provided in tandem with a column ofobservations and comments by staff at the school about a specific case. Latersections focus on self-injurious behavior, health care, adapted equipment,speech/communication/feeding, education, and leisure/recreation. (Contains 11references.) (DB) Descriptors: Behavior Change; *Congenital Impairments; Diseases; Genetics;Individual Characteristics; *Intervention; Mental Retardation; PhysicalDisabilities; Residential Schools; *Self Injurious Behavior; *SevereDisabilities; Special Schools; Speech Impairments; *Symptoms (IndividualDisorders) Identifiers: *Lesch Nyhan Syndrome; Matheny School and Hospital NJ EJ451516 EC604069 Cognitive Abilities of Patients with Lesch-Nyhan Disease. Anderson, Lowell T.; And Others Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders, v22 n2 p189-203 Jun 1992 ISSN: 0162-3257 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); RESEARCH REPORT (143) Journal Announcement: CIJFEB93 Target Audience: Researchers Parents of 42 children (ages 2-32) with Lesch-Nyhan disease were questionedconcerning the subjects' behavior patterns. Grouping of responses into ninecategories of cognitive skills indicated that only one boy showed anysignificant cognitive impairment. Despite evidence of good cognitive andemotional skills, subjects were academically delayed, with only 15 percent atgrade level in math and reading. (Author/DB) Descriptors: *Academic Achievement; Behavior Patterns; Children; CognitiveAbility; *Cognitive Development; Congenital Impairments; Males; MathematicsAchievement; *Neurological Impairments; Reading Achievement; Special HealthProblems Identifiers: *Lesch Nyhan Syndrome ED277197 EC191704 The Use of Biofeedback in Treating the Self-Mutilative Behaviors of a Childwith Lesch-Nyhan Syndrome: A Pilot Study. Carmen, Jeffrey A.; And Others 1985; 12p. EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: RESEARCH REPORT (143) Geographic Source: U.S.; New York Journal Announcement: RIEMAY87 The pilot study focused on the effective design of adaptive biofeedbackequipment for use in the control of self-mutilating behaviors in individualswith Lesch-Nyhan syndrome, typically characterized by apasticity, mentalretardation, and violent biting of the lips and fingers. Utilizing anelectromyographic (EMG) monitor and a custom-designed relay connected to eithera computer game or a tape player, a 15-year-old male learned to control suddenhigh levels of arousal-related muscular tension which were the antecedents ofself-abuse. A subsequent study of the experimental treatment protocol (ratherthan the viability of the instrumentation) is proposed. (Author/JW) Descriptors: Adolescents; *Behavior Disorders; Behavior Modification;*Biofeedback; Electronic Equipment; *Mental Retardation; *Multiple Disabilities;Self Control; Self Destructive Behavior; *Self Mutilation Identifiers: *Electromyography; *Lesch Nyhan Syndrome LOWE'S SYNDROME ED290243 EC201704 Living with Lowe's Syndrome. A Guide for Families, Friends, andProfessionals. Lowe's Syndrome Association, Inc., West Lafayette, IN. 1987 24p.; This publication was made possible in part by a grant from the WillenDrug Co., Baltimore, Maryland. Available From: Lowe's Syndrome Association, Inc., 222 Lincoln St., WestLafayette, IN 47906 (single copy free, $0.50 each additional copy). EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: NON-CLASSROOM MATERIAL (055) Geographic Source: U.S.; Indiana Journal Announcement: RIEJUN88 Target Audience: Parents; Practitioners The document describes Lowe's syndrome, a hereditary condition that affectsonly males and is typically diagnosed during the first year of life. Effectsof Lowe's syndrome on the eyes (cataracts, glaucoma, corneal degeneration, andstrabismus) are discussed, as well as related problems with the central nervoussystem, muscles, kidneys, bones, and teeth. Special health concerns arisingfrom these effects include metabolic imbalance, respiratory illness, andconstipation. Additional topics addressed in the guide are prognosis, relatedinformation on genetics (including females as carriers and genetic counseling),ongoing research efforts, developmental and educational programming, and familydynamics. The booklet concludes with a brief description of Lowe's SyndromeAssociation, a nonprofit organization of parents and professionals founded in1983. (JW) Descriptors: *Congenital Impairments; *Developmental Disabilities; Genetics;Heredity; Identification; Intervention; *Males; Neurological Organization;Parent Child Relationship; Visual Impairments Identifiers: *Lowes Syndrome For information, contact: Lowe Syndrome Association, Inc. Secretary 222 Lincoln Street West Lafayette, IN 47906 (317) 743-3634 (Voice) The Lowe Syndrome Association, Inc. (LSA) fosters communication among familiesof boys with this genetic disease. LSA provides information on the syndrome andsupports research. It also sponsors conferences every 2 to 3 years. LSA publishes a booklet about Lowe's Syndrome and the group. A publication listis available. Serial publication: On the Beam (newsletter), three issues peryear--news on research, letters and photographs from parents, and articles byprofessionals in the field. PRADER-WILLI SYNDROME EJ491034 EC609564 Prader-Willi Syndrome: Quality of Life Issues in Home, School and Community. James, Terrance N.; Brown, Roy I. Australia and New Zealand Journal of Developmental Disabilities, v18 n4 p253-60 1993 Special Congress Issue II. ISSN: 0726-3864 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); REVIEW LITERATURE (070) Journal Announcement: CIJFEB95 Management of psychosocial aspects of Prader-Willi syndrome is considered forseveral quality of life issues, including social change, increased lifeexpectancy, parent stress, child stress, independence, residential options, andaccess to services. (JDD) Descriptors: *Developmental Disabilities; Normalization (Disabilities);*Quality of Life; Stress Management Identifiers: *Prader Willi Syndrome EJ465483 EC606254 Beneficial Effects of Exercise on Aerobic Capacity and Body Composition inAdults with Prader-Willi Syndrome. Silverthorn, Kathryn H.; Hornak, James E. American Journal on Mental Retardation, v97 n6 p654-58 May 1993 ISSN: 0895-8017 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); RESEARCH REPORT (143) Journal Announcement: CIJNOV93 Six adults with Prader Willi syndrome who participated in a six-month walkingprogram showed significant differences in resting heart rate, aerobic capacity,body fat percentage, and weight loss, compared to a control group of fivenonparticipants. (Author/JDD) Descriptors: Adults; *Aerobics; *Body Composition; Body Weight; CongenitalImpairments; *Exercise; Heart Rate; *Mental Retardation; *Obesity; Outcomes ofTreatment; Physical Fitness Identifiers: *Prader Willi Syndrome EJ450128 EC604048 Prader-Willi Syndrome: Causes, Characteristics, Interventions, Long-TermConsequences. Otto, Tracy L.; Barber, William H. B.C. Journal of Special Education, v16 n1 p38-50 1992 ISSN: 0704-7509 Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); PROJECT DESCRIPTION (141) Journal Announcement: CIJJAN93 An overview of Prader-Willi syndrome, the most common form of dysmorphicgenetic obesity associated with mental retardation, is presented, with anemphasis on associated causes, characteristics, diagnosis and counseling,intervention, and long-term consequences. (Author/DB) Descriptors: Clinical Diagnosis; *Congenital Impairments; Etiology; *Genetics;Intervention; *Mental Retardation; Obesity; Special Health Problems; *Symptoms(Individual Disorders) Identifiers: *Prader Willi Syndrome EJ411819 EC231004 The Speech and Language Characteristics of Children with Prader-WilliSyndrome. Kleppe, Sallie A.; And Others Journal of Speech and Hearing Disorders, v55 n2 p300-09 May 1990 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); RESEARCH REPORT (143) Journal Announcement: CIJDEC90 Target Audience: Researchers The study investigated the communicative development of 18 children (ages 8-17) with Prader-Willi syndrome. A variety of communicative deficiencies werefound in the children's speech, language, voice, and fluency. (Author/DB) Descriptors: Adolescents; Children; *Communication Skills; *CongenitalImpairments; *Special Health Problems; *Speech Handicaps Identifiers: *Prader Willi Syndrome EJ388787 EC212411 Phonologic Abilities of a Preschool Child with Prader-Willi Syndrome. Dyson, Alice T.; Lombardino, Linda J. Journal of Speech and Hearing Disorders, v54 n1 p44-48 Feb 1989 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); PROJECT DESCRIPTION (141) Journal Announcement: CIJSEP89 A case study follows the development of phonologic abilities in a child withPrader-Willi syndrome, during her enrollment in language and phonologicremediation from age 2:7 to 6:1. Changes in her phonetic inventory, in the setof phonemes used correctly, and in phonologic processes are described.(Author/JDD) Descriptors: *Articulation Impairments; Case Studies; *Congenital Impairments;Intervention; *Language Acquisition; *Phonology; *Physical Disabilities;Preschool Education; *Remedial Instruction Identifiers: Early Intervention; *Prader Willi Syndrome EJ373966 RC506809 Transdisciplinary Intervention by an Itinerant School Nurse in Two RuralClassrooms. Stile, Stephen W.; Bentley, Nona Rural Special Education Quarterly, v8 n3 p27-32 1988 Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); PROJECT DESCRIPTION (141) Journal Announcement: CIJNOV88 Reports two transdisciplinary interventions conducted by an Itinerant schoolnurse. The case studies presented involve a Prader-Willi syndrome studentenrolled in a class for the trainable mentally handicapped and a studentenrolled in a regular fourth grade classroom but considered at risk forplacement in a behavior disorders setting. (JHZ) Descriptors: Behavior Change; *Behavior Modification; Behavior Problems; CaseStudies; Contingency Management; Elementary Secondary Education; *RuralEducation; *School Nurses; *Special Education Identifiers: *Itinerant Nurses; Single Subject Designs; *TrandisciplinaryApproach EJ359477 EC200355 Some Considerations in the Education and Management of the Child with Prader-Willi Syndrome in the Special Education Classroom. Lupi, Marsha H.; Porcella, John E. Techniques, v3 n3 p230-35 Jul 1987 Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); DISSERTATION (041) Journal Announcement: CIJJAN88 Target Audience: Practitioners The paper summarizes characteristics of the child with Prader-Willi Syndrome(characterized by insatiable appetite and usually mild to moderate mentalretardation). Suggestions are offered for the environmental and behavioralmanagement of the Prader Willi student. (DB) Descriptors: Behavior Change; Body Weight; *Eating Habits; ElementarySecondary Education; *Mental Retardation; *Special Health Problems Identifiers: *Prader Willi Syndrome EJ343953 EC190883 Description of an Innovative Intervention Program for Individuals with Prader-Willi Syndrome. Caldwell, Mary Lou; Taylor, Ronald L. B. C. Journal of Special Education, v10 n2 p183-87 1986 Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); PROJECT DESCRIPTION (141) Journal Announcement: CIJMAR87 A successful five-week weight reduction program for individuals with Prader-Willi Syndrome is described. The program combines diet and exercise, andparticipants are taught to make menu choices within the framework of daily foodexchange allotments. (Author/JW) Descriptors: Daily Living Skills; *Dietetics; Eating Habits; Exercise;*Obesity; *Special Health Problems Identifiers: *Prader Willi Syndrome ED349770 EC301516 Issues in Nutrition for Adolescents with Chronic Illnesses and Disabilities. CYDLINE Reviews. Minnesota Univ., Minneapolis. National Center for Youth with Disabilities.;Society for Adolescent Medicine, Independence, MO. Aug 1992 42p.; Sponsoring Agency: Health Resources and Services Administration (DHHS/PHS),Rockville, MD. Office for Maternal and Child Health Services. EDRS Price - MF01/PC02 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: BIBLIOGRAPHY (131) Geographic Source: U.S.; Missouri Journal Announcement: RIEFEB93 This annotated bibliography lists print materials, training and educationalmaterials, and programs concerned with nutrition for youth with chronicillnesses and disabilities. Basic bibliographic information and a briefabstract are provided for each of the 87 bibliographic citations which datefrom 1980 through 1991. Citations are organized into the following categories:adolescent nutrition; nutrition and disability; mentalretardation/developmental disabilities; chronic illnesses (arthritis, asthma,cerebral palsy, cystic fibrosis, diabetes, digestive system diseases,phenylketonuria, and Prader Willi syndrome); and learning disabilities.Listings for the 16 training materials also include a brief abstract and sourceinformation. Materials include booklets, handouts, videotape recordings, andcurriculum guides. Finally, abstracts and contact information is given forthree nutrition programs. (DB) Descriptors: Adolescent Development; Asthma; Cerebral Palsy; ChildDevelopment; *Child Health; *Chronic Illness; Developmental Disabilities;Diabetes; Dietetics; *Disabilities; Instructional Materials; Mental Retardation;*Nutrition; Nutrition Instruction; *Public Health; Resources; *Special HealthProblems Identifiers: Arthritis; Cystic Fibrosis; Digestive System Diseases;Phenylketonuria; Prader Willi Syndrome ED252006 EC171162 Prader-Willi Disease: A Case Study. Forbus, William R., III 1983; 80p.; Master's Thesis, University of Georgia. EDRS Price - MF01/PC04 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: THESIS (042); PROJECT DESCRIPTION (141) Geographic Source: U.S.; Georgia Journal Announcement: RIEMAY85 A case study focuses on the characteristics and physical management of a 15-year-old with Prader-Willi Syndrome, a birth defect associated with hypotonia,insatiable appetite, hypogonadism, central nervous system dysfunction, andabnormal growth and development . A literature review addresses studiesdealing with behavior modification of obesity and continuous eating, nutritioncounseling, and physical activity intervention. Interventions in the casestudy included those programmed by trained personnel in the following serviceareas: adapted physical education, behavior modification, nutrition, nursing,dormitory living, social work, education, and speech and language. Data arereported for behavior, weight, and adjustment to physical activity. Analysisof data from the S's developmental and medical histories, continuousevaluations, previous staffing summaries, motor proficiency tests, exercisemetabolism tests, progress reports and staff and parent survey forms revealedthat the S made considerable progress in reaching her program goals. She wasfound to demonstrate most of the characteristics classic to the Prader-Willipopulation. Recommendations were made for programming. (CL) Descriptors: *Adapted Physical Education; *Behavior Modification; *CongenitalImpairments; Multiple Disabilities; *Nutrition; *Obesity Identifiers: *Prader Willi Syndrome WILLIAMS SYNDROME Williams Syndrome is a very rare condition which statistics state affect approximately 1 in 20, 000 babies. It is an inborn error of metabolism cause as yet unknown, which can leave a degree of brain, heart and kidney damage, ranging from mild to severe. The symptoms, characteristics and behaviors of Williams Syndrome are as follows: Elfin/Pixie Facial Features : a broad forehead, upturned nose, wide mouth, full lips, widely spaced teeth, small chin, puffiness around the eyes, small head, depressed nasal bridge. Stellate Eye Pattern: blue and green-eyed children may have a star-like pattern in the iris. Brown-eyed children don't usually display this pattern. Low Birth Weight: many of these children are labeled failure to thrive but do show a slow but steady growth and weight gains. Vomiting, gagging, diarrhea or constipation are common in infancy. Heart Disorders: can range from non-existent, to slow murmurs, to aorticor pulmonary stenoses (narrowing). Elevated Serum Calcium Level: this sometimes occurs in the first two years of infancy. Hernias: umbilical, inguinal Apparent Sensitive Hearing: can overreact to volume or type of noise (high-pitched motors, machines). Development Delays: sitting, walking, language, gross and fine motor skills. Friendly/Talkative Personality: unafraid of strangers, have some attention problems, sometimes described as impulsive. Possible mild mental retardation: attention deficit-type behaviors, good long-term memory. Premature puberty Williams Syndrome is a genetic disorder first described by Dr. J.C.P. Williamsof New Zealand. Ws is considered rare and is thought to occur in about 1:20,000births. Research has indicated that individuals with Williams Syndrome aremissing an elastin gene on chromosome #7. This deletion could account for manyof the features of Williams Syndrome, although there may be other geneticmaterial missing from the same region. The extent of additional deletions mayvary and be responsible for some of the medical and developmental difficultiesexperienced by the affected individual. EJ485021 EC608704 Four Case Histories and a Literature Review of Williams Syndrome and AutisticBehavior. Gillberg, Christopher; Rasmussen, Peder Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders, v24 n3 p381-93 Jun 1994 ISSN: 0162-3257 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); REVIEW LITERATURE (070); PROJECTDESCRIPTION (141) Journal Announcement: CIJOCT94 This paper summarizes the case histories of four young children withconcurrent autistic disorder and Williams syndrome. Williams syndromecomprises a peculiar facial appearance, learning disorder, and oftenhypercalcemia, mild microcephaly, large blood vessel stenosis, and a specificbehavioral phenotype. Literature on Williams syndrome is reviewed, focusing onprevalence, biochemical abnormalities, chromosome abnormalities, and brainmorphology. (JDD) Descriptors: *Autism; *Behavior Patterns; Case Studies; Incidence; *MultipleDisabilities; *Symptoms (Individual Disorders); Young Children Identifiers: *Williams Syndrome For more information, contact: Williams Syndrome Association PO Box 297 Clawson, MI 48017-0279 810-541-3630 CAWS: Canadian Association for Williams Syndrome (c/o Cathy Wilson) PO Box 2115 Vancouver, BC Can V6B 3T5 403-887-5257 Internet Resources Internet Listservs Top of PageBack to ERIC MenuBack to CEC Home Page copyright © 1996 ERIC Clearinghouse on Disabilities and Gifted Education URL: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm WT02-B20-83IA001-000011-B031-95http://www.cec.sped.org:80/faq/deaf.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101075211 text/html 21612HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 07:52:19 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 09-Sep-96 21:16:00 GMTContent-length: 21420Content-type: text/html Deaf Deaf-FAQ (last updated July 14, 1996) THE ERIC CLEARINGHOUSE ON DISABILITIES AND GIFTEDEDUCATION (ERIC EC) The Council for Exceptional Children 1920Association Drive Reston, VA 20191 Toll Free: 1-800-328-0272 TTY: 703-264-9449 E-mail: ericec@cec.sped.org Internet: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm Do you have any information on parenting or teaching deaf children? This file includes information about deaf children. At the end of this file are links to Internet resources and Internet listservs (discussion groups) where you can obtain more specific information on this topic. There may be ERIC digests on related topics. You can read the full text of ERIC EC digests under our listing at the U.S. Department of Education, Office of Educational Research and Improvement. Enclosed are several citations from the ERIC database. These records are asample of the kind of information you can find in the ERIC database. For morecitations on your topic of interest, you may want to search the ERIC database yourself on the Internet. References with ED (ERIC Document) and EJ (ERIC Journal) identifiers are cited inthe ERIC database; for example, ED333123 or EJ333999. ERIC documents areavailable in microfiche collections at more than 825 locations worldwide (check yourlocal college or public library). They can also be ordered for a fee through the ERICDocument Reproduction Service (EDRS) at 1-800-443-ERIC. References with anEJ (ERIC Journal) number are available for a fee from the originating journal (checkwith your local college or public library), through interlibrary loan services, or fromarticle reproduction clearinghouses, such as UMI: 1-800-248-0360; or ISI:1-800-523-1850. ERIC descriptors (search terms) used: Deafness or Hearing Impairments EJ457537 EC605080 Hearing Parents and Deaf Children: Some Perspectives on Sign Communication and Service Delivery. Ritter-Brinton, Kathryn; Stewart, David American Annals of the Deaf, v137 n2 p85-91 Apr 1992 ISSN: 0002-726X Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); RESEARCH REPORT (143) Journal Announcement: CIJJUN93 The perspectives of seven hearing parents on their use of sign communication with their deaf children were evaluated. All parents had chosen Signed English rather than American Sign Language (ASL). Parents' understanding of ASL varied greatly; they reported difficulty in developing personal and family fluency in Signed English; and they identified specific support needs. (DB) Descriptors: American Sign Language; Children; Communication Skills; *Deafness; Delivery Systems; *Difficulty Level; Family Relationship; *Interpersonal Communication; Needs Assessment; *Parent Attitudes; Parent Child Relationship; Parent Education; *Sign Language Identifiers: *Signed English EJ428558 EC600813 The Great Debates: Where, How, and What to Teach Deaf Children. Moores, Donald F. American Annals of the Deaf, v136 n1 p35-37 Mar 1991 ISSN: 0002-726X Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); POSITION PAPER (120) Journal Announcement: CIJNOV91 This article reflects on issues in educational placement, alternative communication modes, and curriculum decisions for educating deaf children. Recent trends and conflicts are viewed as interrelated challenges with implications for the future of education of the hearing impaired. (PB) Descriptors: *Communication (Thought Transfer); Curriculum Development; *Deafness; *Educational Trends; Elementary Secondary Education; *Student Placement ED299779 EC211058 Handbook for Parents: Project CHIME. Nassau County Board of Cooperative Educational Services, Westbury, N.Y. 1987; 14p.; A product of the Division of Special Education Program for the Hearing Impaired. For related documents, see EC 211 057-059. Sponsoring Agency: Office of Special Education and Rehabilitative Services (ED), Washington, DC. Grant No: G008401386 EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: NON-CLASSROOM MATERIAL (055) Geographic Source: U.S.; New York Journal Announcement: RIEMAR89 Target Audience: Parents Project CHIME (Children with Hearing Impairments in Mainstreamed Environments) develops and implements strategies that promote effective preschool mainstreaming of selected hearing-impaired children, ages 2-5 in Nassau County, New York. Written for parents of preschool children with hearing impairments, this handbook contains background information on mainstreaming, hearing loss, and the Project CHIME program. Project CHIME emphasizes an auditory/oral approach to teaching communication, and encourages children to use residual hearing, hearing aids, and auditory trainers to develop their hearing and oral speech. Project CHIME also emphasizes the importance of mainstreaming in the preschool environment to allow children with hearing loss to develop relationships with their hearing peers. The handbook covers such topics as parent involvement and training, role of CHIME staff, types of hearing loss, and use of hearing aids and auditory trainers. (JDD) Descriptors: *Auditory Training; Aural Learning; Hearing Aids; *Hearing Impairments; Intervention; *Mainstreaming; *Oral Communication Method; *Parent Participation; Partial Hearing; Preschool Children; Preschool Education; Speech Communication; *Student Placement Identifiers: *Early Intervention ED350818 EC301646 Toward Effective Public School Programs for Deaf Students: Context, Process, and Outcomes. Special Education Series. Kluwin, Thomas N., Ed.; And Others 1992; 264p. ISBN: 0-8077-3160-9 Available From: Teachers College Press, Columbia University, New York, NY 10027. Document Not Available from EDRS. Language: English Document Type: BOOK (010); COLLECTION (020) Geographic Source: U.S.; District of Columbia Journal Announcement: RIEMAR93 Target Audience: Practitioners This book's aim is to define and clarify the issues involved in the education of deaf and hard of hearing children in local public schools, to bring to light the accumulating research in this area, and to recommend actions for organizing effective educational programs. The book offers a perspective on the current confusion in the field of deaf education, examines how different deaf constituencies have unique needs, describes how the family contributes to and makes demands on the school system, and discusses how deaf children are succeeding and losing out. Part I, called "The Context of the Educational Program," contains the following papers: "An Historical Perspective on School Placement" (Donald F. Moores); "What Does 'Local Public School' Program Mean?" (Thomas N. Kluwin); "Ethnic and Cultural Considerations" (Valerie J. Janesick and Donald F. Moores); "How Family Factors Influence School Achievement" (Thomas N. Kluwin and Martha Gonter Gaustad); "Issues of Educational Interpreting" (Joe D. Stedt) and "Understanding the Context of Local Public Education" (Martha Gonter Gaustad). Part II, "The Process and Outcomes of Schooling," presents "Patterns of Communication among Deaf and Hearing Adolescents" (Martha Gonter Gaustad and Thomas N. Kluwin); "The Role of Sport and Extracurricular Activities in Shaping Socialization Patterns" (David A. Stewart and Michael S. Stinson); "Students' Views of Their Social Relationships" (Michael S. Stinson and Kathleen Whitmire); "Considering the Efficacy of Mainstreaming from the Classroom Perspective" (Thomas N. Kluwin); "Identifying the Contributions of School Factors to the Success of Deaf Students" (Angela O'Donnell and others); "The Career Development of Young People with Hearing Impairments" (Suzanne King); "The Collision of Reality and Expectations" (Donald F. Moores); and "Conclusion: Some Reflections on Defining an Effective Program" (Thomas N. Kluwin). (JDD) Descriptors: Academic Achievement; Athletics; Career Development; Cultural Differences; Deaf Interpreting; *Deafness; Educational History; *Educational Methods; Educational Practices; Elementary Secondary Education; Extracurricular Activities; *Hearing Impairments; *Instructional Effectiveness; Interpersonal Communication; Interpersonal Relationship; *Mainstreaming; Parent School Relationship; Performance Factors; Program Development; Program Effectiveness; *Public Schools; *School Effectiveness; Social Integration; Socialization; Student Placement EJ485072 EC608755 Growing Up Deaf. Grupido, Natalie Perspectives in Education and Deafness, v12 n5 p11,15-17 May-Jun 1994 ISSN: 1051-6204 Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); POSITION PAPER (120) Journal Announcement: CIJOCT94 This narrative of a graduate student with deafness describes her experiences in various educational environments including oral communication, total communication, and mainstreamed. The article emphasizes the role of parents as the child's best advocates and advises parents to trust their own instincts and not accept the authority of professionals without skepticism. (JDD) Descriptors: *Child Advocacy; Child Rearing; *Deafness; Delivery Systems; Educational Practices; Elementary Secondary Education; Higher Education; Mainstreaming; Oral Communication Method; *Parent Role; *Personal Narratives; Sign Language; *Student Placement; Total Communication EJ378884 EC210967 Growing in Silence--The Deaf Adolescent. Garbe, Valerie; Rodda, Michael ACEHI Journal, v14 n2 p59-69 1988 Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); NON-CLASSROOM MATERIAL (055) Journal Announcement: CIJMAR89 This paper discusses problems faced by deaf adolescents in the areas of communication skills, education, the impact of mainstreaming, social interaction, the development of social life, and personal identity and behavior.The problems of deciding on communication methods and on a cultural identity complicate life for hearing-impaired adolescents. (Author/JDD) Descriptors: *Adolescent Development; Adolescents; *Communication Skills; *Deafness; *Educational Experience; *Hearing Impairments; Interaction; Interpersonal Communication; Mainstreaming; Secondary Education; *Social Development; Social Life; Student Behavior EJ487944 EC609137 Educational Programs for Deaf Students. American Annals of the Deaf, v139 n2 p173-257 Apr 1994 Reference Issue ISSN: 0002-726X Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); DIRECTORY (132) Journal Announcement: CIJDEC94 This directory provides information, by state and province, on U.S. and Canadian schools and programs for preschool, elementary, secondary, and postsecondary students who are deaf or hearing impaired. A chart summarizes program types, number of students enrolled, services offered, and communication methodologies. Information on demographic characteristics of deaf students is also provided. (DB) Descriptors: *Deafness; Delivery Systems; Educational Trends; Elementary Secondary Education; Hearing Impairments; Incidence; Mainstreaming; National Surveys; Postsecondary Education; Preschool Education; School Districts; Social Integration; *Special Programs; *Special Schools; State Schools; Student Characteristics Identifiers: Canada; United States ED379947 FL022817 Language, Gesture, and Space. Emmorey, Karen, Ed.; Reilly, Judy S., Ed. 1995; 464p. ISBN: 0-8058-1378-0 Available From: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc., 365 Broadway, Hillsdale, NJ 07642. Document Not Available from EDRS. Language: English Document Type: COLLECTION (020); BOOK (010) Geographic Source: U.S.; New Jersey Journal Announcement: RIEJUL95 A collection of papers addresses a variety of issues regarding the nature and structure of sign language, gesture, and gesture systems. Articles include: "Theoretical Issues Relating Language, Gesture, and Space: An Overview" (Karen Emmorey, Judy S. Reilly); "Real, Surrogate, and Token Space: Grammatical Consequences in ASL American Sign Language" (Scott K. Liddell); "Differential Processing of Topographic and Referential Functions of Space" (Karen Emmorey, David Corina, Ursula Bellugi); "Right Brain and Gesture" (David McNeill, Laura L. Pedelty); "Spatial Mapping in Comparative Discourse Frames" (Elizabeth A. Winston); "On Narrative Discourse and Point of View in Quebec Sign Language" (Christine Poulin, Christopher Miller); "Point of View Expressed Through Shifters" (Elisabeth Engberg-Pedersen); "The Point of View Predicate in American Sign Language" (Diane Lillo-Martin); "Line Segmentation and Narrative Structure: A Study of Eyegaze Behavior in American Sign Language" (Benjamin J. Bahan, Samuel J. Supalla); "A Crosslinguistic Perspective on ASL Verb Agreement" (Wynne D. Janis); "Lexical Tense Markers in American Sign Language" (Debra Aarons, Benjamin J. Bahan, Judy Kegl, Carol Neidle); "Morpho-Syntactic Structure of Aspect and Number Inflections in ASL" (Donald S. Metlay, Ted Supalla); "The Cataclysmic Break between Gesticulation and Sign: Evidence against a Unified Continuum of Gestural Communication" (Jenny L. Singleton, Susan Goldin-Meadow, David McNeill); "The Genesis of Language: How Much Time Is Needed To Generate Arbitrary Symbols in a Sign System?" (Jill. P. Morford, Jenny L. Singleton, Susan Goldin-Meadow); "The Grammar of International Sign: A New Look at Pidgin Languages" (Ted Supalla, Rebecca Webb); "Mental Phonology and Language Comprehension, or What Does That Sign Mistake Mean?" (Rachel I. Mayberry); "When Do Modality Factors Affect the Course of Language Acquisition?" (Virginia Volterra, Jana M. Iverson); "Prelinguistic Gesture in Deaf and Hearing Infants" (Richard P. Meier, Raquel Willerman); and "The Resilience of Language: Mother-Child Interaction and Its Effect on the Gesture Systems of Chinese and American Deaf Children" (Xiao-Lei Wang, Carolyn Mylander, Susan Goldin-Meadow). (MSE) Descriptors: *American Sign Language; *Body Language; Brain Hemisphere Functions; Comparative Analysis; Deafness; Eye Movements; Foreign Countries; Grammar; Infants; Language Acquisition; Language Patterns; Language Research; *Languages; Language Variation; Linguistic Theory; Morphology (Languages); Mothers; Neurological Organization; Parent Child Relationship; *Personal Space; Phonology; Pidgins; *Sign Language; *Spatial Ability; Symbolism; Syntax Identifiers: Chinese People; Quebec EJ475928 EC607598 First-Language Acquisition after Childhood Differs from Second-Language Acquisition: The Case of American Sign Language. Mayberry, Rachel I. Journal of Speech and Hearing Research, v36 n6 p1258-70 Dec 1993 ISSN: 0022-4685 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); RESEARCH REPORT (143) Journal Announcement: CIJMAY94 Target Audience: Researchers This study compared American Sign Language (ASL) abilities in 36 deaf adults who acquired ASL either in early childhood or in later childhood and who were born deaf or later lost their hearing. Subjects who acquired ASL as a second language after early childhood outperformed those who acquired it as a first language at the same age. (Author/DB) Descriptors: Adventitious Impairments; *Age Differences; *American Sign Language; Congenital Impairments; *Deafness; *Language Acquisition; Language Skills; *Second Language Learning EJ430080 FL850019 Directions in Bilingual Education for Deaf Children. Stewart, David A. Teaching English to Deaf and Second-Language Students, v8 n2 p4-9 Win 1990 Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); REVIEW LITERATURE (070) Journal Announcement: CIJDEC91 Discusses trends and future issues in the bilingual education of deaf children, including teacher learning and use of American Sign Language (ASL), the total communication approach, deaf teachers' use of ASL, the coding of English in signs, and signed English and ASL as complementary communication systems. (five references) (CB) Descriptors: *American Sign Language; *Bilingual Education; *Deafness; Educational Trends; *English (Second Language); *Language of Instruction; Second Language Instruction; Sign Language EJ420146 FL520635 Simultaneous Communication: The State of the Art and Proposals for Change. Maxwell, Madeline M. Sign Language Studies, n69 p333-90 Win 1990 Report No: ISSN-0302-1475 Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); REVIEW LITERATURE (070) Journal Announcement: CIJMAY91 A review of the research about languages, modes of expression, and usage rules and related cultural, linguistic, physiological, and sociopolitical issues concludes that more research is needed before any one method of communication can be recommended above others for the effective education of deaf children. (134 references) (CB) Descriptors: *American Sign Language; *Deafness; *Instructional Effectiveness;Language Acquisition; *Language of Instruction; Sign Language; *Total Communication ED347716 EC301327 Which Sign Language System Should Be Used with Young Deaf Children? Greenwood-Logsdon, Marsha 1990; 17p. EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: POSITION PAPER (120) Geographic Source: U.S.; Indiana Journal Announcement: RIEDEC92 This paper examines the evolution of sign language's role in education, beginning with the debate over sign language versus oral communication, followed by the debate over American Sign Language (ASL) versus other sign systems. The paper points out that this debate process is hindering the educational experience for thousands of deaf children and further widening the gap between the "hearing world" and the "deaf world" as hearing people try to impose their opinions on those who are deaf. Research is cited showing that deaf children with deaf parents, who used sign language to communicate, scored better in overall educational achievement and social adjustment than deaf children of hearing parents. American Sign Language is not recommended for use with young deaf children, because the native language of most parents of deaf children is English, the majority of teachers are hearing, and ASL is a spatial language with no written format. The system of Signed English is recommended in its place. Newer, more complex sign systems are not recommended because they have become so complex that they hinder rather than assist the learning process. (Includes nine annotated references) (JDD) Descriptors: *American Sign Language; Communication Skills; Cultural Context; *Deafness; Educational Methods; Educational Practices; Educational Principles; *Educational Trends; Elementary Secondary Education; *Manual Communication; Oral Communication Method; Selection; *Sign Language; *Trend Analysis; Young Children EJ400881 FL850013 ASL and Bilingual Education. Walworth, Margaret Teaching English to Deaf and Second-Language Students, v7 n1 p27-30 Spr 1989 Speech presented on October 28, 1988 (Wausau, WI). Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); CONFERENCE PAPER (150); POSITION PAPER (120) Journal Announcement: CIJMAY90 Explores the use of American Sign Language (ASL) in the bilingual instruction of English as a Second Language for deaf students. Issues addressed include dominant languages, language minorities, legislative and cultural recognition of ASL as an official language, and limited English proficiency. (CB) (Adjunct ERIC Clearinghouse on Literacy Education) Descriptors: *American Sign Language; *Bilingual Education; *Deafness; *English (Second Language); *Language of Instruction; Limited English Speaking; Second Language Instruction Internet Resources Internet Listservs Top of Page Back to ERIC Menu Back to CEC Home Page copyright © 1996 ERIC Clearinghouse on Disabilities and Gifted Education URL: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm WT02-B20-84IA001-000011-B031-111http://www.cec.sped.org:80/faq/downsynd.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101075224 text/html 17320HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 07:52:28 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 09-Sep-96 21:17:00 GMTContent-length: 17128Content-type: text/html DownSynd DownSynd-FAQ (last updated July 14, 1996) THE ERIC CLEARINGHOUSE ON DISABILITIES AND GIFTEDEDUCATION (ERIC EC) The Council for Exceptional Children 1920Association Drive Reston, VA 20191 Toll Free: 1-800-328-0272 TTY: 703-264-9449 E-mail: ericec@cec.sped.org Internet: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm What information can you provide about Down Syndrome? This file includes information about Down Syndrome. At the end of this file are links to Internet resources and Internet listservs (discussion groups) where you can obtain more specific information on this topic. ERIC EC digest E457, "Down Syndrome" provides further information on this topic.You can read the full text of ERIC EC digests under our listing at the U.S. Department of Education, Office of Educational Research and Improvement.Enclosed are several citations from the ERIC database. These records are asample of the kind of information you can find in the ERIC database. For morecitations on your topic of interest, you may want to search the ERIC database yourself on the Internet. References with ED (ERIC Document) and EJ (ERIC Journal) identifiers are cited inthe ERIC database; for example, ED333123 or EJ333999. ERIC documents areavailable in microfiche collections at more than 825 locations worldwide (check yourlocal college or public library). They can also be ordered for a fee through the ERICDocument Reproduction Service (EDRS) at 1-800-443-ERIC. References with anEJ (ERIC Journal) number are available for a fee from the originating journal (checkwith your local college or public library), through interlibrary loan services, or fromarticle reproduction clearinghouses, such as UMI: 1-800-248-0360; or ISI:1-800-523-1850. ERIC descriptors (search terms) used: Downs Syndrome ED386013 EC304216 Down Syndrome, Birth to Adulthood: Giving Families an EDGE. Rynders, John E.; Horrobin, J. Margaret 1996; 344p.; For the 1974 book, see ED 100 087. ISBN: 0-89108-236-0 Available From: Love Publishing Co., 1777 S. Bellaire St., Denver, CO 80222 ($29.95). Document Not Available from EDRS. Language: English Document Type: BOOK (010); NON-CLASSROOM MATERIAL (055); COLLECTION (020) Geographic Source: U.S.; Colorado Journal Announcement: RIEJAN96 Target Audience: Parents; Practitioners This updated book provides a collection of longitudinal perspectives on experiences of individuals with Down Syndrome, from birth to adulthood. The book is an outgrowth of a federally funded early intervention study called Project EDGE (Expanding Developmental Growth through Education). Contents cover the following topics: historical review of developments regarding Down Syndrome (John Rynders), life as a journey (J. Rynders), the new baby's life within the family, (Janet Sophie Thayer), health promotion during the early years (Margaret Horrobin), stimulation of the young child's development (J. Rynders), family adjustment and adaptation (Brian H. Abery), becoming literate and socialized during the school years (J. Rynders), participating in community recreation (J. Rynders et al.), the transition from school to work and independent living (Alan Fletcher), maintaining health into adulthood (M. Horrobin), perspectives of parents and siblings (J. Rynders), and the life views of young adults with Down Syndrome (I. Karon Sherarts). Numerous photographs illustrate the personal accounts. A resource compilation by Shannon Matson lists national organizations on Down Syndrome, assistive technology and communication aids, computers/technology resource centers, recreation resources, books, and journals. Also appended are: information on reading skill stages, tips for adapting common recreation activities for young adults, and a list of assessment instruments and where they can be obtained. (Individual chapters contain references.) (SW) Descriptors: Adapted Physical Education; Adults; *Child Development; Child Health; *Child Rearing; Children; Community Recreation Programs; Daily Living Skills; *Developmental Stages; *Downs Syndrome; Early Experience; Education Work Relationship; *Family Relationship; Health Promotion; Infants; Information Sources; National Organizations; Parent Child Relationship; Parent Role; Personal Narratives; Physical Health; Stimulation; Student Adjustment; Student Development; Student Experience; *Vocational Rehabilitation EJ461888 SP521979 Mainstreaming. Wanted: Just One Friend. Case History. Barringer, Mary Dean Learning, v21 n4 p29 Nov-Dec 1992 ISSN: 0090-3167 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: TEACHING GUIDE (052); JOURNAL ARTICLE (080) Journal Announcement: CIJAUG93 Target Audience: Teachers; Practitioners Describes the process 1 family used to facilitate friendships for their 10-year-old daughter with Down's Syndrome. The article explains to teachers how children who are mainstreamed into regular schools can feel lonely without a support network to provide social interactions that might not otherwise occur. (SM) Descriptors: *Classroom Techniques; Consciousness Raising; Downs Syndrome; Elementary Education; *Family Involvement; Friendship; *Mainstreaming; *Social Networks; Teacher Role EJ389323 IR519730 Integration of Down's Syndrome Children in the Primary School: A Longitudinal Study of Cognitive Development and Academic Attainments. Casey, Wendy; And Others British Journal of Educational Psychology, v58 pt3 p279-86 Nov 1988 Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); RESEARCH REPORT (143) Journal Announcement: CIJSEP89 Describes British study that monitored and evaluated the cognitive development and academic attainments of Down's Syndrome children ages 3-10 over a two-year period. Comparisons with mainstream schools and special schools are made in the areas of children's expressive language, comprehension, numeracy, verbal fluency, drawing ability, and reading. (22 references) (LRW) Descriptors: *Academic Achievement; *Cognitive Development; Comparative Analysis; *Downs Syndrome; Early Childhood Education; Foreign Countries; Language Acquisition; Longitudinal Studies; *Mainstreaming; Mathematics Skills; Measures (Individuals); Moderate Mental Retardation; Primary Education; Psychological Studies; Reading Ability; Verbal Ability; Visual Arts Identifiers: *Great Britain EJ341344 EC190480 I Helped My Son into the Mainstream. Fredericks, Bud Exceptional Parent, v16 n5 p14,16-17 Sep 1986 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); POSITION PAPER (120); NON-CLASSROOM MATERIAL (055) Journal Announcement: CIJJAN87 Target Audience: Parents A parent describes how presenting information on what it is like to have a disability to his son's teacher and fifth grade classmates helped his Down Syndrome son to adjust to a new school and achieve acceptance. The success of this strategy should encourage other parents to make comparable efforts. (JC) Descriptors: *Adaptive Behavior (of Disabled); *Adjustment (to Environment); *Downs Syndrome; Elementary Education; *Mainstreaming; Mental Retardation; *Parent Role; Parent School Relationship; Parent Student Relationship; *Peer Acceptance; Personal Narratives EJ310123 EC171051 The Integration of Eight Down's Syndrome Children into Regular Schools. Pieterse, Moira; Center, Yola Australia and New Zealand Journal of Developmental Disabilities, v10 n1 p11-20 Mar 1984 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); RESEARCH REPORT (143) Journal Announcement: CIJAPR85 Eight Down's Syndrome children integrated into regular classes after exposure to 3-5 years early intervention, functioned within the mild rather than the moderate range of mental retardation, and their social skills and oral reading and comprehension were acceptable. (Author/CL) Descriptors: Adjustment (to Environment); *Downs Syndrome; Elementary Education; *Intervention; *Mainstreaming EJ279605 EC151314 Jason Goes to Kindergarten. Elias, Lois; And Others Exceptional Parent, v13 n1 p55-58 Feb 1983 Available From: Reprint: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); GENERAL REPORT (140) Journal Announcement: CIJAUG83 The article looks at the experiences of a Down's Syndrome child mainstreamed into a regular kindergarten class. Benefits of the least restrictive environment, such as cost effectiveness, are pointed out. Viewpoints of the teacher, the special education aide, and principal are presented. (SW) Descriptors: *Downs Syndrome; Early Childhood Education; Kindergarten; *Mainstreaming; Parent Role; *Teacher Attitudes ED329093 EC300089 Personal and Professional Change Associated with the Integration of Children with Down Syndrome into the Public Schools. West, Russell F.; Cummins, Pete 14 Nov 1990; 42p.; Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the Mid-South Educational Research Conference (New Orleans, LA, November 14, 1990). EDRS Price - MF01/PC02 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: CONFERENCE PAPER (150) Geographic Source: U.S.; Tennessee Journal Announcement: RIEJUL91 The purpose of this study was to describe the personal and professional changes that occurred when three young children with Down Syndrome were mainstreamed into "regular" kindergarten classes in Northeast Tennessee. During the 1989-1990 school year, data were collected using participant observation and in-depth interviews with parents, teachers, and principals in three schools. Data were collapsed into four general categories of results, focusing on changes in personal and professional confidence, changes in teaching approaches and strategies, changes in perspectives on integration, and changes in personal beliefs and attitudes. Results indicated that all adults involved in the mainstreaming process viewed the experience positively. All parties gained a great deal of confidence both in themselves and in each other. All those concerned developed a respect for the potential that children with Down Syndrome bring to the regular classroom. (20 references) (JDD) Descriptors: *Administrator Attitudes; Attitude Change; *Downs Syndrome; Kindergarten; *Mainstreaming; *Parent Attitudes; Primary Education; *Public Schools; Self Esteem; *Teacher Attitudes; Teaching Methods Identifiers: Tennessee ED301976 EC211073 Adjusting to School: Eight Children with Down's Syndrome. Item 2. Rietveld, Christine Australian Council for Educational Research, Hawthorn.; New Zealand Council for Educational Research, Wellington. SET: Research Information for Teachers, n1 1988 1988; 9p.; SET provides leaflets and brief reports designed for a quick read. EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: EVALUATIVE REPORT (142); SERIAL (022) Geographic Source: New Zealand Journal Announcement: RIEMAY89 The study compared the adjustment to regular classes (in New Zealand) of eight 6- and 7-year-old children with Down Syndrome (DS) with that of 24 children rated by their eight teachers as being the "three least competent children in the class." The study evaluated teacher attitudes, social participation on the playground, and developmental progress. The study found teachers still uncertain about the value of integrating such children into regular classes after 1 year though their beliefs were not always supported by the data comparing the DS children with the contrast children in the areas of time on-task/disruptions, interactions with the teacher, compliance, social interaction, and affectionate behavior and mimicry. There was no support for the commonly held belief that DS children are socially isolated during unstructured time with some DS children showing a greater range of abilities when interacting with peers in unstructured situations than in the classroom. All of the DS children maintained or surpassed their previous rate of progress after 1 year although teachers gave them much more attention than contrast children. Results suggested that integration of these children can be effective but that the services of an itinerant teacher are valuable and the use of novelty encourages more peer interaction in all children. (DB) Descriptors: Compliance (Psychology); *Downs Syndrome; Foreign Countries; *Interpersonal Competence; *Mainstreaming; *Moderate Mental Retardation; Peer Acceptance; Peer Relationship; Teacher Attitudes; Teacher Student Relationship; Time on Task Identifiers: New Zealand EJ428710 FL521067 Language in Down's Syndrome: A Life-Span and Modularity Perspective. Rondal, J. A. Rassegna Italiana di Linguistica Applicata, v22 n1 p1-32 Jan-Apr 1991 Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); REVIEW LITERATURE (070) Journal Announcement: CIJNOV91 Discusses the language development in individuals with Down's syndrome in both early childhood and adulthood, and outlines intervention programs to assist language development in these individuals not only in their early years but throughout their lives. (71 references) (CFM) Descriptors: Child Language; *Downs Syndrome; *Intervention; *Language Acquisition; Language Handicaps; Language Processing; Morphology (Languages); Semantics; Sentence Structure; *Special Education EJ408573 EC230401 A Longitudinal Study of Language Acquisition in Autistic and Down Syndrome Children. Tager-Flusberg, Helen; And Others Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders, v20 n1 p1-21 Mar 1990 Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); RESEARCH REPORT (143) Journal Announcement: CIJOCT90 Target Audience: Teachers; Practitioners Six autistic children, age 3-6, and 6 children with Down syndrome were followed over a period of 12-26 months. Autistic children followed the same general developmental path as the Down syndrome children in the acquisition of grammatical and lexical aspects of language. (Author/JDD) Descriptors: *Autism; Comparative Analysis; *Developmental Stages; *Downs Syndrome; *Grammar; *Language Acquisition; Language Patterns; Longitudinal Studies; Preschool Education; *Vocabulary EJ285360 EC152746 A Simple Thing Like a Swing. Brenner, Suzanne Exceptional Parent, v13 n2 p11-13 Apr 1983 Available From: Reprint: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); POSITION PAPER (120) Journal Announcement: CIJDEC83 The mother of a Down's syndrome four-year-old describes how a slight adaptation in a playground swing allowed her son to experience the joy of independent play. (CL) Descriptors: *Downs Syndrome; *Parent Attitudes; Parent Child Relationship; Parent Materials; *Play; Playground Activities; Preschool Education EJ356058 SE541156 The Causes of Down Syndrome. Patterson, David Scientific American, v257 n2 p52-60 Aug 1987 Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); GENERAL REPORT (140) Journal Announcement: CIJOCT87 Target Audience: Practitioners; Researchers Presents current findings and theories on the causes of Down Syndrome. Reviews research which focused on chromosome 21 and the pathologies associated with it. (ML) Descriptors: *Congenital Impairments; Disabilities; *Downs Syndrome; *Genetics; Heredity; *Human Body; Scientific Research; *Special Health Problems Identifiers: *Chromosome Abnormalities Internet Resources Internet Listservs Top of PageBack to ERIC MenuBack to CEC Home Page copyright © 1996 ERIC Clearinghouse on Disabilities and Gifted Education URL: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm WT02-B20-85IA001-000011-B031-131http://www.cec.sped.org:80/faq/epilepsy.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101075241 text/html 22648HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 07:52:43 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 09-Sep-96 21:33:00 GMTContent-length: 22456Content-type: text/html Epilepsy-FAQ Epilepsy-FAQ (last updated August 14, 1996) THE ERIC CLEARINGHOUSE ON DISABILITIES AND GIFTEDEDUCATION (ERIC EC) The Council for Exceptional Children 1920Association Drive Reston, VA 20191 Toll Free: 1-800-328-0272 TTY: 703-264-9449 E-mail: ericec@cec.sped.org Internet: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm Do you have any information on epilepsy? This file includes information about epilepsy. At the end of this file are links to Internet resources and Internet listservs (discussion groups) where you can obtain more specific information on this topic. There may be ERIC digests on related topics that provide further information. You can read the full text of ERIC EC digests under our listing at the U.S. Department of Education, Office of Educational Research and Improvement. The primary focus of the ERIC system is education. While the ERIC database contains information on some medical disorders, you may want to search a medical database such as MEDLINE/MEDLARS at the National Library of Medicine or MedWeb at Emory University. Enclosed are several citations from the ERIC database. These records are a sample of the kind of information you can find in the ERIC database. For morecitations on your topic of interest, you may want to search the ERIC database yourself onthe Internet. References with ED (ERIC Document) and EJ (ERIC Journal) identifiers are cited inthe ERIC database; for example, ED333123 or EJ333999. ERIC documents areavailable in microfiche collections at more than 825 locations worldwide (check yourlocal college or public library). They can also be ordered for a fee through the ERICDocument Reproduction Service (EDRS) at 1-800-443-ERIC. References with anEJ (ERIC Journal) number are available for a fee from the originating journal (checkwith your local college or public library), through interlibrary loan services, or fromarticle reproduction clearinghouses, such as UMI: 1-800-248-0360; or ISI:1-800-523-1850. The following information is exerpted from the Epilepsy Foundation of America What is epilepsy? Epilepsy is a neurological condition that from time to time produces brief disturbances in the normal electrical function of the brain. Normal brain function is made possible by millions of tiny electrical charges passing between nerve cells in the brain and to all parts of the body. When someone has epilepsy, this normal pattern may be interrupted by intermittent bursts of electrical energy that are much more intense than usual. They may affect a person's consciousness, bodily movements or sensations for a short time. These physical changes are called epileptic seizures. That is why epilepsy is sometimes called a seizure disorder. The unusual bursts of energy may occur in just one area of the brain (partial seizures) , or may affect nerve cells throughout the brain (generalized seizures). Normal brain function cannot return until the electrical bursts subside. Conditions in the brain that produce these episodes may have been present since birth, or they may develop later in life due to injury, infections, structural abnormalities in the brain, exposure to toxic agents, or for reasons that are still not well understood. Many illnesses or severe injuries can affect the brain enough to produce a single seizure. When seizures continue to occur for unknown reasons or because of an underlying problem that cannot be corrected, the condition is known as epilepsy. Epilepsy affects people of all ages, all nations, and all races. Epilepsy can also occur in animals, including dogs, cats, rabbits, and mice. ERIC descriptors (search terms) used: Epilepsy EJ487924 EC609111 Listening to Epilepsy. Brunquell, Phillip J. Infants and Young Children, v7 n1 p24-33 Jul 1994 ISSN: 0896-3746 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); REVIEW LITERATURE (070) Journal Announcement: CIJDEC94 This paper discusses what epilepsy is and what it is not, defines types of epileptic seizures, identifies epilepsy syndromes, discusses antiepileptic drugs, describes seizure surgery, and examines issues of quality of life. (JDD) Descriptors: Drug Therapy; *Epilepsy; Quality of Life; *Seizures; Surgery; *Symptoms (Individual Disorders) EJ472637 EC607075 The Special Education Teachers and Epilepsy. Hampson, Eric B.C. Journal of Special Education, v17 n1 p26-32 1993 ISSN: 0704-7509 Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); REVIEW LITERATURE (070); NON-CLASSROOM MATERIAL (055) Journal Announcement: CIJMAR94 Basic information about epilepsy is provided for special education teachers. Epilepsy is seen as primarily a symptom and is not, by itself, a reason for special education placement. Epilepsy may, however, also occur in cases where learning difficulties are the sequelae of generalized brain damage. (DB) Descriptors: *Epilepsy; Etiology; Learning Problems; Neurological Impairments;Special Education; Student Characteristics; Student Placement ED372587 EC303220 Epilepsy in the Classroom: Guidance for Educators. Lassner, Lee M. Nov 1993; 31p.; Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the Mid South Educational Research Association (New Orleans, LA, November 10-12, 1993). EDRS Price - MF01/PC02 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: NON-CLASSROOM MATERIAL (055); CONFERENCE PAPER (150) Geographic Source: U.S.; Mississippi Journal Announcement: RIEDEC94 Target Audience: Teachers; Counselors; Practitioners This paper for educators, school psychologists, and counselors attempts to provide guidance for meeting the needs of students with epilepsy. Stressed throughout the paper are ways to provide for the child's special needs while fostering his/her self esteem and full participation in classroom activities. The paper addresses the following topics: (1) what epilepsy is; (2) types of epilepsy; (3) recognizing epileptic seizures; (4) identification, evaluation, and correct placement; (5) consultation; (6) counseling; (7) coordination of programs; (8) research; (9) specific knowledge educators, counselors, and children should have; (10) medicines for epilepsy and their side effects; (11) administration of antiepileptic drugs by school officials; (12) seizure management; (13) epilepsy and academic achievement; (14) epilepsy and athletics; and (15) the future. Contains 22 references. (DB) Descriptors: Academic Achievement; Counselor Role; Definitions; Disability Identification; Drug Therapy; *Educational Needs; Elementary Secondary Education; *Epilepsy; Mainstreaming; Peer Relationship; *Seizures; Special Health Problems; *Symptoms (Individual Disorders); Teacher Role ED358997 RC019170 Rural Issues for Children and Families Affected by Epilepsy. Ellis, Gail Johnston Mar 1993; 12p.; In: Montgomery, Diane, Ed. Rural America: Where All Innovations Begin. Conference Proceedings (Savannah, GA, March 11-13, 1993); see RC 019 153. Seizure recognition chart contains small print. EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: REVIEW LITERATURE (070); CONFERENCE PAPER (150) Geographic Source: U.S.; Maryland Journal Announcement: RIENOV93 Epilepsy affects approximately one percent of the population, with most cases having onset during childhood. School personnel can best incorporate the child with epilepsy into the classroom and provide support for families by becoming familiar with the types of seizure disorders, the issues that epilepsy presents for children and families, and the supports that children and families need. This paper provides information on: (1) seizure types, what they look like, first aid, and what not to do; (2) common misconceptions and negative attitudes regarding epilepsy that can compromise a child's ability to participate actively in social and school activities; (3) difficulties in diagnosis and medication and resulting family stress; (4) possible scholastic difficulties; and (5) the benefits and drawbacks of rural living and rural schools for children with epilepsy and their families. Two brief case studies illustrate the social, emotional, and academic effects that epilepsy can have on children. Ways in which the school can alleviate some of the problems of students with epilepsy and their families are suggested, including an information seminar for the entire school about epilepsy and associated problems, designating one staff member to be a support person for the student, and maintaining frequent family contacts. Information sources on epilepsy for teachers and family are noted. (SV) Descriptors: Elementary Secondary Education; *Epilepsy; Family School Relationship; *Mainstreaming; Misconceptions; Rural Areas; *Rural Schools; Social Adjustment; *Social Bias; *Special Education; Stress Variables; *Student Participation EJ455514 CG542104 Classroom Performance and Adaptive Skills in Children with Epilepsy. Huberty, Thomas J.; And Others Journal of School Psychology, v30 n4 p331-42 Win 1992 ISSN: 0022-4405 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); RESEARCH REPORT (143) Journal Announcement: CIJMAY93 Studied relationships of age at onset, seizure syndrome, seizure type, and seizure frequency to classroom performance and adaptive skills of 131 children with epilepsy. Epilepsy syndrome and frequency of seizures significantly related to some analyses. Results suggest that seizure disorder associated with diffuse or multifocal brain insult can produce problems in achievement and school adaptation. (Author/NB) Descriptors: *Academic Achievement; *Adjustment (to Environment); Elementary Education; *Elementary School Students; *Epilepsy; *Personality Traits; *Student Adjustment ED353711 EC301742 Epilepsy: General Information. Fact Sheet Number 6 = La Epilepsia: Informacion General. Fact Sheet Number 20. Interstate Research Associates, McLean, VA.; National Information Center for Children and Youth with Disabilities, Washington, DC. Sep 1992 5p.; Sponsoring Agency: Special Education Programs (ED/OSERS), Washington, DC. Contract No: H030A00002 EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. Language: English; Spanish Document Type: REVIEW LITERATURE (070); MULTILINGUAL/BILINGUAL MATERIALS (171) Geographic Source: U.S.; Virginia Journal Announcement: RIEJUN93 This fact sheet on epilepsy is offered in both English and Spanish. It provides a definition, information on incidence, typical characteristics, and educational implications. It notes that epilepsy is classified as "other health impaired" under the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act and that students with epilepsy are eligible for special educational services. These include adaptations in classroom instruction and first aid instruction on seizure management for the child's teachers. The importance of communication between family and school is stressed. The fact sheet lists four print resources and two organizations. (DB) Descriptors: Definitions; *Educational Needs; Elementary Secondary Education; *Epilepsy; Incidence; Preschool Education; *Seizures; *Special Health Problems; Student Characteristics EJ426437 SP520359 The Schoolchild with Epilepsy: How Do We Respond? Bergen, Donna PTA Today, v16 n4 p18 Feb 1991 ISSN: 0195-2781 Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); NON-CLASSROOM MATERIAL (055) Journal Announcement: CIJSEP91 Target Audience: Parents; Teachers; Practitioners Parents and teachers who are informed about epilepsy can avoid unpleasant classroom situations. A brief explanation of epilepsy is followed by information on what to do in case a seizure occurs at school. The best policy is for parents to forewarn the school and create an appropriate plan. (SM) Descriptors: Children; Classroom Environment; Elementary Education; *Epilepsy;Parent School Relationship; *Parent Teacher Cooperation; *Seizures; *Teacher Role Identifiers: *Emergency Preparedness EJ413307 EC231436 A Survey of the Use of Antiepileptic and Muscle Relaxant Medication in a Sample of Children with Neuromotor Disorders. Greer, Bobby G.; And Others Research in Developmental Disabilities, v11 n2 p241-48 1990 Report No: ISSN-0891-4222 Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); RESEARCH REPORT (143) Journal Announcement: CIJJAN91 A longitudinal survey of 424 preschoolers and infants with neuromotor disorders served by a children's rehabilitation center was conducted to determine the number who were receiving muscle relaxant or anticonvulsant medication, as well as average daily dosages. An increase in the number of antiepileptic prescriptions was found from 1962 to 1986. (Author/PB) Descriptors: *Drug Therapy; *Epilepsy; *Incidence; Longitudinal Studies; Medical Services; *Neurological Impairments; Pharmacology; Preschool Education; Rehabilitation Centers; *Trend Analysis Identifiers: *Antiepileptic Medication; *Muscle Relaxants ED312817 EC221275 Trick or Treat or Trouble: Featuring Brian McDaniel. The Kids on the Block Book Series. Aiello, Barbara; Shulman, Jeffrey 1989; 59p.; For related books, see EC 221 270-277 Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); POSITION PAPER (120) Journal Announcement: CIJMAY89 A parent talks of his family's experience in choosing to keep a severely retarded epileptic 20-year-old son at home. Coss such as loss of the image of a perfect family and benefits such as increased personal growth are identified. (DB) Descriptors: *Decision Making; *Epilepsy; *Family Problems; *Multiple Disabilities; Personal Narratives; *Severe Mental Retardation; Young Adults EJ361106 EC201017 Nurturing a Special Child. Kelso, Jill Exceptional Parent, v17 n8 p50-53 Nov-Dec 1987 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); POSITION PAPER (120) Journal Announcement: CIJFEB88 Target Audience: Parents A mother of a son with epilepsy and dyslexia offers 10 guidelines for parents including: acknowledge your grief; recognize assets and limitations; encourage independence; ignore unsolicited advice; be proud of your child's achievements; make use of financial aid; subscribe to newsletters; get to know your child's physician; and make time for yourself. (DB) Descriptors: *Child Rearing; *Disabilities; *Dyslexia; *Epilepsy; Personal Narratives ED299767 EC211046 A Child's Guide to Seizure Disorders. Epilepsy Foundation of America, Landover, MD. 1987 7p.; For related documents, see EC 211 045-047. Report No: 078-787-CGS Available From: Epilepsy Foundation of America, 4351 Garden City Dr., Landover, MD 20785. EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: INSTRUCTIONAL MATERIAL (051) Geographic Source: U.S.; Maryland Journal Announcement: RIEMAR89 Target Audience: Students Intended for young children suffering from seizure disorders, the booklet explains what a seizure disorder is, encourages the asking of questions, provides a simple explanation of how seizures happen and what effects they have, describes various kinds of seizures, and stresses the importance of taking prescribed medication regularly. Also stressed are first aid measures a child can take if he sees another child having a seizure. (DB) Descriptors: Drug Therapy; *Epilepsy; Neurology; Safety Education; *Seizures; *Self Care Skills ED299766 EC211045 The Teacher's Role: Children and Epilepsy. A Guide for School Personnel. Revised Edition. Epilepsy Foundation of America, Landover, MD. 1987; 17p.; For related documents, see EC 211 046-047. Report No: 068-186-SCB Available From: Epilepsy Foundation of America, 4351 Garden City Dr., Landover, MD 20785 (free). EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: NON-CLASSROOM MATERIAL (055) Geographic Source: U.S.; Maryland Journal Announcement: RIEMAR89 Target Audience: Practitioners The brief guide offers information on epilepsy to teachers and other school personnel. Types of seizures are defined (e.g., simple and complex partial seizures, generalized tonic clonic seizures), and management practices in the classroom setting for each type of seizure are described. Signs indicating that a seizure requires immediate medical attention are listed. Specific suggestions for helping other children in the class understand what seizures are and deal with the experience of witnessing a seizure are offered. Other topics addressed in the pamphlet include medication for seizure prevention and the school's involvement in this responsibility, symptoms a teacher might note in a child as yet undiagnosed with epilepsy, academic and behavioral expectations for the epileptic child, avoiding overprotection, and communicating with parents. A list of suggested readings is included. (JW) Descriptors: Drug Therapy; Elementary Education; *Epilepsy; Mainstreaming; *Neurological Impairments; *Noninstructional Responsibility; Normalization (Handicapped); Parent Teacher Cooperation; Peer Acceptance; Seizures; *Teacher Role EJ335546 CG530197 Students with Epilepsy: Counseling Implications for the Hidden Handicap. Hourcade, Jack J.; Parette, Howard P., Jr. School Counselor, v33 n4 p279-85 Mar 1986 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); PROJECT DESCRIPTION (141) Journal Announcement: CIJSEP86 Provides school counselors and other educational personnel with basic information regarding epilepsy and seizure control and management. Discusses how to provide appropriate services to epileptic students and their families, especially in the students' adjustment to regular school programs. (Author/ABB) Descriptors: *Adjustment Counselors; Children; Counseling Objectives; Elementary Education; *Epilepsy; *Individual Needs; *Physical Disabilities; School Counselors; Special Health Problems; *Student Needs EJ321134 EC180330 Let's Talk about Seizures. Part I. Questions and Answers for Children. Goldman, Jeri Exceptional Parent, v15 n4 p24-26,28 Jul 1985 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); NON-CLASSROOM MATERIAL (055) Journal Announcement: CIJNOV85 Target Audience: Students; Parents Written for children with seizures and their caregivers, the article answers questions concerning the cause, types, and treatment of seizures. (CL) Descriptors: *Coping; Drug Therapy; Elementary Secondary Education; *Epilepsy;Etiology; Medical Services; *Seizures EJ302455 CG526626 Helplessness and Resourcefulness in Coping with Epilepsy. Rosenbaum, Michael; Palmon, Noami Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, v52 n2 p244-53 Apr 1984 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: RESEARCH REPORT (143) Journal Announcement: CIJNOV84 Tested the hypothesis that psychological adjustment to epilepsy would be a joint function of subjects' (N=50) perceived repertoire of self-control skills and the extent to which they were exposed to uncontrollable seizures. Results showed that high-resourceful epileptics exposed to lower frequencies of seizures coped better with their disability. (LLL) Descriptors: *Adaptive Behavior (of Disabled); *Coping; Emotional Adjustment; *Epilepsy; Foreign Countries; *Helplessness; Patients; Self Control Identifiers: Israel ED248658 EC170437 Babysitting for Special Children. Tips on Caring for a Child with Autism, Cerebral Palsy, Epilepsy or Mental Retardation. Minnesota State Comprehensive Epilepsy Program, Minneapolis.; Wisconsin Council on Developmental Disabilities, Madison. 1983; 17p. EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: NON-CLASSROOM MATERIAL (055) Geographic Source: U.S.; Minnesota Journal Announcement: RIEFEB85 Government: State Target Audience: Practitioners The booklet is designed to help people interested in babysitting for children with special needs. A brief explanation of each of the four disabilities covered by this guide (autism, cerebral palsy, epilepsy, and mental retardation) is followed by a checklist designed to elicit information on practical issues from parents, such as communication methods, special routines, preferences, medication, special handling, play positions, seizure activity, sleep, feeding, behavior problems, and special equipment. The booklet concludes with general babysitting tips about safety and first aid. (CL) Descriptors: *Autism; *Cerebral Palsy; *Child Rearing; *Epilepsy; First Aid; *Mental Retardation; *Respite Care; Safety Identifiers: *Babysitters Internet Resources Internet Listservs copyright © 1996 ERIC Clearinghouse on Disabilities and Gifted Education URL: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm WT02-B20-86IA001-000011-B031-150http://www.cec.sped.org:80/faq/fetalalc.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101075303 text/html 23697HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 07:53:00 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 16-Sep-96 16:50:00 GMTContent-length: 23505Content-type: text/html FetalAlc FetalAlc (last updated August 15, 1996) THE ERIC CLEARINGHOUSE ON DISABILITIES AND GIFTEDEDUCATION (ERIC EC) The Council for Exceptional Children 1920Association Drive Reston, VA 20191 Toll Free: 1-800-328-0272 TTY: 703-264-9449 E-mail: ericec@cec.sped.org Internet: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm Where would I find some information about teaching strategies for children with fetal alcohol syndrome (FAS) or children with problems due to prenatal substance exposure? This file includes information about fetal alcohol syndrome and prenatal substance exposure. At the end of this file are links to Internet resources and Internet listservs (discussion groups) where you can obtain more specific information on the topic. There may be ERIC digeststhat provide information on related topics. You can read the full text of ERIC EC digests under our listing at the U.S. Department of Education, Office of Educational Research and Improvement. The primary focus of the ERIC system is education. While the ERIC database contains information on some medical disorders, you may want to search a medical database such as MEDLINE/MEDLARS at the National Library of Medicine or MedWeb at Emory University. Enclosed are several citations from the ERIC database. These records are a sample of the kind of information you can find in the ERIC database. For morecitations on your topic of interest, you may want to search the ERIC database yourself onthe Internet. References with ED (ERIC Document) and EJ (ERIC Journal) identifiers are cited inthe ERIC database; for example, ED333123 or EJ333999. ERIC documents areavailable in microfiche collections at more than 825 locations worldwide (check yourlocal college or public library). They can also be ordered for a fee through the ERICDocument Reproduction Service (EDRS) at 1-800-443-ERIC. References with anEJ (ERIC Journal) number are available for a fee from the originating journal (checkwith your local college or public library), through interlibrary loan services, or fromarticle reproduction clearinghouses, such as UMI: 1-800-248-0360; or ISI:1-800-523-1850. The following information is excerpted from Family Resource Institute. What is Fetal Alcohol Syndrome? Fetal Alcohol Syndrome is an organic brain disorder caused by prenatal alcohol exposure. The affected person may have: height, weight, and growth deficiencies. a specific pattern of facial features. central nervous system damage i.e., a unique cluster of behavioral symptoms. The following information is excerpted from University ofWashington, Seattle. EDUCATING CHILDREN WITH FETAL ALCOHOL SYNDROME (FAS) and FETAL ALCOHOL EFFECTS (FAE) One of the most debilitating characteristics of FAS and FAE is the poor ability to adapt to demands of surroundings. Educational experiences should make students as independent as possible, both now and in the future, with the outcome being adults functioning as fully as they are able. For some children, "functional" may mean following traditional academic curricula. Many students are fairly accomplished in academic subjects. To be independent, they also may need to learn to ride buses, prepare meals, use money appropriately, and not only perform a job, but use the social skills necessary to keep it. Educational goals and objectives should go beyond classroom boundaries and target skills to be used not only at school, but in homes and communities as successful, productive citizens. Equally important is instruction of communication skills. Programs must depart from traditional models of "speech therapy" or "language instruction" and view communication as all the verbal, written, gestural, and behavioral skills that allow an individual to participate in a social environment. Students with FAS/FAE must be taught appropriate ways to relate needs to others, whether verbally or through other communication systems. Communication skills should be developed in the context of social skills instruction. Because the two are inseparable and essential sets of skills to live and work in the community, they should be major components of the educational process from preschool through to high school. Small children can learn to communicate their needs, interact with peers, and respond to others appropriately. By high school, students should be teaming more complex communication and social skills, such as how to interact with employers and coworkers, make and maintain friendships, and behave with friends of the opposite sex. ERIC descriptors (search terms) used: Fetal Drug Exposure or Prenatal Drug Exposure ED385039 EC304072 What Educators Need To Know about Having Students with Fetal Alcohol Syndrome and Fetal Alcohol Effects in the Classroom: Issues, Identification, Intervention & Instructional Strategies. Finlay, Gwathmey H.; Sorenson, Amy L. May 1995; 79p. EDRS Price - MF01/PC04 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: RESEARCH REPORT (143); TEST, QUESTIONNAIRE (160) Geographic Source: U.S.; Virginia Journal Announcement: RIEDEC95 The information needs of regular elementary teachers concerning the special needs of students who have Fetal Alcohol Syndrome (FAS) and Fetal Alcohol Effects (FAE) were assessed. A literature review covers means of identification of these disorders, intervention, effective instructional strategies, and issues involved with FAS and FAE. Observations were undertaken with a first grade teacher and a child who is alcohol-affected but not yet identified as having FAS/FAE. An informal interview was also conducted with a special education teacher who was helping the first grade teacher in having the child tested to receive special services. Additionally, a questionnaire was completed by nine teachers in the same elementary school regarding the extent of teacher knowledge concerning FAS/FAE as well as information needs. It was concluded that alcohol-affected children have learning disabilities, poor social skills, and disruptive behavior. Forty-four percent of the teachers had a student suspected of having either FAS or FAE, and 11 percent had a student who had been identified. Appendices include an observation form, a questionnaire, interview questions, and a handout for educators on FAS and FAE. (Contains 22 references.) (SW) Descriptors: *Disability Identification; Educational Strategies; Elementary Education; Elementary School Teachers; *Fetal Alcohol Syndrome; *Information Needs; *Intervention; Knowledge Base for Teaching; Needs Assessment; *Student Needs EJ493722 RC510311 Fetal Alcohol Syndrome: Understanding the Problem; Understanding the Solution; What Indian Communities Can Do. Streissguth, Ann P. American Indian Culture and Research Journal, v18 n3 p45-83 1994 ISSN: 0161-6463 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: REVIEW LITERATURE (070); NON-CLASSROOM MATERIAL (055); JOURNAL ARTICLE (080) Journal Announcement: CIJMAR95 Summarizes facts about fetal alcohol syndrome (FAS), including physical and mental symptoms; cause; prevalence overall and in Indian communities; and problems of infants, children, and adults with FAS. Emphasizes the importance of public awareness, professional education, and provision of community services to prevent FAS. Outlines specific prevention and intervention strategies for Indian communities. (SV) Descriptors: *Alcohol Abuse; Alcohol Education; *American Indians; *Community Action; Community Services; Disabilities; Drinking; *Fetal Alcohol Syndrome; Health Promotion; Identification; Prenatal Influences; *Prevention; *Symptoms (Individual Disorders) Identifiers: Public Awareness ED380718 CG026096 A Sourcebook of Successful School-based Strategies for Fetal Alcohol and Drug-Affected Students. Osborne, Jan, Comp. Western Regional Center for Drug-Free Schools and Communities, Portland, OR. Oct 1994; 60p. Sponsoring Agency: Department of Education, Washington, DC. Contract No: S188A00001 EDRS Price - MF01/PC03 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: NON-CLASSROOM MATERIAL (055) Geographic Source: U.S.; Oregon Journal Announcement: RIEAUG95 This publication's instructional strategies were collected over a three-year period from participants in a series of workshops which dealt with fetal alcohol and other drug-affected children in the educational setting. These strategies are not intended to be all inclusive; rather, they are intended to celebrate the "wisdom of practice." The approaches listed here have not been evaluated as to their effectiveness, but are based on sound guidelines for working with children who may have been prenatally exposed to alcohol or others drugs. The strategies should provide the educator with a springboard for his or her own creativity and expertise. Each strategy is organized into sections by grade level: Preschool; Kindergarten through 6th Grade; Junior High/Middle School; and High School. Each grade level is then divided into three sections, with each section featuring sub-categories: (1) Room Environment (Quiet Zones, Classroom Seating, Limit Distractions, Organized Materials, Clear Rules for Classroom and Learning Centers); (2) Active Learning (Use Multiple Modalities, Multi-sensory, Manipulatives; Keep Steps Simple; Provide Opportunities for Decision Making and Problem Solving; Model and Demonstrate Behaviors; Provide Structure); and (3) Routine (Daily Schedule, Consistent Schedule, Plan for Change, Build in Transitions, Use Visual, Auditory, and Sensory Cues). (RJM) Descriptors: Adolescents; Children; Classroom Techniques; Early Childhood Education; *Educational Strategies; Elementary Secondary Education; *Fetal Alcohol Syndrome; Instructional Design; Learning Strategies; Special Health Problems; *Special Needs Students; Teaching Methods Identifiers: *Fetal Drug Exposure ED340149 EC300798 Substance Exposed Infants and Children. ERIC Digest #E505. Pinkerton, Dianna Council for Exceptional Children, Reston, Va.; ERIC Clearinghouse on Handicapped and Gifted Children, Reston, Va. Nov 1991 3p.; Sponsoring Agency: Office of Educational Research and Improvement (ED), Washington, DC. Contract No: RI88062007 Report No: EDO-EC-91-10 Available From: Council for Exceptional Children, 1920 Association Dr., Reston, VA 22091-1589 ($1.00 each, minimum order $5.00 prepaid, product no. E-505). EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: ERIC PRODUCT (071); NON-CLASSROOM MATERIAL (055); ERIC DIGESTS (SELECTED) (073) Geographic Source: U.S.; Virginia Journal Announcement: RIEMAY92 Target Audience: Practitioners This digest briefly summarizes available information on the educational needs of prenatally substance exposed infants and children. Estimated incidence figures are given for the numbers of children exposed in utero to illicit drugs and alcohol. The importance of parent/caregiver education in specific techniques to increase infant alertness and interactions is stressed. Sixteen recommended classroom strategies are grouped into protective factors (e.g., developmentally appropriate curricula) and facilitative processes (e.g., encouraging child attachment to an adult and allowing child decision making). Transdisciplinary/transagency approaches to program development are encouraged. Also listed are five references and six resources, including hotlines and organizations. (DB) Descriptors: Agency Cooperation; Alcohol Abuse; Classroom Techniques; *Congenital Impairments; *Drug Abuse; *Educational Needs; Incidence; Parent Education; *Prenatal Influences; Preschool Education; Special Health Problems; *Substance Abuse Identifiers: ERIC Digests; *Fetal Drug Exposure EJ505912 UD518563 "Be Very Careful Not to Let the Facts Get Mixed Up with the Truth": Children Prenatally Exposed to Crack/Cocaine. Barone, Diane Urban Education, v30 n1 p40-55 Apr 1995 ISSN: 0042-0859 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: REVIEW LITERATURE (070); POSITION PAPER (120); JOURNAL ARTICLE (080) Journal Announcement: CIJOCT95 Reviews the research on cocaine use and its effect on newborns; examines the popular misconceptions, including the background of children who are exposed; and discusses interventions. The author concludes with a discussion about looking beyond prenatal drug exposure and focusing on the child. Studies looking at these children longitudinally are highlighted. (GR) Descriptors: *Academic Ability; Black Youth; *Child Development; Child Health; *Cocaine; Drug Use; Inner City; *Misconceptions; *Prenatal Influences; Prevention; *Research Identifiers: *Fetal Drug Exposure EJ501924 PS523119 Early Childhood Special Education. Prenatal Drug Exposure: Implications for Teachers of Young Children. Kinnison, Lloyd R.; And Others Day Care & Early Education, v22 n3 p35-37 Spr 1995 ISSN: 0092-4199 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: NON-CLASSROOM MATERIAL (055); JOURNAL ARTICLE (080) Journal Announcement: CIJAUG95 Discusses the nature and extent of problem of prenatal drug exposure. Expresses concern about the increase in number of women of childbearing age testing positive for drug use. Explains the social, cognitive, behavioral, and motor deficiencies resulting from such drug exposure and consequent issues and recommendations for early childhood professionals. (BAC) Descriptors: Behavior Disorders; Child Caregivers; Cognitive Development; *Developmental Delays; Early Childhood Education; *Prenatal Influences; Psychomotor Skills; *Substance Abuse Identifiers: *Fetal Drug Exposure EJ489899 PS522272 Book and Video Reviews. Stephens, Karen Young Children, v49 n6 p80 Sep 1994 ISSN: 0044-0728 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: BOOK-PRODUCT REVIEW (072); JOURNAL ARTICLE (080) Journal Announcement: CIJJAN95 Reviews two videos. "Caregivers Guide for Drug Exposed Infants" addresses the effects of fetal drug exposure on children's physical, emotional, and social development and illustrates caregiving techniques. "Foundations for Being a Successful Director" offers professionals advice on stress in the workplace, taking care of yourself, empowerment, and dealing with difficult people. (TJQ) Descriptors: Child Development; Management Development; *Prenatal Influences; *Professional Development; *Self Management; Stress Management; *Substance Abuse; Videotape Cassettes Identifiers: Caregiver Training; *Drug Exposed Children; Empowerment; Fetal Drug Exposure; Video Tape Reviews EJ487908 EA529667 "Don't Give Up on Me--I Can Learn." Meyer, Janet; Morris, John Principal, v74 n1 p36-38 Sep 1994 ISSN: 0271-6062 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: EVALUATIVE REPORT (142); JOURNAL ARTICLE (080) Journal Announcement: CIJDEC94 Given our schools' mission to teach all children in regular classrooms, working with children damaged by prenatal substance exposure is tremendously challenging. Even the best-taught lesson may be forgotten within a day or an hour. Teachers should reduce the excitability factor, keep a uniform pattern of change, give advance warning, follow through, and establish bonding. (MLH) Descriptors: Behavior Problems; *Classroom Environment; *Classroom Techniques; Elementary Education; *Learning Problems; *Special Needs Students; *Teacher Responsibility; Teacher Student Relationship Identifiers: *Crack Babies; *Fetal Drug Exposure EJ485372 PS522014 Psychosocial, Behavioral, and Developmental Characteristics of Toddlers Prenatally Exposed to Cocaine. Yolton, Kimberly A.; And Others Child Study Journal, v24 n1 p49-68 1994 ISSN: 0009-4005 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: RESEARCH REPORT (143); JOURNAL ARTICLE (080) Journal Announcement: CIJOCT94 Toddlers in foster care, exposed prenatally to cocaine, were assessed for development, temperament, play behaviors, and adaptive and maladaptive behaviors. Compared to nonexposed toddlers, these toddlers possessed more risk factors at birth and experienced more illnesses after birth; scored lower on conceptual development and higher on expression of feelings and peer interaction; and displayed more physically violent behavior patterns. (HTH) Descriptors: *Adjustment (to Environment); Affective Behavior; Behavior Development; *Child Behavior; Cocaine; Cognitive Development; Comparative Analysis; Foster Children; Peer Relationship; Personality; Prenatal Influences; *Toddlers; Violence Identifiers: *Fetal Drug Exposure ED380718 CG026096 A Sourcebook of Successful School-based Strategies for Fetal Alcohol and Drug-Affected Students. Osborne, Jan, Comp. Western Regional Center for Drug-Free Schools and Communities, Portland, OR. Oct 1994; 60p. Sponsoring Agency: Department of Education, Washington, DC. Contract No: S188A00001 EDRS Price - MF01/PC03 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: NON-CLASSROOM MATERIAL (055) Geographic Source: U.S.; Oregon Journal Announcement: RIEAUG95 This publication's instructional strategies were collected over a three-year period from participants in a series of workshops which dealt with fetal alcohol and other drug-affected children in the educational setting. These strategies are not intended to be all inclusive; rather, they are intended to celebrate the "wisdom of practice." The approaches listed here have not been evaluated as to their effectiveness, but are based on sound guidelines for working with children who may have been prenatally exposed to alcohol or others drugs. The strategies should provide the educator with a springboard for his or her own creativity and expertise. Each strategy is organized into sections by grade level: Preschool; Kindergarten through 6th Grade; Junior High/Middle School; and High School. Each grade level is then divided into three sections, with each section featuring sub-categories: (1) Room Environment (Quiet Zones, Classroom Seating, Limit Distractions, Organized Materials, Clear Rules for Classroom and Learning Centers); (2) Active Learning (Use Multiple Modalities, Multi-sensory, Manipulatives; Keep Steps Simple; Provide Opportunities for Decision Making and Problem Solving; Model and Demonstrate Behaviors; Provide Structure); and (3) Routine (Daily Schedule, Consistent Schedule, Plan for Change, Build in Transitions, Use Visual, Auditory, and Sensory Cues). (RJM) Descriptors: Adolescents; Children; Classroom Techniques; Early Childhood Education; *Educational Strategies; Elementary Secondary Education; *Fetal Alcohol Syndrome; Instructional Design; Learning Strategies; Special Health Problems; *Special Needs Students; Teaching Methods Identifiers: *Fetal Drug Exposure ED378759 EC303658 Just Kids: A Practical Guide for Working with Children Prenatally Substance-Exposed. California State Dept. of Education, Sacramento. Bureau of Publications.; Shasta County Office of Education, Redding, CA. 1994; 74p. Sponsoring Agency: California State Dept. of Education, Sacramento. Div. of Child Development. ISBN: 0-8011-1104-8 Available From: Bureau of Publications, Sales Unit, California Department of Education, P.O. Box 271, Sacramento, CA 95812-0271 ($8.25 each, plus sales tax for California residents). EDRS Price - MF01 Plus Postage. PC Not Available from EDRS. Language: English Document Type: NON-CLASSROOM MATERIAL (055) Geographic Source: U.S.; California Journal Announcement: RIEJUN95 Government: State Target Audience: Teachers; Parents; Practitioners This guide was developed to provide effective and practical strategies to meet the needs of prenatally substance-exposed children in preschool or day care settings. Techniques are based on good child development practices and are equally effective for both teachers and parents. The first chapter outlines information about prenatal substance exposure, such as the effects of different drugs on the fetus and the resulting behaviors and learning characteristics. The second chapter presents teaching strategies, including protective factors involving daily routines, transitions, and rules; facilitative factors such as relationships, peer sensitivity, and decision making; and strategies for play, communication development, motor development, social/emotional development, and home-school partnerships. Characteristics of an exemplary child development program are then described in chapter 3. Practical guidelines are offered for dealing with parents with chemical dependency in chapter 4. The final chapter focuses on assessment and offers a preschool assessment protocol consisting of a parent interview and developmental history, administration of developmental screening tests and instruments, play observation, and behavioral observations. An appendix lists organizational resources, training resources, written resources, videotapes, audiotapes, free reference materials, newsletters, and other resources; another appendix defines terms. (Each chapter contains references.) (JDD) Descriptors: *Classroom Techniques; *Congenital Impairments; Day Care Centers; *Drug Abuse; Early Childhood Education; *Educational Strategies; Parent School Relationship; *Prenatal Influences; Program Development; Student Evaluation; Substance Abuse Identifiers: *Fetal Drug Exposure Internet Resources Internet Listservs Top of PageBack to ERIC MenuBack to CEC Home Page copyright © 1996 ERIC Clearinghouse on Disabilities and Gifted Education URL: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm WT02-B20-87IA001-000011-B031-172http://www.cec.sped.org:80/faq/mentret.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101075320 text/html 24796HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 07:53:22 GMTLast-modified: Tuesday, 10-Sep-96 15:26:00 GMTContent-length: 24603Content-type: text/html MentRet-FAQ MentRet (last updated August 19, 1996) THE ERIC CLEARINGHOUSE ON DISABILITIES AND GIFTEDEDUCATION (ERIC EC) The Council for Exceptional Children 1920Association Drive Reston, VA 20191 Toll Free: 1-800-328-0272 TTY: 703-264-9449 E-mail: ericec@cec.sped.org Internet: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm Where can I find some practical research-based information about children withmental retardation? This file includes general information about mental retardation. At the endof the file are links to Internet resources and Internet listservs (discussion groups)where you can find more specific information on the topic. ERIC EC digest E528, "Mental Retardation" provides further information on this topic. You can read the full text of ERIC EC digests under our listing at the U.S. Department of Education, Office of Educational Research andImprovement. Enclosed are several citations from the ERIC database. These records are asample of the kind of information you can find in the ERIC database. For morecitations on your topic of interest, you may want to search the ERIC database yourself on the Internet. References with ED (ERIC Document) and EJ (ERIC Journal) identifiers are cited inthe ERIC database; for example, ED333123 or EJ333999. ERIC documents areavailable in microfiche collections at more than 825 locations worldwide (check yourlocal college or public library). They can also be ordered for a fee through the ERICDocument Reproduction Service (EDRS) at 1-800-443-ERIC. References with anEJ (ERIC Journal) number are available for a fee from the originating journal (checkwith your local college or public library), through interlibrary loan services, or fromarticle reproduction clearinghouses, such as UMI: 1-800-248-0360; or ISI:1-800-523-1850. ERIC descriptors (search terms) used: Mental Retardation ED385085 EC304118 Rays of Hope: The Special Child and the Family. Pitts, Raymond J., Jr.; Marchitell, Carolyn K. 1995; 67p.; Photographs may not reproduce well. Available From: Communication Arts, 3 Dayleview Rd., Berwyn, PA 19312-1293. EDRS Price - MF01/PC03 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: POSITION PAPER (120) Geographic Source: U.S.; Pennsylvania Journal Announcement: RIEDEC95 Target Audience: Parents; Community This book illustrates techniques that families have found effective in coping with a family member who has mental retardation. It provides quotations and comments from a number of parents as well as anecdotal accounts and photographs, grouped into four sections. The first section is on the recognition process and recounts how parents have coped with the emotional trauma and imbalance as their feelings change from joy to sorrow and uncertainty when finding out and acknowledging that their child has mental retardation. The second section is on the dynamic process of dealing with fears, fantasies, and facts associated with the effects of the disability on the family dynamics. The third section stresses the working process which is using existing support systems and the exercising of rights when dealing with schools, programs, and placement decisions. The final section is on the future process--ways to prepare and position the family member with mental retardation for a lifetime. (DB) Descriptors: Adolescents; Adults; *Child Rearing; Children; *Coping; Decision Making; Disability Identification; *Emotional Adjustment; Family Problems; *Family Relationship; Family School Relationship; Infants; Long Range Planning;*Mental Retardation; *Parent Attitudes EJ489831 IR529349 Beyond the Stereotypes: Characters with Mental Disabilities in Children's Books. Heim, Annette B. School Library Journal, v40 n9 p139-42 Sep 1994 ISSN: 0362-8930 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: NON-CLASSROOM MATERIAL (055); BOOK-PRODUCT REVIEW(072); JOURNAL ARTICLE (080) Journal Announcement: CIJJAN95 Gives criteria with which to evaluate children's and young adult books that depict mentally disabled characters, including accuracy of information, lack of stereotypes, literary quality, confronting the disability, and not "using" disabled characters. Six exemplary titles are examined in light of these criteria, and 11 other books are recommended. (Contains three references.) (KRN) Descriptors: *Adolescent Literature; Book Reviews; *Characterization; *ChildrensLiterature; *Disabilities; *Evaluation Criteria; Literary Criticism; *Mental Retardation;Stereotypes Identifiers: Literary Quality; Theme (Literary) EJ474385 EC607469 Strategies for Functional Community-Based Instruction and Inclusion for Children withMental Retardation. Beck, Joni; And Others Teaching Exceptional Children, v26 n2 p44-48 Win 1994 ISSN: 0040-0599 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); PROJECT DESCRIPTION (141) Journal Announcement: CIJAPR94 This article describes one school's efforts to teach students with mental retardation functional skills in community settings, while maximizing inclusive experiences. The approach includes a method of identifying functional curricula, collaborative instructional planning and teaching, and community-based instruction for all students. (DB) Descriptors: Curriculum Development; *Daily Living Skills; Elementary Education; *Experiential Learning; *Mainstreaming; *Mental Retardation; School Community Relationship; Social Integration; Teaching Methods Identifiers: *Community Based Education; *Function Based Curriculum ED373483 EC303251 The Integration of Students with Mental Retardation into General Education Classrooms. Hilton, Alan 7 Apr 1994; 20p.; Paper presented at the Annual International Convention of theCouncil for Exceptional Children (72nd, Denver, CO, April 6-10, 1994). EDRS Price - MF01 Plus Postage. PC Not Available from EDRS. Language: English Document Type: CONFERENCE PAPER (150); POSITION PAPER (120); REVIEW LITERATURE (070) Geographic Source: U.S.; Washington Journal Announcement: RIEJAN95 Inclusion of students with disabilities, especially those with mental retardation, has come to mean the placement of all students in general education classrooms, sometimes with limited planning for the individual needs of each student. Several court cases, laws, and movements have brought about the level of inclusion that exists today. However, schools are now evolving from inclusion to integration, which involves the planned placement of students in a setting. Two circuit court cases with implications for integration include Holland versus the Board of Sacramento City Unified School District, in which four components were outlined for determining the removal of a student from general education and the Oberti case, which stated that students with disabilities should be placed in general education classes with appropriate support. The four components of the Holland case provide a framework for examining what is effective in integrating students; components include educational benefits, non-academic benefits, effect on teacher and children in theregular classroom, and cost. A case-by-case approach to integrating students intogeneral education is needed. The established best practices of the field of mentalretardation should follow students no matter where they are placed, and ongoingmonitoring of student progress should occur. (Contains 45 references.) (JDD) Descriptors: *Court Litigation; Educational Change; Educational Legislation;*Educational Planning; Elementary Secondary Education; Federal Legislation;*Individualized Programs; *Mainstreaming; *Mental Retardation; *Student Placement Identifiers: *Inclusive Schools ED372593 EC303420 Mental Retardation. ERIC Digest E528. Hawkins-Shepard, Charlotte Council for Exceptional Children, Reston, Va.; ERIC Clearinghouse on Disabilities and Gifted Education, Reston, VA. Sep 1994 3p.; This digest supersedes ERIC Digest E423 (ED 287 258). Sponsoring Agency: Office of Educational Research and Improvement (ED), Washington, DC. Contract No: RR93002005 Report No: EDO-EC-93-11 Available From: Council for Exceptional Children, 1920 Association Dr., Reston, VA 22091 ($1 each, minimum order $5 prepaid). EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: ERIC PRODUCT (071); ERIC DIGESTS (SELECTED) (073) Geographic Source: U.S.; Virginia Journal Announcement: RIEDEC94 This revised digest presents basic information on mental retardation for educators and others. First, definitions from the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA) and the American Association on Mental Retardation (AAMR) are presented. The fact sheet then analyzes how the new AAMR definition differs from earlier ones noting the new definition's emphasis on a pattern of limitations and on a multidimensional approach to assessment. TheAAMR use of the term "supports," is also explained noting the eight types of function that support can serve and four levels of support intensity. Also cited are figures showing the number of children, aged 6-21, who were classified as having mental retardation and received services under IDEA. Additionalparagraphs list typical characteristics of children with mental retardation and consider educational implications (such as use of more hands-on instructional materials with these children and short but frequent learning sessions). The fact sheet also lists 10 suggested additional readings, 9 organizational resources, and 3 periodicals. (DB) Descriptors: Clinical Diagnosis; *Definitions; *Educational Needs; Elementary Secondary Education; Federal Legislation; *Mental Retardation; *Student Characteristics; Student Evaluation Identifiers: *American Association on Mental Retardation; ERIC Digests; Individualswith Disabilities Education Act EJ477614 EC607689 How Children with Learning Problems Learn Addition: A Longitudinal Study. Hanrahan, James; And Others Canadian Journal of Special Education, v9 n2 p101-09 1993 ISSN: 0827-3383 Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); RESEARCH REPORT (143) Journal Announcement: CIJJUN94 Seventy-seven children (ages 5-13) with mild to moderate mental retardation were presented with addition problems. The patterns of strategies used were found to be similar to those used by intellectually normal children, though counting-on and memory strategies were used by subjects with greater frequency. Strategies became more sophisticated with subjects' age. (Author/JDD) Descriptors: *Addition; Age Differences; Comparative Analysis; Elementary Education; *Learning Strategies; Longitudinal Studies; Memory; *Mild MentalRetardation; *Moderate Mental Retardation; *Problem Solving ED371530 EC303117 Child Disability: A Study of Three Families (Summary). Bloom, Barbara Saskatchewan Univ., Saskatoon. Dept. for the Education of Exceptional Children. 1993; 16p.; For the complete study, see EC 303 116. EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: REVIEW LITERATURE (070) Geographic Source: Canada; Saskatchewan Journal Announcement: RIENOV94 This paper presents a summary of a qualitative research study which evaluated, in case studies of three families, what it means to have a child with a disability. The research developed out of practice in early intervention and work focusing on optimal developmental environments for persons with disabilities. Background information on each of the families is provided, including data on the children's disabilities, which included mental retardation in each case. Five principal areas which emerged from interview data are identified: the children, parental stress/anxiety, services, personal comments, and survival strategies. Data acquired from questionnaires completed by the parents and from the MAPS (McGill Action Planning System) planning process are also presented. Recommendations are provided in three areas: attitude changes, policy changes, and service provision. (Contains 14 references.) (JDD) Descriptors: Anxiety; Attitude Change; Case Studies; *Child Rearing; Coping; DeliverySystems; Elementary Secondary Education; Family Relationship; Foreign Countries; *Human Services; *Mental Retardation; *Parent Attitudes; Parent Child Relationship; Policy Formation; Qualitative Research; Stress Variables ED364006 EC302575 Promoting Self-Determination Using the Life Centered Career Education Curriculum. Wehmeyer, Michael Arc, Arlington, TX. 9 Apr 1993 23p.; Paper presented at the Annual Convention of the Council for Exceptional Children (71st, San Antonio, TX, April 5-9, 1993). EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: CONFERENCE PAPER (150); PROJECT DESCRIPTION (141); POSITION PAPER (120) Geographic Source: U.S.; Texas Journal Announcement: RIEAPR94 This paper examines issues concerning self determination for people with mental retardation and other disabilities, within the context of the Life Centered Career Education (LCCE) curriculum. It looks at various views of self-determination; offers a definition; and relates self-determination to autonomy, self-actualization, and self-regulation. Aspects of the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act dealing with self-determination and transition are considered, as are best practices in promoting self-determination and the educator's role in this process. The paper then addresses the curricular components of self-determination, describing the development of one organization's (The Arc) model of self-determination and a project which resuinstruction. (Contains 26 references.) (DB) Descriptors: *Career Education; *Curriculum Development; Daily Living Skills; Instructional Materials; Lesson Plans; *Mental Retardation; *Personal Autonomy; Secondary Education; Self Actualization; *Self Determination; Self Efficacy; SelfEsteem; Self Evaluation (Individuals); *Student Educational Objectives Identifiers: *Life Centered Career Education ED354701 EC301886 Siblings: Brothers and Sisters of People Who Have Mental Retardation. Arc Q & A Series. Arc, Arlington, TX. Jan 1993 3p.; Sponsoring Agency: Minnesota Governor's Planning Council on Developmental Disabilities, St. Paul.; Contract No: MGPCDD-25200 Available From: The Arc, 500 E. Border St., Suite 300, Arlington, TX 76010. EDRS Price - MF01 Plus Postage. PC Not Available from EDRS. Language: English Document Type: NON-CLASSROOM MATERIAL (055) Geographic Source: U.S.; Texas Journal Announcement: RIEJUL93 Basic information about siblings of people with mental retardation is presented in a question-and-answer format. The following questions are addressed: "Is having a sibling with a disability different than having a sibling who does not have a disability?"; "What are some of the concerns of siblings of people with disabilities?"; "Are there any benefits to being the brother or sister of a person with a disability?"; "What are some positive actions parents can take with their children when there is a sibling with a disability?"; "How does family structure affect siblings?"; and "What is being done to address concerns that siblings may have about having a brother or sister with a disability?" Also provided is a list of three organizational resources and five references. (DB) Descriptors: Child Rearing; *Disabilities; *Emotional Adjustment; *Family Relationship; *Mental Retardation; *Sibling Relationship; *Siblings EJ449998 EC603718 Reading Instruction for Students with Moderate Mental Retardation: Review and Analysis of Research. Conners, Frances A. American Journal on Mental Retardation, v96 n6 p577-97 May 1992 ISSN: 0895-8017 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); REVIEW LITERATURE (070) Journal Announcement: CIJJAN93 Analysis of research on reading instruction for children with moderate mental retardation indicated that word analysis instruction is a feasible option; word analysis is the most effective method of oral reading error correction; and the strongest sight-word instruction methods include those that use picture integration, constant delay, and the Edmark errorless discrimination method. (Author/JDD) Descriptors: *Decoding (Reading); Elementary Secondary Education; Error Correction; *Moderate Mental Retardation; Oral Reading; Phoneme Grapheme Correspondence; *Phonics; *Reading Instruction; *Reading Research; *Sight Method; Sight Vocabulary; Teaching Methods; Word Recognition ED365050 EC302675 School Restructuring & Full Inclusion. Revision 5. Prepublication Copy. Sailor, Wayne; And Others San Francisco State Univ., CA. California Research Inst. 1992 94p.; Sponsoring Agency: Department of Education, Washington, DC. EDRS Price - MF01/PC04 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: POSITION PAPER (120) Geographic Source: U.S.; California Journal Announcement: RIEMAY94 This monograph addresses the issue of full inclusion of children and youth with severe intellectual disabilities and whether this form of social and academic integration is consistent with the direction of present school reform policies. The first section examines the implications of current efforts in educational reform. A case study illustrates differences between integration and inclusion. Key elements of full inclusion are identified: (1) full general education class membership; (2) full perception of "ownership" by the general education program (including special education); (3) individual outcomes-based decision making; (4) student-based services with team curriculum design; and (5) site team coordination of services and educational support. Next, issues in education policy are discussed such as recent trends in general education policy and reform. The following critical variables in school restructuring are identified: curriculum revision, performance-based assessment, decentralized instruction, school autonomy, site-based management and budgeting, shared decision making, infusion and coordination of educational resources, and community involvement. Finally, the comprehensive local school is described as a framework for inclusion through delivery of a variety of special education services and through systematic team design of the individual's curriculum within the general curriculum. (Contains 87 references.) (DB) Descriptors: Change Strategies; Curriculum Development; Delivery Systems;Educational Change; Educational Policy; Elementary Secondary Education;Individualized Instruction; *Mainstreaming; *Normalization (Disabilities); Peer Relationship; *Regular and Special Education Relationship; *School Restructuring; *Severe Mental Retardation; *Social Integration; Teamwork Identifiers: Performance Based Evaluation ED348787 EC301407 Teaching Socialization and Sex Education to Persons with Mental Retardation. Birch, Carol P.; Rouse, Geraldine R. Apr 1992; 24p.; Paper presented at the Annual Convention of the Council forExceptional Children (70th, Baltimore, MD, April 13-17, 1992). EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: CONFERENCE PAPER (150); PROJECT DESCRIPTION (141); NON-CLASSROOM MATERIAL (055) Geographic Source: U.S.; New Mexico Journal Announcement: RIEJAN93 Target Audience: Teachers; Practitioners This paper describes a language-based, problem-solving socialization and sex education curriculum designed for individuals with developmental delays. The curriculum aims to increase the students' understanding of themselves socially, psychologically, and physically enabled to function more effectively in a mainstream society that is ever changing. The program has a strong theoretical and applied research base in the areas of language development and thought, sociolinguistics, and cognitive behavior modification. It uses a process-oriented approach involving group interaction and natural context. This paper describes the program's philosophy, parental permission needed, student attitudes, and use of team teaching. Activities include vocabulary development; use of pictures, slides, and videotapes; semantic mapping; role play; problem solving; group work; and follow-up activities. The curriculum's 31 lessons cover such topics as hygiene, human reproduction, relationships, acquired immune deficiency syndrome, and sexual abuse. A sample lesson plan is presented, on the topic of parts of the body. (Contains 32 references.) (JDD) Descriptors: Developmental Disabilities; Elementary Secondary Education;*Interpersonal Relationship; Language Acquisition; *Mental Retardation; Problem Solving; *Sex Education; Socialization; Teaching Methods ED344372 EC301098 Social Skills for School and Community: Systematic Instruction for Children and Youthwith Cognitive Delays. Sargent, Laurence R. Council for Exceptional Children, Reston, VA. Div. on Mental Retardation. 1991; 299p. Available From: The Council for Exceptional Children, Publication Sales,1920 Association Dr., Reston, VA 22091-1589 ($18.00, $15.00 for CEC-MR members). EDRS Price - MF01 Plus Postage. PC Not Available from EDRS. Language: English Document Type: TEACHING GUIDE (052) Geographic Source: U.S.; Virginia Journal Announcement: RIESEP92 Target Audience: Teachers; Practitioners This monograph presents a rationale for proactive social skills training for persons with mental retardation as well as over 100 examples of such instruction across the K-12 continuum. Chapter 1 provides a conceptual framework of social competence with principles of what, when, and how to teach social skills. Chapter 2 discusses the direct instruction of social skills including use of simulation and specific instructional procedures and processes.The bulk of the book consists of specific lesson plans organized by level (primary, intermediate, middle school/junior high, and senior high) and skill areas (classroom related skills, school building related skills, personal skills, interaction initiative skills, interaction response skills, community related skills, and work related skills). Each lesson plan includes the objective, performance criteria, materials needed, and procedures (often outlined in detail). A checklist for rating school and community social skills is appended as are homework forms to encourage practice in 32 specific skills. (DB) Descriptors: Communication Skills; Conflict Resolution; Elementary Secondary Education; *Interpersonal Competence; Lesson Plans; *Mental Retardation; Simulation; Social Development; *Teaching Methods Internet Resources Internet Listservs Top of Page Back to ERIC Menu Back to CEC Home Page copyright © 1996 ERIC Clearinghouse on Disabilities and Gifted Education URL: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm WT02-B20-88IA001-000011-B031-181http://www.cec.sped.org:80/faq/muscdyst.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101075331 text/html 13129HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 07:53:38 GMTLast-modified: Tuesday, 10-Sep-96 14:37:00 GMTContent-length: 12936Content-type: text/html Muscular Dystrophy MuscDystr-FAQ (last updated August 14, 1996) THE ERIC CLEARINGHOUSE ON DISABILITIES AND GIFTEDEDUCATION (ERIC EC) The Council for Exceptional Children 1920Association Drive Reston, VA 20191 Toll Free: 1-800-328-0272 TTY: 703-264-9449 E-mail: ericec@cec.sped.org Internet: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm What is muscular dystrophy? This file includes information about children with muscular dystrophy. At the end of the file are links to Internet resources and Internet listservs (discussion groups) where you can obtain more specific information on the topic. There may be ERIC digests that provide information on related topics. You can read the full text of ERIC EC digests under our listing at the U.S. Department of Education, Office of Educational Research and Improvement. The primary focus of the ERIC system is education. While the ERIC database contains information on some medical disorders and related disabilities, you may want to search a medical database such as MEDLINE/MEDLARS at the National Library of Medicine or MedWeb at Emory University. Enclosed are several citations from the ERIC database. These records are asample of the kind of information you can find in the ERIC database. For morecitations on your topic of interest, you may want to search the ERIC database yourself on the Internet. References with ED (ERIC Document) and EJ (ERIC Journal) identifiers are cited inthe ERIC database; for example, ED333123 or EJ333999. ERIC documents areavailable in microfiche collections at more than 825 locations worldwide (check yourlocal college or public library). They can also be ordered for a fee through the ERICDocument Reproduction Service (EDRS) at 1-800-443-ERIC. References with anEJ (ERIC Journal) number are available for a fee from the originating journal (checkwith your local college or public library), through interlibrary loan services, or fromarticle reproduction clearinghouses, such as UMI: 1-800-248-0360; or ISI:1-800-523-1850. The following information is excerpted from Muscular Dystrophy Association, Australia What is Muscular Dystrophy ? The terms covers over 40 separate Neuromuscular disorders which have in common the progressive and irreversible wasting of muscle tissue. Some of these diseases are known as dystrophies, the wasting of the muscles from within themselves. Others are atrophies, wasting arising from a disorder originating in the nerve system which causes loss of the ability to use muscles. Various Myopathies, Peripheral Nerve and Metabolic Disorders also fall into the realm of disorders covered by the MDA's program. These Neuromuscular disorders (NMD's) are generally, incorrectly, termed "muscular dystrophy". ERIC descriptors (search terms) used: Muscular Dystrophy EJ432828 EC601447 Preparing for the Mainstream. Wolfson, Penny L. Exceptional Parent, v21 n4 p24-26 Jun 1991 ISSN: 0046-9157 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); POSITION PAPER (120) Journal Announcement: CIJFEB92 Target Audience: Parents A mother recounts the first experience of her 5.5-year-old son who has muscular dystrophy and learning disabilities with mainstreaming in a summer day camp. (DB) Descriptors: *Day Camp Programs; Early Childhood Education; *Learning Disabilities; *Mainstreaming; Personal Narratives; *Physical Disabilities; *Summer Programs Identifiers: *Muscular Dystrophy EJ352453 EC192298 Julie Goes to College. Morfee, Pat; Morfee, Tom Exceptional Parent, v17 n3 p36,38 Apr 1987 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); POSITION PAPER (120); PROJECT DESCRIPTION (141) Journal Announcement: CIJAUG87 Target Audience: Parents Parents describe how the Disabled Students' Program at the University of California-Berkeley supported their daughter with cerebral palsy in pursuing an independent college career. Two vignettes describing college students' (with muscular dystrophy and physical disabilities) adjustment at Boston University are presented. (CB) Descriptors: *Adjustment (to Environment); *Cerebral Palsy; *College Programs; College Students; *Daily Living Skills; *Disabilities; Higher Education; Parent Child Relationship; Personal Narratives; Physical Disabilities Identifiers: *Boston University MA; Muscular Dystrophy; *University of California Berkeley ED288336 EC201217 Newborn Screening: National Library of Medicine Literature Search, January 1980 through March 1987. No. 87-2. Patrias, Karen National Library of Medicine (DHHS/NIH), Bethesda, Md. Mar 1987; 58p.; Available From: Literature Search Program, Reference Section, National Library of Medicine, 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 (free; send a gummed, self-addressed label). EDRS Price - MF01/PC03 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: BIBLIOGRAPHY (131) Geographic Source: U.S.; Maryland Journal Announcement: RIEAPR88 Government: Federal This bibliography, prepared by the National Library of Medicine through a literature search of its online databases, covers all aspects of newborn screening. It includes references to screening for: inborn errors of metabolism, such as phenylketonuria and galactosemia; hemoglobinopathies, particularly sickle cell disease; congenital hypothyroidism and congenital adrenal hyperplasia; cystic fibrosis; and muscular dystrophy. Citations are primarily to journal articles from "Medline," "Health Planning and Administration," and "Bioethicsline." The bibliography contains over 750 references to English and foreign-language publications, issued between January 1980 and March 1987, in alphabetic order. (Author/JDD) Descriptors: *Congenital Impairments; *Disabilities; *Handicap Identification; Metabolism; *Neonates; *Screening Tests; Sickle Cell Anemia; Special Health Problems Identifiers: Cystic Fibrosis; Galactosemia; Hypothyroidism; Muscular Dystrophy; Phenylketonuria ED276189 EC190955 The Child with Muscular Dystrophy in School. Revised. Schock, Nancy C. 1985; 22p. Available From: Nancy C. Schock, 8 Marrett Rd., Lexington, MA 02173 ($2.50 prepaid; $4.00 if invoiced). EDRS Price - MF01 Plus Postage. PC Not Available from EDRS. Language: English Document Type: NON-CLASSROOM MATERIAL (055) Geographic Source: U.S.; Massachusetts Journal Announcement: RIEAPR87 Target Audience: Teachers; Parents; Practitioners Practical information on children with muscular dystrophy is intended to help parents and teachers facilitate their inclusion in mainstreamed classrooms. Major topics addressed include the following: transportation arrangements; providing full information to the teacher regarding the child's specific abilities and physical limitations; accessibility within the physical school environment; adaptive equipment, lifting, and managing a wheelchair; the role of the teacher in promoting social adjustment and positive peer relationships; individualized physical education; tutoring services during extended school absences; and career guidance. Names and addresses of organizational resources and publications are included. (JW) Descriptors: *Accessibility (for Disabled); *Assistive Devices (for Disabled); Career Guidance; Elementary Secondary Education; Home Instruction; *Mainstreaming; Peer Relationship; *Physical Disabilities; Physical Education; Physical Mobility; Social Adjustment; *Teacher Student Relationship; Wheelchairs Identifiers: *Muscular Dystrophy ED276162 EC190914 Handi Helps, 1985 Colorado State Univ., Ft. Collins. Cooperative Extension Service. Handi Helps, Jan-Apr, Oct-Dec 1985; 14p. EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: SERIAL (022); NON-CLASSROOM MATERIAL (055) Geographic Source: U.S.; Colorado Journal Announcement: RIEAPR87 Target Audience: Practitioners; Parents The six issues of Handi Helps presented here focus on specific issues of concern to the disabled, parents, and those working with the disabled. The two-page handi help fact sheets focus on the following topics: child sexual abuse prevention, asthma, scoliosis, the role of the occupational therapist, kidnapping, and muscular dystrophy. Each handi help provides basic information (such as cause, diagnosis, symptoms, and treatment (in the case of diseases), practical suggestions for readers, and additional resources (such as organizations, books, and films). (DB) Descriptors: Asthma; Clinical Diagnosis; *Diseases; Etiology; *Information Sources; Occupational Therapy; Sexual Abuse; *Special Health Problems; Therapy Identifiers: Kidnapping; Muscular Dystrophy; Scoliosis EJ306770 EC170283 Helping Our Children Accept Themselves. Gamble, Mae Exceptional Parent, v14 n4 p48-51 Jun 1984 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); PROJECT DESCRIPTION (141) Journal Announcement: CIJFEB85 Target Audience: Parents Parents of a child with muscular dystrophy recount their reactions to learning of the diagnosis, their gradual acceptance, and their son's resistance, which was gradually lessened when he was provided with more information and treated more normally as a member of the family. (CL) Descriptors: *Coping; *Diseases; *Emotional Adjustment; Family Relationship; Parent Materials; Personal Narratives; Physical Disabilities Identifiers: *Muscular Dystrophy EJ296566 CG525900 Personality Correlates and Degree of Impairment in Male Adolescents with Progressive and Nonprogressive Physical Disorders. Harper, Dennis C. Journal of Clinical Psychology, v39 n6 p859-67 Nov 1983 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: RESEARCH REPORT (143) Journal Announcement: CIJJUL84 Investigated 44 adolescents with physical impairment to determine the relationship among personality correlates, disability type, functional level of impairment, and rapidity of decline in those with progressive disease. Results showed similarities to severe physical limitations in both groups of males regardless of diagnosis or progression of their physical status. (LLL) Descriptors: Adjustment (to Environment); *Adolescents; Males; Mild Disabilities; *Personality Traits; *Physical Disabilities; Severe Disabilities Identifiers: Muscular Dystrophy; Orthopedic Disabilities EJ280357 TM508016 Effects of Passive Physical Exercise on Peripheral Vision in Muscular Dystrophic Children. Eickelberg, Warren; And Others Perceptual and Motor Skills, v56 n1 p167-70 Feb 1983 Available From: Reprint: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); RESEARCH REPORT (143) Journal Announcement: CIJAUG83 The effects of passive exercise of the extremities on peripheral vision of muscular dystrophic children aged 9 to 13 years was investigated. Compared to control subjects, those who experienced six minutes of passive exercise evidenced increased peripheral vision. Curriculum revisions for muscular dystrophic children indicate the importance of activity in facilitating learning. (Author/RD) Descriptors: Cardiovascular System; *Developmental Disabilities; *Exercise; *Exercise Physiology; Intermediate Grades; Motor Reactions; *Training Methods; *Vision; Visual Impairments Identifiers: Hypoxia; *Muscular Dystrophy; *Peripheral Vision Internet Resources Internet Listservs Top of Page Back to ERIC Menu Back to CEC Home Page copyright © 1996 ERIC Clearinghouse on Disabilities and Gifted Education URL: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm WT02-B20-89IA001-000011-B031-191http://www.cec.sped.org:80/faq/tourette.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101075342 text/html 20837HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 07:53:50 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 05-Dec-96 23:25:00 GMTContent-length: 20643Content-type: text/html Tourette-FAQ Tourette's Syndrome (last updated August 27, 1996) THE ERIC CLEARINGHOUSE ON DISABILITIES AND GIFTEDEDUCATION (ERIC EC) The Council for Exceptional Children 1920Association Drive Reston, VA 20191 Toll Free: 1-800-328-0272 TTY: 703-264-9449 E-mail: ericec@cec.sped.org Internet: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm Do you have any information on Tourette Syndrome? This file includes information about Tourette Syndrome. At the end of the file are links to Internet resources and Internet listservs (discussion groups) where you can obtain more specific information on the topic. There may be ERIC digests that provide information on related topics. You can read the full text of ERIC EC digests under our listing at the U.S. Department of Education, Office of Educational Research and Improvement. Enclosed are several citations from the ERIC database. These records are asample of the kind of information you can find in the ERIC database. For morecitations on your topic of interest, you may want to search the ERIC database yourself on the Internet. References with ED (ERIC Document) and EJ (ERIC Journal) identifiers are cited inthe ERIC database; for example, ED333123 or EJ333999. ERIC documents areavailable in microfiche collections at more than 825 locations worldwide (check yourlocal college or public library). They can also be ordered for a fee through the ERICDocument Reproduction Service (EDRS) at 1-800-443-ERIC. References with anEJ (ERIC Journal) number are available for a fee from the originating journal (checkwith your local college or public library), through interlibrary loan services, or fromarticle reproduction clearinghouses, such as UMI: 1-800-248-0360; or ISI:1-800-523-1850. The following information was excerpted fromthe Tourette Syndrome home page What is Tourette Syndrome? Tourette Syndrome (TS) is a neurological disorder characterized bytics -- involuntary, rapid, sudden movements or vocalizations thatoccur repeatedly in the same way. Diagnostic criteria include: Both multiple motor and one or more vocal tics present at sometime, although not necessarily simultaneously; The occurrence of tics many times a day (usually in bouts) nearly every day or intermittently throughout the span of more than one year; Periodic changes in the number, frequency, type and location of the tics, and in the waxing and waning of their severity. Symptoms can sometimes disappear for weeks or months at a time; Onset before the age of 18. ERIC descriptors (search terms) used: Tourette Syndrome EJ503148 EC611279 Tourette's Syndrome and Learning Disorders. Harris, Deborah; Silver, Archie A. Learning Disabilities: A Multidisciplinary Journal, v6 n1 p1-7 Feb 1995 ISSN: 1046-6819 Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); RESEARCH REPORT (143) Journal Announcement: CIJSEP95 Target Audience: Researchers Twenty-one children (ages 6-15) with Tourette's syndrome completed an educational battery. Seventy-five percent had problems with spelling and writing, 50% had difficulty with calculations, and 25% had difficulty with word identification and reading comprehension. Visual-motor defects were common. (Author/DB) Descriptors: Elementary Secondary Education; *Incidence; *Learning Disabilities; Learning Problems; Neurological Impairments; Perceptual Motor Coordination; *Special Health Problems; *Symptoms (Individual Disorders) Identifiers: *Tourette Syndrome ED387980 EC304334 Learning Problems and the TS Child and Specific Classroom Strategies and Techniques for Students with Tourette Syndrome and Techniques To Aid Students with TS in Completing Written Assignments. Davidovicz, Herman; And Others Tourette Syndrome Association, Inc., Bayside, NY. Apr 1994; 8p. Sponsoring Agency: American Legion Child Welfare Foundation, Inc., Indianapolis, Ind. Available From: Tourette Syndrome Association, Inc., 42-40 Bell Blvd. Bayside, NY 11361-2874 ($0.50 each). EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: NON-CLASSROOM MATERIAL (055); COLLECTION (020) Geographic Source: U.S.; New York Journal Announcement: RIEMAR96 Target Audience: Parents; Practitioners Three fact sheets provide parents and educators with basic information on Tourette Syndrome (TS). The first sheet is titled "Learning Problems and the TS Child" and is by Herman Davidovicz, a neuropsychologist. It notes the high frequency of attention deficit disorders and learning problems in children with TS and provides information for parents on warning signs, reasons for the learning problems, suggestions for intervention, and consideration of remedial help and regular classroom adjustments. The second fact sheet is by an educator, Susan Conners, and is titled "Specific Classroom Strategies and Techniques for Students with Tourette Syndrome." Strategies are suggested for the following areas: tic symptoms; attention deficit hyperactivity disorder problems; visual motor integration, auditory processing difficulties, and fine motor skill problems; and "short fuse" and oppositional behavior difficulties. The third sheet is by Jacqueline Favish, a special educator, and is titled "Techniques To Aid Students with TS in Completing Written Assignments." It offers suggestions for helping students with note taking, standardized tests, teacher-devised tests, and timed tests. (DB) Descriptors: Accessibility (for Disabled); Attention Deficit Disorders; Behavior Problems; *Classroom Techniques; Elementary Secondary Education; Hyperactivity; Incidence; Intervention; *Learning Problems; Learning Strategies; Mainstreaming; *Neurological Impairments; Remedial Instruction; *Symptoms (Individual Disorders); Test Wiseness Identifiers: *Tourette Syndrome ED385078 EC304111 Discipline and the TS Child: A Guide for Parents and Teachers of Children with Tourette Syndrome. Fisher-Collins, Ramona Tourette Syndrome Association, Inc., Bayside, NY. 1994; 21p. Available From: Tourette Syndrome Association, Inc., 42-40 Bell Blvd., Bayside, NY 11361-2874 ($3). EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: NON-CLASSROOM MATERIAL (055) Geographic Source: U.S.; New York Journal Announcement: RIEDEC95 Target Audience: Teachers; Parents; Practitioners This parent and teacher guide considers discipline for children with Tourette Syndrome (TS) who have difficulty with behavioral compliance. Discipline is defined primarily as "training to act in accordance with rules," and is not punishment but involves teaching self-control and observance of societal expectations. Controversy and misconceptions about discipline are noted. Consideration is given to redirecting the child from undesirable behaviors which can occur with TS, such as the urge to spit or touch or grab other people's personal body parts. Ways to redirect the child from obsessive thought repetition are also addressed to help avoid the child's distress when saying phrases or words of an obscene or violent nature which stick in their minds. Practice in anticipating outcomes of behaviors can be helpful for the child with TS who has difficulty with impulse control and does not see the connection between actions and consequences. In addition to teaching the child the concept of cause and effect, children can be taught how to make choices and to accept consequences for them. Also important is providing the child with structure, direction, and limits regarding the expression of explosive anger. Included are brief annotations of three videotapes and three publications on TS. (SW) Descriptors: Behavior Change; *Behavior Modification; *Behavior Problems; *Discipline; Elementary Secondary Education; *Neurological Impairments; Parent Role; *Self Control; Teacher Role Identifiers: *Tourette Syndrome ED372543 EC303175 Tourette Syndrome and Associated Features and the School Aged Child. Willis, Christopher 16 Apr 1993; 15p.; Paper presented at the Conference of the National Association of School Psychologists (25th, Washington, DC, April 16, 1993). EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: CONFERENCE PAPER (150); REVIEW LITERATURE (070) Geographic Source: U.S.; Rhode Island Journal Announcement: RIEDEC94 Target Audience: Practitioners Tourette Syndrome (TS) is described as a genetically based, chronic constellation of neurobehavioral symptoms and associated features involving repetitive, simple, and/or complex motor and phonic tics. Treatment generally involves neuroleptic medication. Symptoms of obsessive-compulsive disorder, attention deficit hyperactive disorder, learning disabilities, neuropsychological anomalies, school adjustment problems, and behavior or conduct disorders are often associated with Tourette Syndrome. Milestones unique to the course of Tourette Syndrome may include parents' realization that something is unusual about their child's behavior, a referral to a school psychologist, an official diagnosis, and subsequent parental involvement with a support group. The role of the school psychologist involves evaluation, case manager, counselor or therapist, and advocacy. School psychologists are in a unique position to be prime facilitators and advocates in promoting self-esteem, encouraging school achievement, and supporting warm family relationships and peer socializations. Appendices outline symptoms and frequency of behavioral difficulties. (Contains 23 references.) (JDD) Descriptors: Behavior Problems; Child Advocacy; *Congenital Impairments; Drug Therapy; Elementary Secondary Education; Multiple Disabilities; *Neurological Impairments; *School Psychologists; *Staff Role; Student Characteristics; *Symptoms (Individual Disorders) Identifiers: *Tourette Syndrome EJ468786 EC606678 Educational Considerations for Children with Tourette's Syndrome. Jones, Kevin; Johnson, Genevieve Marie Canadian Journal of Special Education, v8 n2 p129-33 1992 ISSN: 0827-3391 Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); REVIEW LITERATURE (070); NON-CLASSROOM MATERIAL (055) Journal Announcement: CIJJAN94 Target Audience: Teachers; Practitioners This article provides an introduction to Tourette's Syndrome, an inherited neurological disorder characterized by motor and vocal tics. Considered are prevalence of the syndrome, common characteristics, instructional strategies, and the critical role of the teacher. (Author/DB) Descriptors: Congenital Impairments; Elementary Secondary Education; Heredity; *Incidence; *Neurological Impairments; Student Characteristics; *Symptoms (Individual Disorders); Teacher Role; *Teaching Methods Identifiers: *Tourette Syndrome EJ463949 EC605544 Gilles de la Tourette Disorder among Individuals with Severe or Profound Mental Retardation. Crews, W. David, Jr.; And Others Mental Retardation, v31 n1 p25-28 Feb 1993 ISSN: 0047-6765 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); RESEARCH REPORT (143) Journal Announcement: CIJOCT93 Target Audience: Researchers Three case reports of people with severe or profound mental retardation and Tourette disorder are presented. Issues related to the diagnosis of Tourette disorder in this population are discussed. (Author) Descriptors: Case Studies; *Clinical Diagnosis; Incidence; Medical Evaluation; *Mental Disorders; Multiple Disabilities; Neurological Impairments; Neuropsychology; *Severe Mental Retardation; *Symptoms (Individual Disorders) Identifiers: *Tourette Syndrome ED358880 JC930311 Disability Accommodation Handbook. Flick-Hruska, Connie, Comp.; Blythe, Gretchen, Comp. Metropolitan Community Colleges of Kansas City, Mo. Sep 1992 69p. Sponsoring Agency: Office of Special Education and Rehabilitative Services (ED), Washington, DC. EDRS Price - MF01/PC03 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: TEACHING GUIDE (052) Geographic Source: U.S.; Missouri Journal Announcement: RIENOV93 Target Audience: Teachers; Practitioners Designed as a resource for two-year college faculty and staff working with students with disabilities, this handbook contains facts about various disabilities, practical suggestions for improving services, and resource points for further information. Following a brief introduction, legal implications regarding disabled students are discussed for postsecondary education institutions, and general suggestions for overcoming negative reactions to disabled students are provided. Next, the handbook describes symptoms and useful teaching techniques/classroom approaches for the following disabilities: learning disabilities; traumatic brain injury; mobility impairments; visual impairments (legal blindness); total blindness; hearing impairments, including information on using a relay system to call the hearing impaired and working with interpreters; back impairments; speech impairments; epilepsy; cerebral palsy; carpal tunnel syndrome; multiple sclerosis; rheumatoid arthritis; Tourette's syndrome; mental illness; suicide; Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome (AIDS); and substance abuse. For each disability, telephone numbers of institutions offering further information are provided. The manual then lists possible side effects of medication that students may be taking and reviews considerations regarding disabled student access to science laboratories. Finally, evacuation procedures for visually impaired, hearing impaired, and non-ambulatory students are considered. (MAB) Descriptors: *Accessibility (for Disabled); Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome; Classroom Environment; *Classroom Techniques; Community Colleges; *Disabilities; Handicap Identification; Hearing Impairments; Injuries; *Learning Disabilities; Mental Disorders; Perceptual Handicaps; *Physical Disabilities; Postsecondary Education; Special Needs Students; Speech Handicaps; Teacher Response; Teaching Methods; Two Year Colleges; Two Year College Students; Visual Impairments EJ455860 EC604786 Tourette Syndrome and Learning Disabilities. Burd, Larry; And Others Journal of Learning Disabilities, v25 n9 p598-604 Nov 1992 ISSN: 0022-2194 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); RESEARCH REPORT (143) Journal Announcement: CIJMAY93 Examination of 42 cases of children with Tourette Syndrome with intelligence quotients (IQs) above 70 found that mean IQs were higher than mean math, spelling, reading, and reading comprehension scores. Using a 1.5 standard deviation discrepancy, 51 percent met criteria for learning disability in at least one academic area; 21 percent had a 2-standard-deviation discrepancy. (Author/JDD) Descriptors: Congenital Impairments; *Developmental Disabilities; Educational Diagnosis; *Handicap Identification; *Incidence; Intelligence Quotient; *Learning Disabilities Identifiers: *Discrepancy Model; *Tourette Syndrome EJ440393 SP521056 Mindy Has Tourette Syndrome. Connely, Connie Learning, v20 n5 p42-45 Jan 1992 ISSN: 0090-3167 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); NON-CLASSROOM MATERIAL (055) Journal Announcement: CIJJUN92 A primary teacher describes what it was like for her to have a first grade student with Tourette Syndrome. After discussing diagnosis and intervention, she makes suggestions for teachers who think they have students with similar problems. (SM) Descriptors: Adaptive Behavior (of Disabled); *Adjustment (to Environment); Classroom Techniques; Congenital Impairments; *Early Intervention; Grade 4; Mild Disabilities; Primary Education; *Special Needs Students; *Student Adjustment; *Teacher Role; Teacher Student Relationship Identifiers: *Tourette Syndrome EJ439385 EC602018 Gilles de la Tourette Syndrome: A Review and Implications for Educators. Lemons, Laurie A.; Barber, William H. B.C. Journal of Special Education, v15 n2 p146-58 1991 ISSN: 0704-7509 Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); REVIEW LITERATURE (070) Journal Announcement: CIJJUN92 Target Audience: Practitioners Gilles de la Tourette syndrome is a disorder characterized by multiple involuntary motor and verbal tics. This review covers the history, symptoms, diagnostic criteria, past and present treatments, associated disorders, and various educational techniques. (Author/DB) Descriptors: *Clinical Diagnosis; Elementary Secondary Education; *Handicap Identification; *Intervention; Medical Evaluation; *Neurological Impairments; Therapy Identifiers: Teaching; *Tourette Syndrome EJ425652 EC600299 An Educator's Guide to Tourette Syndrome. Bronheim, Suzanne Journal of Learning Disabilities, v24 n1 p17-22 Jan 1991 ISSN: 0022-2194 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); NON-CLASSROOM MATERIAL (055) Journal Announcement: CIJSEP91 Target Audience: Teachers; Practitioners Tourette Syndrome is described in terms of causes, treatment, associated disorders (attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, obsessive-compulsive behaviors, learning disabilities), and classroom management (dealing with tics, writing problems, language problems, and attention problems). Common teacher questions concerning Tourette Syndrome are answered. (DB) Descriptors: Attention Control; Behavior Problems; Classroom Techniques; Elementary Secondary Education; Etiology; Intervention; Language Handicaps; *Learning Disabilities; *Neurological Impairments; *Symptoms (Individual Disorders); Teaching Methods; Writing Difficulties Identifiers: *Tourette Syndrome EJ425651 EC600298 The Tourette Syndrome Association, Inc. Levi, Sue L. Journal of Learning Disabilities, v24 n1 p16 Jan 1991 ISSN: 0022-2194 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); PROJECT DESCRIPTION (141) Journal Announcement: CIJSEP91 The article briefly describes the Tourette Syndrome Association, an association which works to advance public understanding, treatment, and the correct diagnosis of this neurological impairment, which can involve "bizarre" behavioral symptoms as well as learning, attention, and impulse control problems. (DB) Descriptors: Behavior Problems; *Neurological Impairments; *Organizations (Groups); *Social Support Groups; Symptoms (Individual Disorders) Identifiers: Public Information; *Tourette Syndrome Association RESOURCES Tourette Syndrome Association 42-40 Bell Blvd. Bayside, NY 11361-2861 1-800-237-0717 718-224-2999 E-mail: tourette@ix.netcom.com URL: http://neuro-www2.mgh.harvard.edu/tsa/tsamain.nclk Internet Resources Internet Listservs Top of Page Back to ERIC Menu Back to CEC Home Page copyright © 1996 ERIC Clearinghouse on Disabilities and Gifted Education URL: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm WT02-B20-90IA001-000011-B031-202http://www.cec.sped.org:80/faq/bipolar.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101075353 text/html 21388HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 07:54:00 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 09-Sep-96 21:01:00 GMTContent-length: 21196Content-type: text/html  NAME OF FILE, Bipolar-FAQ Bipolar-FAQ (last updated July 14, 1996) THE ERIC CLEARINGHOUSE ON DISABILITIES AND GIFTEDEDUCATION (ERIC EC) The Council for Exceptional Children 1920Association Drive Reston, VA 20191 Toll Free: 1-800-328-0272 TTY: 703-264-9449 E-mail: ericec@cec.sped.org Internet: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm What is bipolar disorder? This file includes information about bipolar disorder. At the end of this file are links to Internet resources and Internet listservs (discussion groups) where you can obtain more specific information on this topic. There may be an ERIC digests on related topics that provides further information. You can read the full text of ERIC EC digests under our listing at the U.S. Department of Education, Office of Educational Research and Improvement. Enclosed are several citations from the ERIC database. For more citations on your topic of interest, you may want to search the ERIC database yourself on the Internet. While the ERIC database contains information on some mental health disorders, you might have more relevant results by accessing a world wide web site such as the National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) or a database such as PsychNET from the American Psychological Association (APA). References with ED (ERIC Document) and EJ (ERIC Journal) identifiers are cited inthe ERIC database; for example, ED333123 or EJ333999. ERIC documents areavailable in microfiche collections at more than 825 locations worldwide (check yourlocal college or public library). They can also be ordered for a fee through the ERICDocument Reproduction Service (EDRS) at 1-800-443-ERIC. References with anEJ (ERIC Journal) number are available for a fee from the originating journal (checkwith your local college or public library), through interlibrary loan services, or fromarticle reproduction clearinghouses, such as UMI: 1-800-248-0360; or ISI:1-800-523-1850. The following information on bipolar disorder is from the National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH). WHAT IS BIPOLAR DISORDER? Bipolar disorder, which is also known as manic-depressive illness and will becalled by both names throughout this publication--is a mental illness involvingepisodes of serious mania and depression. The person's mood usually swings fromoverly "high" and irritable to sad and hopeless and then back again, withperiods of normal mood in between. Bipolar disorder typically begins in adolescence or early adulthood andcontinues throughout life. It is often not recognized as an illness, and peoplewho have it may suffer needlessly for years or even decades. Effective treatments are available that greatly alleviate the suffering causedby bipolar disorder and can usually prevent its devastating complications.These include marital break-ups, job loss, alcohol and drug abuse, and suicide. The following information on bipolar disorder is from the National Alliance for the Mentally Ill (NAMI). BIPOLAR DISORDER AND DEPRESSION Almost one-third of six-to-twelve-year-old children diagnosed with major depression will develop bipolar disorders within a few years, according to a study of 79 depressed children over two-to-five years reported in the May 1994 issue of the Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry. Most became bipolar before the onset of puberty, and 32% became bipolar at an average age of 11 years. The researchers recommend that those caring for depressed children should be on the lookout for symptoms of manic-depressive illness. They also suggested that--because antidepressants may worsen certain forms of manic illness in adults--prescribing antidepressants for children should be done with care. ERIC descriptors (search terms) used: Bipolar Disorder or Emotional Disturbances or Mental Disorders EJ414620 CG538044 Understanding Bipolar Disorder: Implications for Mental Health Counselors. Withrow, J. Steve; Hinkle, J. Scott Journal of Mental Health Counseling, v12 n2 p138-50 Apr 1990 Report No: ISSN-0193-1830 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); GENERAL REPORT (140) Journal Announcement: CIJFEB91 Provides an overview of bipolar disorder, including a discussion of diagnostic indicators, etiological theories, and psychopharmacological treatment. Examines treatment implications for mental health counselors, including role in psychiatric liaison, individual counseling, marriage and family therapy, and vocational counseling. (Author/ABL) Descriptors: Clinical Diagnosis; Counseling; Etiology; *Mental Disorders; Psychotherapy Identifiers: *Bipolar Disorder ED316996 EC230055 A Psychiatric Primer for Programs Serving People with Developmental Disabilities. Monograph #101. Dal Pozzo, Earlene; Bernstein, Gail S. Colorado Univ., Denver, John F. Kennedy Child Development Center. Jun 1987; 14p.; For a related document, see EC 230 056. EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: CLASSROOM MATERIAL (050) Geographic Source: U.S.; Colorado Journal Announcement: RIEAUG90 Intended for personnel in programs serving persons with developmental disabilities, the booklet provides basic information about the major psychiatric disorders and their treatment. Five sections cover: the major disorders; medications--uses and problems; assessment; cooordination of services; and psychiatric emergencies. Major disorders such as schizophrenia and affective illness, bipolar disorder, and depression are described. Commonly used antipsychotic and antidepressant medications are listed by both generic and trade names, and side effects are explained. Four steps of assessment are recommended: (1) obtain informed consent from the client or guardian; (2) obtain medical and psychiatric history; (3) obtain a social history; and (4) obtain verification that the client has had a recent physical examination. Coordination of services including those of a physician, a therapist, a source of expert information on medications, and an inpatient facility is urged. Finally, appropriate immediate management of a psychiatric emergency is discussed. Six references. (DB) Descriptors: Depression (Psychology); *Developmental Disabilities; *Drug Therapy; *Emotional Disturbances; Evaluation Methods; Interdisciplinary Approach; Multiple Disabilities; *Psychiatry; Psychosis; Schizophrenia; Therapy EJ486046 CG544381 Strategies for Helping Early School-Aged Children with Oppositional Defiant and Conduct Disorders: The Importance of Home-School Partnerships. Webster-Stratton, Carolyn School Psychology Review, v22 n3 p437-57 1993 ISSN: 0279-6015 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: REVIEW LITERATURE (070); JOURNAL ARTICLE (080) Journal Announcement: CIJNOV94 Reviews diagnosis, developmental progression, and etiology of oppositional defiant and early-onset conduct disorders (ODD/CD) in children. Describes family and school behavioral programs for helping these children. Notes that most successful programs will be those which target multiple symptoms of ODD/CD across risk factors, multiple settings (home and school), and agents (parents, teachers, and children). (Author/NB) Descriptors: *Behavior Disorders; *Behavior Modification; *Counseling Techniques; Educational Diagnosis; Etiology; *Family School Relationship; Intervention; Preschool Education; Prevention; Primary Education; Psychological Evaluation; *Young Children EJ414620 CG538044 Understanding Bipolar Disorder: Implications for Mental Health Counselors. Withrow, J. Steve; Hinkle, J. Scott Journal of Mental Health Counseling, v12 n2 p138-50 Apr 1990 Report No: ISSN-0193-1830 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); GENERAL REPORT (140) Journal Announcement: CIJFEB91 Provides an overview of bipolar disorder, including a discussion of diagnostic indicators, etiological theories, and psychopharmacological treatment. Examines treatment implications for mental health counselors, including role in psychiatric liaison, individual counseling, marriage and family therapy, and vocational counseling. (Author/ABL) Descriptors: Clinical Diagnosis; Counseling; Etiology; *Mental Disorders; Psychotherapy Identifiers: *Bipolar Disorder ED340976 CG023931 Facts for Families from the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry 1991 . American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, Washington, DC. 1991; 20p. EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: GENERAL REPORT (140) Geographic Source: U.S.; District of Columbia Journal Announcement: RIEJUN92 Target Audience: Parents Nine fact sheets relevant to children's emotional well-being are presented in this document. The first fact sheet, "Teenagers with Eating Disorders" focuses on anorexia nervosa and bulimia. The second fact sheet, "Children and Grief" describes age-related responses to death, and ways of coping with a death in a family that includes children. The third fact sheet, "Teen Suicide" describes conditions that can lead to adolescent suicide and warning signs that parents should recognize. Patients are also urged to recognize depression and suicidal feelings as treatable mental disorders. The fourth fact sheet, "Children of Alcoholics" discusses the risks for children of alcoholic parents. Benefits of professional help and support groups are described. The fifth fact sheet, "Stepfamily Problems" looks at the challenges faced by new stepfamilies. Suggestions are given for building strong bonds. The sixth fact sheet, "Helping Children after a Disaster" provides tips and insights to help parents consider the effects of a catastrophe on their children. Symptoms and changes that may indicate Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder are described. The seventh fact sheet, "Manic-Depressive Illness in Teens" describes the symptoms of manic-depressive illness, also known as bipolar mood disorder. The eighth fact sheet, "Children of Parents with Mental Illnesses" discusses the risks of mental illnesses for children, and lists protective or positive factors that can decrease the risk. The ninth fact sheet, "Making Decisions about Substance Abuse Treatment" provides questions for parents to ask when substance abuse treatment is recommended. In most of the fact sheets, symptoms and warning signs are listed.(LLL) Descriptors: *Adolescents; Alcoholism; Anorexia Nervosa; At Risk Persons; Bulimia; *Children; Eating Habits; Elementary Secondary Education; *Family (Sociological Unit); Grief; Mental Disorders; Stepfamily; Suicide Identifiers: Children of Alcoholics; Manic Depression; Posttraumatic Stress Disorder EJ402457 EC221837 Manic Depressive Disorder in Mental Handicap. Berney, T. P.; Jones, P. M. Australia and New Zealand Journal of Developmental Disabilities, v14 n3-4 p219-25 1988 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); PROJECT DESCRIPTION (141) Journal Announcement: CIJJUN90 Eight cases of early onset bipolar affective disorder in adolescents with mental impairment are described, focusing on age of onset; common characteristics such as rapid cycling, mixed affective states, and lithium resistance; and the likelihood that cerebral dysfunction might cause a secondary form of bipolar disorder. (JDD) Descriptors: Adolescents; Age; Case Studies; *Depression (Psychology); *Individual Characteristics; *Mental Disorders; *Mental Retardation; Multiple Disabilities Identifiers: *Manic Depression ED283343 EC192772 Depressive Disorders: Treatments Bring New Hope. Sargent, Marilyn National Inst. of Mental Health (DHHS), Rockville, Md. Div. of Scientific and Public Information. 1986; 31p. Report No: DHHS-(ADM)-86-1491 EDRS Price - MF01/PC02 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: EVALUATIVE REPORT (142) Geographic Source: U.S.; District of Columbia Journal Announcement: RIENOV87 Government: Federal This booklet describes the symptoms, forms, causes, and treatment of depression, with particular focus on depression in children, adolescents, and older adults. Symptoms include: persistent sad or "empty" mood; feelings of hopelessness, guilt, or helplessness; loss of interest in ordinary activities; sleep disturbances; eating disturbances; thoughts of death or suicide; and restlessness and irritability. Among the disorders several forms are major clinical depression, dysthymia, bipolar depression (also called manic-depressive disorder), or a combination of disorders. Causes include genetic, biochemical, and environmental factors. Treatments include drug, psychosocial, and electroconvulsive therapy, and (still under study) experimental treatments. Childhood depression may go unrecognized when combined with other types of behavior such as hyperactivity or delinquency. Depression appears to be occurring more commonly among teenagers, whose symptoms are sometimes attributed to the "normal adjustments" of adolescence. Symptoms of depressed older adults are often misdiagnosed as senility or everyday problems of the aged. The depressed person can be helped by family and friends who maintain as normal a relationship as possible, point out distorted thinking without being critical or disapproving, acknowledge that the depressed individual is suffering and in pain, and express affection. Family and friends should not blame the depressed person for his or her condition or say or do anything to exacerbate a poor self-image. (CB) Descriptors: Adolescents; Biochemistry; Children; *Depression (Psychology); Drug Therapy; *Emotional Disturbances; *Etiology; Genetics; Older Adults; Psychotherapy; Suicide; *Therapy ED328808 CG023114 Plain Talk about Depression. Plain Talk Series. Sargent, Marilyn National Inst. of Mental Health (DHHS), Bethesda, Md. 1989; 5p. Report No: DHHS-(ADM)-89-1639 EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: GENERAL REPORT (140) Geographic Source: U.S.; Maryland Journal Announcement: RIEJUL91 Government: Federal Depression is defined as a "whole-body" illness, involving the body, mood, and thoughts. Three of the most prevalent types of depressive disorders are described: major depression, dysthymia, and bipolar disorders (formerly called manic-depressive illness). Eleven symptoms of depression and 10 symptoms of mania are listed. Causes of depression are discussed, focusing on genetic, psychological, and environmental factors. Diagnostic evaluation and treatment are described. The components of a diagnostic evaluation are discussed. Antidepressant medications are reviewed, focusing on tricyclics, monoamine oxidase inhibitors, and lithium. It is noted that antidepressants are not habit-forming and that antianxiety drugs are not antidepressants. Side effects of antidepressants are discussed and ways to deal with them are presented. Psychotherapies are discussed, including the issues involved in short-term therapy, behavior therapy, and psychodynamic therapy. Information on self-help is presented, including realizing that depressive disorders make one feel exhausted, worthless, helpless, and hopeless. Advice is given on what actions to take or not to take when one is depressed. Information on how to help depressed persons is discussed. This includes helping the depressed person to get diagnosis and treatment and offering emotional support. Addresses of groups providing information are included. (ABL) Descriptors: Adults; *Depression (Psychology); Etiology; Helping Relationship;Mental Disorders; Psychiatric Services; Psychological Services; *Psychotherapy; Referral; *Symptoms (Individual Disorders) ED296196 CG020886 Emerging from Depression: Treatment of Adolescent Depression Using the Major Treatment Models of Adult Depression. Long, Kathleen M. North Dakota Univ., Grand Forks. Apr 1988; 26p. EDRS Price - MF01/PC02 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: REVIEW LITERATURE (070) Geographic Source: U.S.; North Dakota Journal Announcement: RIEDEC88 Noting that adolescents who commit suicide are often clinically depressed, this paper examines various approaches in the treatment of depression. Major treatment models of adult depression, which can be directly applied to the treatment of the depressed adolescent, are described. Major treatment models and selected research studies are reviewed in the areas of: (1) cognitive therapy; (2) cognitive and behavior therapy; (3) cognitive therapy with pharmacotherapy; (4) the use of pharmacotherapy for acute depression; (5) treatment of manic depression with lithium; (6) the use of lithium in learning and behavior problems; and (7) reality therapy. The paper concludes that a combination of therapies may be needed to treat depressed adolescents: one therapy may be needed to treat the condition immediately, especially if the teenager is suicidal, and another therapy may be needed later to alter cognitive distortions and to encourage responsible choices in coping with life's problems. (NB) Descriptors: *Adolescents; *Behavior Modification; *Cognitive Restructuring; Counseling Techniques; *Depression (Psychology); *Drug Therapy; Models; *Reality Therapy; School Psychologists; Secondary Education ED290573 PS017130 A Personality Profile of Oppositional Children as Measured on Selected Scales of the Personality Inventory for Children. Rapp, Doris Jean Gaines; Hutchinson, Roger L. 18 Dec 1987; 20p. EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: RESEARCH REPORT (143) Geographic Source: U.S.; Indiana Journal Announcement: RIEJUN88 By means of 12 selected subscales of the Personality Inventory for Children (PIC), which were used to plot profiles, this study investigated personality characteristics of oppositional children. In general, oppositional children are children who do not do what is asked of them. In particular, oppositional behavior consists of at least 6 months of disobedient, negativistic, and provocative opposition to authority figures which is manifested in at least two of the following five symptoms: (1) violations of minor rules; (2) temper tantrums; (3) argumentativeness; (4) provocative behavior; and (5) stubbornness.Participants, who completed a 600-item PIC, were the parents of 43 oppositional children and 57 compliant children. Their children were between 6 and 12 years of age. Findings suggest that oppositional children may be psychologically maladjusted, have problems in school achievement, be depressed, and tend to come from ineffective families which lack cohesion. Such children may display delinquent tendencies and be somewhat withdrawn. Oppositional children appear to be anxious and to display some features that are similar to those exhibited by children with psychosis. Oppositional children are often overactive, but not when they are severely depressed. These children may also lack social skills and may not have effective social relations. (RH) Descriptors: *Behavior Problems; *Children; Comparative Analysis; *Individual Characteristics; Parents; *Personality Assessment; Profiles; Rating Scales Identifiers: *Oppositional Behavior; *Personality Inventory for Children Internet Resources Internet Listservs Top of Page Back to ERIC Menu Back to CEC Home Page copyright © 1996 ERIC Clearinghouse on Disabilities and Gifted Education URL: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm WT02-B20-91IA001-000011-B031-214http://www.cec.sped.org:80/faq/oddcd.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101075404 text/html 26101HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 07:54:12 GMTLast-modified: Tuesday, 10-Sep-96 15:31:00 GMTContent-length: 25908Content-type: text/html ODD/CD ODD/CD-FAQ (last updated July 19, 1996) THE ERIC CLEARINGHOUSE ON DISABILITIES AND GIFTEDEDUCATION (ERIC EC) The Council for Exceptional Children 1920Association Drive Reston, VA 20191 Toll Free: 1-800-328-0272 TTY: 703-264-9449 E-mail: ericec@cec.sped.org Internet: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm What is oppositional defiant disorder and how is it distinguished from othertypes of antisocial behavior? This file includes information about oppositional defiant disorder (ODD), sometimes called oppositional conduct disorder (OCD). At the end of the file are linksto Internet resources and Internet listservs (discussion groups) where you can obtainmore specific information on the topic. There may be an ERIC digestthat provides further information on related topics. For morecitations on your topic of interest, you may want to search the ERIC database yourself on the Internet. While the ERIC databasecontains information on some mental health disorders, you might have better results byaccessing a world wide web site such as the National Institute of Mental Healthor a database such as PsychNET from the AmericanPsychological Association. References with ED (ERIC Document) and EJ (ERIC Journal) identifiers are cited inthe ERIC database; for example, ED333123 or EJ333999. ERIC documents areavailable in microfiche collections at more than 825 locations worldwide (check yourlocal college or public library). They can also be ordered for a fee through the ERICDocument Reproduction Service (EDRS) at 1-800-443-ERIC. References with anEJ (ERIC Journal) number are available for a fee from the originating journal (checkwith your local college or public library), through interlibrary loan services, or fromarticle reproduction clearinghouses, such as UMI: 1-800-248-0360; or ISI:1-800-523-1850. The following information is excerpted from Internet Mental Health. The International Classification of Disease (ICD-10) Classification of Mental andBehavioural Disorders, published by the World Health Organization, Geneva, 1992 F91.3 Oppositional Defiant Disorder This type of conduct disorder is characteristically seen in children below the age of 9 or 10 years. It is defined by the presence of markedly defiant, disobedient, provocative behaviour and by the absence of more severe dissocial or aggressive acts that violate the law or the rights of others. The disorder requires that the overall criteria for F91 be met: even severely mischievous or naughty behaviour is not in itself sufficient for diagnosis. Many authorities consider that oppositional defiant patterns of behaviour represent a less severe type of conduct disorder, rather than a qualitatively distinct type. Research evidence is lacking on whether the distinction is qualitative or quantitative. However, findings suggest that, in so far as it is distinctive, this is true mainly or only in younger children. Caution should be employed in using this category, especially in the case of older children. Clinically significant conduct disorders in older children are usually accompanied by dissocial or aggressive behaviour that go beyond defiance, disobedience, or disruptiveness, although, not infrequently, they are preceded by oppositional defiant disorders at an earlier age. The category is included to reflect common diagnostic practice and to facilitate the classification of disorders occurring in young children. Diagnostic Guidelines The essential feature of this disorder is a pattern of persistently negativistic, hostile, defiant, provocative, and disruptive behaviour, which is clearly outside the normal range of behaviour for a child of the same age in the same sociocultural context, and which does not include the more serious violations of the rights of others as reflected in the aggressive and dissocial behaviour specified for categories F91.0 and F91.2. Children with this disorder tend frequently and actively to defy adult requests or rules and deliberately to annoy other people. Usually they tend to be angry, resentful, and easily annoyed by other people whom they blame for their own mistakes or difficulties. They generally have a low frustration tolerance and readily lose their temper. Typically, their defiance has a provocative quality, so that they initiate confrontations and generally exhibit excessive levels of rudeness, uncooperativeness, and resistance to authority. Frequently, this behaviour is most evident in interactions with adults or peers whom the child knows well, and signs of the disorder may not be evident during a clinical interview. ICD-10 copyright 1992 by World Health Organization. Internet Mental Health copyright 1995-1996 by Phillip W. Long, M.D. ERIC descriptors (search terms) used: Emotional Disturbances or Behavior Disorders or Oppositional Behavior EJ442629 CG540821 Familial Risk Factors to Oppositional Defiant Disorder and Conduct Disorder: Parental Psychopathology and Maternal Parenting. Frick, Paul J.; And Others Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, v60 n1 p49-55 Feb 1992 ISSN: 0022-006X Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080); RESEARCH REPORT (143) Journal Announcement: CIJAUG92 In sample of 177 clinic-referred children aged 7-13, association was found between diagnosis of conduct disorder and several aspects of family functioning: maternal parenting (supervision and persistence in discipline) and parent adjustment (paternal antisocial personality disorder and paternal substance abuse). Children with oppositional defiant disorder were intermediate to families of children with conduct disorders and clinic control children. (Author/NB) Descriptors: Antisocial Behavior; *At Risk Persons; *Behavior Disorders; Children; Family Life; *Family Relationship; Fathers; Mothers; *Parent Role; *Psychopathology; Substance Abuse ED367112 EC302819 Learning Disabilities Spectrum: ADD, ADHD, and LD. Proceedings of the Annual Spectrum of Developmental Disabilities Course (15th, Baltimore, Maryland, March 16-18, 1992). Capute, Arnold J., Ed.; And Others 1994; 261p. ISBN: 0-912752-33-5 Available From: York Press, P.O. Box 504, Timonium, MD 21094 ($32.50). Document Not Available from EDRS. Language: English Document Type: CONFERENCE PROCEEDINGS (021); RESEARCH REPORT(143); NON-CLASSROOM MATERIAL (055) Geographic Source: U.S.; Maryland Journal Announcement: RIEJUL94 This volume, the proceedings of a 1992 conference, presents 14 papers which take a neuropsychological approach to attention deficit disorder, attention deficit disorder with hyperactivity, and learning disabilities. Papers have the following titles and authors: "A New Conceptual Model for Dyslexia" (Sally E. Shaywitz et al.); "Experimental and Clinical Models of Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (Walter E. Kaufmann); "Learning Disability Subtypes: Splitting versus Lumping Revisited" (Stephen R. Hooper and Carl Swartz); "Fragile X Syndrome: A Behavioral Genetics' Window into Understanding Social Emotional Learning Disability" (Thomas Baumgardner and Allan L. Reiss); "Familial Dyslexia: Genetic, Behavioral, and Imaging Studies" (H. Lubs et al.); "Interrelationships between Reading Disability and Attention Deficit-Hyperactivity Disorder" (Bennett A. Shaywitz et al.); "Early Detection of Learning Disability" (Bruce K. Shapiro); "The Role of Language in Learning Disabilities" (Elisabeth H. Wiig); "Social Deficits in Children with Learning Disabilities" (Wendy L. Stone and Annette M. La Greca); "Diagnosis and Treatment of Depressive Disorders in Children with Learning Disabilities" (Paramjit T. Joshi); "Conduct Disorder versus Oppositional Defiant Disorder: Endpoint of Learning Disabilities" (Pasquale J. Accardo); "Educational Interventions in Learning Disabilities: Follow-up Studies and Future Research Needs" (Doris J. Johnson); "The Establishment of Self-Regulation and Social Understanding in Children and Adolescents with ADHD: Family Factors" (James C. Harris); and "Learning Disabilities: Beyond the School Years" (Michael Bender). References accompany individual papers. (DB) Descriptors: *Attention Deficit Disorders; Behavior Disorders; Clinical Diagnosis; Depression (Psychology); Disability Identification; Dyslexia; Elementary Secondary Education; Family Influence; Followup Studies; Genetics; *Hyperactivity; Interpersonal Competence; Language Acquisition; *Learning Disabilities; Models; Neurology; *Neuropsychology; Outcomes of Education; Reading Difficulties; *Research and Development; Self Management; Social Cognition; Theory Practice Relationship; Therapy Identifiers: Fragile X Syndrome ED368120 EC302875 Promoting Social Competency in Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disordered Elementary-Aged Children. Pfeiffer, Linda Jo 6 Jan 1994 92p.; Ed.D. Practicum Report, Nova University. EDRS Price - MF01/PC04 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: PRACTICUM PAPER (043) Geographic Source: U.S.; Florida Journal Announcement: RIEAUG94 This practicum designed and implemented a program using art therapy to improve the social competency of elementary-aged children with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder and oppositional/defiant disorder. Students were in a special class for children with severe emotional disturbances. The children met once a week in art therapy sessions either individually or in pairs and were observed in structured and unstructured situations. A combination of art therapy, verbal associations, and role playing were used to help children interpret social cues, generate solutions to social dilemmas, and apply this learning in social settings. Analysis of projective drawings, interviews, and observations suggested that the children improved in the areas of interpreting social cues and generating solutions to social problems. However, application of learned social behaviors was observed only when studentswere first given a verbal reminder. Appendixes include a letter to parents and samples of students' drawings. (Contains 23 references.) (DB) Descriptors: *Art Therapy; *Attention Deficit Disorders; Behavior Disorders; Elementary Education; Elementary School Students; *Emotional Disturbances; Freehand Drawing; Generalization; *Hyperactivity; *Interpersonal Competence; Problem Solving; Role Playing EJ486046 CG544381 Strategies for Helping Early School-Aged Children with Oppositional Defiant and Conduct Disorders: The Importance of Home-School Partnerships. Webster-Stratton, Carolyn School Psychology Review, v22 n3 p437-57 1993 ISSN: 0279-6015 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: REVIEW LITERATURE (070); JOURNAL ARTICLE (080) Journal Announcement: CIJNOV94 Reviews diagnosis, developmental progression, and etiology of oppositional defiant and early-onset conduct disorders (ODD/CD) in children. Describes family and school behavioral programs for helping these children. Notes that most successful programs will be those which target multiple symptoms of ODD/CD across risk factors, multiple settings (home and school), and agents (parents, teachers, and children). (Author/NB) Descriptors: *Behavior Disorders; *Behavior Modification; *Counseling Techniques; Educational Diagnosis; Etiology; *Family School Relationship; Intervention; Preschool Education; Prevention; Primary Education; Psychological Evaluation; *Young Children ED361932 EC302399 Behavior Disorders: The Need for Multiple and Integrated Treatment Activities. Bernes, Kerry 19 Aug 1993; 33p. EDRS Price - MF01/PC02 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: PROJECT DESCRIPTION (141); REVIEW LITERATURE (070) Geographic Source: Canada; Alberta Journal Announcement: RIEFEB94 Target Audience: Practitioners In response to increasing demands that Canadian school boards provide behavior adaptation programs to counter the effects of disruptive home environments, school violence, and victimization, this paper explores definitions and diagnostic criteria for the following behavior disorders: attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder, oppositional defiant disorder, conduct disorder, juvenile delinquency, and antisocial personality. The paper outlines how these disorders can be placed on a continuum from least problematic to most problematic. A brief literature review summarizes effects of interventions currently employed to treat youth with behavior disorders. Difficulties associated with current treatments are highlighted and an integrated approach to treatment is provided. The proposed model targets youth diagnosed with conduct disorder ages 13 through 17 by providing them with male and female leaders and a group revolving around an educational/remedial framework. Activities are arranged to challenge students intellectually, physically, and emotionally, in order to form, challenge and extend self-concepts held by group members. (Contains 27 references.) (PB) Descriptors: *Antisocial Behavior; Attention Deficit Disorders; *Behavior Disorders; Behavior Modification; *Behavior Problems; Definitions; Delinquency; Demonstration Programs; Foreign Countries; *Group Therapy; Handicap Identification; Hyperactivity; Intervention; Secondary Education; *Self Concept;Youth Problems EJ424879 PS518032 Nature versus Nurture in Childhood Conduct Disorder: It Is Time to Ask a Different Question. Dodge, Kenneth A. Developmental Psychology, v26 n5 p698-701 Sep 1990 ISSN: 0012-1649 Available From: UMI Language: English Document Type: JOURNAL ARTICLE (080) Journal Announcement: CIJAUG91 Critiques Lytton's article in this issue that argues against focusing on the relative strength of child effects versus environmental effects. It is recommended that researchers should instead focus on the issues on which mechanisms operate and how they interact during transactional development. (RH) Descriptors: Children; *Child Responsibility; *Etiology; *Individual Development; Males; *Models; *Nature Nurture Controversy; *Research Design Identifiers: *Child Conduct Disorder; Theoretical Analysis ED330184 EC300156 The Special Child: Strategies for Treatment and Management. Understanding and Guiding to Reach Individual Potential. Ellis, Mickie 23 Sep 1990; 267p.; For the Practicum paper that this resource manual supplements, see EC 300 155. EDRS Price - MF01/PC11 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: NON-CLASSROOM MATERIAL (055) Geographic Source: U.S.; Florida Journal Announcement: RIEAUG91 Target Audience: Teachers; Practitioners The manual is intended to provide preschool educators who work with exceptional children with both theoretical background and practical guidance in teaching children with attentional deficit disorders, oppositional disorders, conduct disorders, autism, developmental learning disorders, childhood depression, borderline personality disorders, and childhood schizophrenia. The first chapter presents information on the normal child including motor development, perceptual development, language acquisition, and social and emotional development. Charts of age appropriate norms from ages 2 through 5 are provided. Among 10 charts given in the extensive chapter on the special child are a temperament checklist, a self-concept rating scale, a chart of basic developmental tasks, language milestones, and indicators of possible learning disorders. A chapter is then given to each specific disability area organized around theoretical considerations, student characteristics, causation and prognosis, and treatment and management. Suggested readings are provided for each chapter and a glossary of terms is also included. (DB) Descriptors: Attention Deficit Disorders; Autism; Behavior Disorders; *Child Development; Depression (Psychology); Developmental Disabilities; Developmental Stages; *Disabilities; Early Childhood Education; Etiology; Inservice Teacher Education; Schizophrenia; Student Characteristics; *Teaching Methods; Therapy ED332413 EC300275 Glossary of Acronyms, Laws, and Terms for Parents Whose Children Have Emotional Handicaps. Families as Allies Project. Second Edition. Norman, Loretta, Ed.; Friesen, Barbara J. Portland State Univ., OR. Research and Training Center on Family Support and Children's Mental Health. Mar 1988; 19p. Sponsoring Agency: National Inst. of Mental Health (DHHS), Rockville, MD.; National Inst. on Disability and Rehabilitation Research (ED/OSERS), Washington, DC. Contract No: G008435137 EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: DICTIONARY (134) Geographic Source: U.S.; Oregon Journal Announcement: RIEOCT91 This reference guide provides a glossary of over 80 acronyms relevant to the area of serving children with emotional handicaps. It lists eight federal laws by their commonly used abridged names (such as Section 504) and notes the formal name of each law and its purpose. The guide also provides definitions for almost 100 terms important in the emotional handicaps field, such as oppositional disorder, least restrictive environment, and adjudicated. (Two references) (JDD) Descriptors: Abbreviations; *Definitions; *Emotional Disturbances; *Federal Legislation; *Vocabulary ED290573 PS017130 A Personality Profile of Oppositional Children as Measured on Selected Scales of the Personality Inventory for Children. Rapp, Doris Jean Gaines; Hutchinson, Roger L. 18 Dec 1987; 20p. EDRS Price - MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: RESEARCH REPORT (143) Geographic Source: U.S.; Indiana Journal Announcement: RIEJUN88 By means of 12 selected subscales of the Personality Inventory for Children (PIC), which were used to plot profiles, this study investigated personality characteristics of oppositional children. In general, oppositional children are children who do not do what is asked of them. In particular, oppositional behavior consists of at least 6 months of disobedient, negativistic, and provocative opposition to authority figures which is manifested in at least twoof the following five symptoms: (1) violations of minor rules; (2) temper tantrums; (3) argumentativeness; (4) provocative behavior; and (5) stubbornness. Participants, who completed a 600-item PIC, were the parents of 43 oppositional children and 57 compliant children. Their children were between 6 and 12 years of age. Findings suggest that oppositional children maybe psychologically maladjusted, have problems in school achievement, be depressed, and tend to come from ineffective families which lack cohesion. Such children may display delinquent tendencies and be somewhat withdrawn. Oppositional children appear to be anxious and to display some features that are similar to those exhibited by children with psychosis. Oppositional children are often overactive, but not when they are severely depressed. These children may also lack social skills and may not have effective social relations. (RH) Descriptors: *Behavior Problems; *Children; Comparative Analysis; *Individual Characteristics; Parents; *Personality Assessment; Profiles; Rating Scales Identifiers: *Oppositional Behavior; *Personality Inventory for Children ED269683 CG019068 Differentiating Conduct Disorder from Depressive Disorders in School Age Children. King, Richard B.; And Others Apr 1986; 27p.; Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the American Educational Research Association (70th, San Francisco, CA, April 16-20, 1986). EDRS Price - MF01/PC02 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: RESEARCH REPORT (143); CONFERENCE PAPER (150) Geographic Source: U.S.; California Journal Announcement: RIEOCT86 Target Audience: Researchers Due to similarities in symptomatology, childhood depression has often been misdiagnosed as conduct disorder. Differentiating between the two disorders would help to direct the appropriate interventions for each disorder. Children (N=48) between the ages of 6 and 13 years and their parents participated in a study designed to analyze variables which could discriminate children who display depressive or conduct disorders from those who are free of significant disturbance. Children were selected by their teachers or school counselors as being conduct disordered or normal in conduct. Sixteen of the subjects were normal controls screened for psychopathology. The remaining 32 conduct disordered subjects were administered the Children's Depression Inventory and were classified as either depressed (N=16) or as conduct disordered (N=16). Children also completed the Nowicki-Strickland Locus of Control Scale for Children and the aggression scale of the Frost Self-Description Questionnaire. Parents completed the Beck Depression Inventory, the Maryland Parent Attitude Survey, and the Family Adaptability and Cohesion Evaluation Scales II. A two-group discriminant function analysis identified five variables that maximally differentiated the depressed/acting out group from the conduct disordered group: parental disicpline, locus of control, parental depression, internalized aggression, and family adaptability. These variables support research suggesting that depressed children often have a depressed parent; receive harsh, power-assertive discipline from their parents; have a rigidly adaptive family style; have a more internal locus of control; and tend to internalize aggression more than do non- depressed conduct disordered children. (NB) Descriptors: Adolescents; *Aggression; *Behavior Disorders; *Children; *Depression (Psychology); Discipline; Family Influence; Identification; *Locus of Control; *Parent Child Relationship; Parent Influence; Problem Children ED265456 CG018780 Psychological Approaches to Problems of Children and Adolescents. Volume II. Grimes, Jeff, Ed.; Thomas, Alex, Ed. Iowa State Dept. of Public Instruction, Des Moines. Div. of Special Education. 1985; 432p.; For Volume I, see ED 232 082. EDRS Price - MF01/PC18 Plus Postage. Language: English Document Type: COLLECTION (020); NON-CLASSROOM MATERIAL (055); PROJECT DESCRIPTION (141) Geographic Source: U.S.; Iowa Journal Announcement: RIEJUN86 Government: State Target Audience: Support Staff; Practitioners This document contains articles addressing a variety of psychological and behavioral problems of adolescents and children and is intended as a resource tool for school psychologists. Articles include background information, approaches regarding assessment of the behavior of concern, intervention possibilities, monitoring methods, and references. The articles are: (1) "Firesetting in Children and Youth," by M. Carol Sensor; (2) "Educational Implications of Overdependency," by Lyle J. White; (3) "Chronic Illness in Childhood and Adolescence: Considerations for School Personnel," by Margaret L.Potter; (4) "Stealing," by R. Michael Weger; (5) "Child Sexual Abuse," by Harvey A. Disenhouse; (6) "Sleep Disorders," by Bruno A. Bielat; (7) "Decision Making Quandries for Children and Adolescents," by Deborah A. Hill; (8) Preschool Screening Programs: A Challenge for Decision Makers," by Barry J. Wilson; (9) "Oppositional Behavior," by Mary Grace Percival; (10) "Vandalism and Property Destruction: School Psychological Services to Meet the Challenge,"by Stewart Ehly; (11) "Headache - Considerations for the School Psychologist," by Larry Gile; (12) "Shy-Withdrawn Patterns of Behavior," by John C. Polifka and Sharon Polifka; and (13) "Seizure and Convulsive Disorders," by David Happe. (ABL) Descriptors: *Adolescents; *Behavior Problems; *Children; Decision Making; Diseases; Elementary Secondary Education; *Emotional Problems; School Counselors; Screening Tests; Seizures; Sexual Abuse; *Stealing; *Vandalism Identifiers: *Arson; Headaches; Oppositional Behavior; Shyness Internet Resources Internet Listservs Top of Page Back to ERIC Menu Back to CEC Home Page copyright © 1996 ERIC Clearinghouse on Disabilities and Gifted Education URL: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm WT02-B20-92IA001-000011-B031-244http://www.cec.sped.org:80/faq/gt-urls.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101075436 text/html 5597HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 07:54:46 GMTLast-modified: Tuesday, 24-Dec-96 17:30:00 GMTContent-length: 5405Content-type: text/html GT-Links Links to Other Information Sources FEDERALLY FUNDED CENTERS and SITES National Research Center on Gifted and Talented at the University of Connecticut URL: http://www.ucc.uconn.edu/~wwwgt/nrcgt.html National Research Center on Gifted and Talented at the University of Virginia URL: http://curry.edschool.virginia.edu/curry/dept/edes/gifteded/NRC Jacob K. Javits Gifted and Talented Education Program URL: http://www.ed.gov/prog_info/Javits/index.html National Excellence URL: http://www.ed.gov/pubs/DevTalent/ Prisoners of Time URL: http://www.ed.gov/pubs/PrisonersOfTime/index.html UNIVERSITY SITES Institute for the Academic Advancement of Youth (IAAY), The Center for Talented Youth at the The Johns Hopkins University URL: gopher://jhuniverse.hcf.jhu.edu URL: http://www.jhu.edu/~gifted// Duke University Talent Identification Program URL: http://www.jayi.com/jayi/tip/ Center for Talent Development at Northwestern University URL: http://www.nwu.edu/schools/programs.html URL: gopher://ctdnet.acns.nwu.edu Education Program for Gifted Youth at Stanford University URL: http://kanpai.stanford.edu/epgy/ URL: gopher://kanpai.stanford.edu The Center for Gifted Education at the College of Wm. & Mary/School of Education URL: gopher://warthog.cc.wm.edu:70/11/SOE/CFGE URL: gopher://gopher.wm.edu The World Council for Gifted and Talented Children, Inc. URL: http://www.uiowa.edu/~belinctr/world-council/wc.html Connie Belin & Jacqueline N. Blank International Center for Gifted Education and Talent Development (CBJNB International Center) URL: http://www.uiowa.edu/~belinctr/ SENG (Supporting the Emotional Needs of the Gifted), Kent State University URL: http://monster.educ.kent.edu/CoE/EFSS/SENG/contacts.html MISCELLANEOUS SITES OF INTEREST Gifted and Talented (TAG) Resources Home Page URL: http://www.eskimo.com/~user/kids.html Jon's Home-School Resource List URL: http://www.midnightbeach.com/jon/#main.pages Mensa URL: http://www.mensa.org// Multiple Intelligences (MI) Theory URL: http://k12.cnidr.org:90/edref.mi.intro.html National Association for Gifted Children URL: http://www.nagc.org/ National Foundation for Gifted and Creative Children URL: http://www.nfgcc.oa.net/ Odyssey of the Mind URL: http://www.odyssey.org/odyssey/ 1994 State of the States Report URL: http://www.netc.org/web_mod/gifted_ed/ StudyWEB URL: http://www.the-acr.com/studyweb/studyweb.htm TAGFAM's home page URL: http://www.access.digex.net/~king/tagfam.html Top of Page Back to ERIC Menu Back to CEC Home Page copyright © 1996 ERIC Clearinghouse on Disabilities and Gifted Education Last updated: December 24, 1996 URL: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm WT02-B20-93IA001-000011-B031-227http://www.cec.sped.org:80/ericec.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101075419 text/html 3391HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 07:54:26 GMTLast-modified: Wednesday, 20-Nov-96 17:39:00 GMTContent-length: 3197Content-type: text/html CEC ERIC Clearinghouse on Disabilities and Gifted Education About ERIC EC About the ERIC Information System Searching the Databases Submitting Documents to ERIC The ERIC/OSEP Special Project **Learning to Read, Reading to Learn** Recent Additions to this Web Site Digests, Fact Sheets, Minibibs Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs) Links to Other Information Sources Listservs AskERIC Question-Answering Service National Parent Information Network Back to CEC Home Page The ERIC Clearinghouse on Disabilities and Gifted Education (ERIC EC) is part of theEducation Resources Information Center (ERIC), National Library of Education (NLE),Office of Educational Research and Improvement (OERI), U.S. Department ofEducation. It is operated by The Council for Exceptional Children (CEC). ERIC ECprovides information on the education of individuals with disabilities as well as thosewho are gifted. We also provide access to information from a variety of sources outsideour clearinghouse, the ERIC System, and the U.S. Department of Education. Ourinclusion of information is not an endorsement of viewpoints, reports, products, orservices. WT02-B20-94IA001-000011-B031-260http://www.cec.sped.org:80/ericec/listserv.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101075451 text/html 2877HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 07:54:57 GMTLast-modified: Tuesday, 17-Sep-96 14:11:00 GMTContent-length: 2685Content-type: text/html HOW TO JOIN A LISTSERV E-mail lists, often known as listservs, are interactive computer-based communications. E-mail lists can be manually administered by humans, or they can be automated byservers such as listserv, or majordomo. Subscribing to a Manually Administered List To subscribe to (join) a manually administered list, send a regular e-mail message tothe administrator or owner of the list. Subscribing to an Automated List Automated lists have at least two accounts--one for the server (the list ADDRESS) andone for the actual list (the list NAME). To subscribe to (join) an automated list, send ane-mail message to the list ADDRESS, not the list NAME, for the server to recognize thecommand. Examples are given for two of the more common types of automatedlists listserv and majordomo. For listserv lists: Leave the Subject: line blank In the body of the message, type only the following line: subscribe {listname} {yourfirstname} {yourlastname} ex: subscribe l-hcap Happy Golucky For majordomo lists: Majordomo lists do not require {yourfirstname} and{yourlastname} in the message. Leave the Subject: line blank In the body of the message, type only the following line: subscribe {listname} subscribe spedtalk Posting Messages to a List To post a message to the list, send it to the NAME of the list in the TO: field. Example: TO: spedtalk@virginia.edu To Find a List of Lists A quick way to find a list of (the thousands of) lists is as follows: Send message to: listserv@listserv.net With command in body: lists global Or: lists global/[keyword] where [keyword] is the topic of your choice (e.g., disability). Top of Page Back to Menu Back Home copyright © 1996 ERIC Clearinghouse on Disabilities and Gifted Education Last updated: September 17, 1996 URL: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm WT02-B20-95IA001-000011-B031-273http://www.cec.sped.org:80/ericec/assistiv.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101075502 text/html 3501HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 07:55:09 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 19-Dec-96 21:08:00 GMTContent-length: 3308Content-type: text/html Assistiv ADAPTIVE/ASSISTIVE TECHNOLOGY IBM Screen Reader Subscription address: listserv@vm1.nodak.edu Post messages to: ibm-srt@vm1.nodak.edu ADAPT-L Adaptive technology and libraries Subscription address: listserv@american.edu Post messages to: adapt-l@american.edu ASTER-L AsTer (Audio System for Technical Reading) Subscription address: listproc@u.washington.edu Post messages to: aster-l@u.washington.edu EASI Equal access to software and information Subscription address: listserv@sjuvm.stjohns.edu Post messages to: easi@sjuvm.stjohns.edu GW-INFO GW Micro products Subscription address: listserv@gwmicro.com Post messages to: gw-info@gwmicro.com IBM-SRT ITD-TOC Information and Technology for the Disabled Journal Subscription address: listserv@sjuvm.stjohns.edu For table of contents and abstracts only, send e-mail to the same addresswith the message "SUB TOC-ITD yourfirstname yourlastname" VAT Vendors of adaptive technology Subscription address: listserv@kramden.phaedrv.on.ca Post messages to: vat@kramden.phaedrv.on.ca WAYCOOL-L Student reviews of software Subscription address: listserv@UConnvm.UConn.Edu Post messages to: waycool-l@UConnvm.UConn.Edu Top of PageBack to ERIC MenuBack to CEC Home Page copyright © 1996 ERIC Clearinghouse on Disabilities and Gifted Education Last updated: December 19, 1996 Send updates to: ericec@cec.sped.org URL: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm WT02-B20-96IA001-000011-B031-287http://www.cec.sped.org:80/ericec/add.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101075516 text/html 2631HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 07:55:26 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 12-Aug-96 20:09:00 GMTContent-length: 2440Content-type: text/html ADD ATTENTION DEFICIT DISORDERS ADD-EMP-SUPPT-L ADD and the workplace Subscription address: listserv@netcom.com Post messages to: add-emp-suppt-l@netcom.com ADD-KIDS-INFO Attention deficit disorder in children Subscription address: add-kids-info-request@dragon.com Post messages to: add-kids-info@dragon.com ADD-PARENTS For parents of kids with ADD Subscription address: majordomo@mv.mv.com Post messages to: add-parents@mv.mv.com ADDULT Adults with attention deficit disorder Subscription address: listserv@sjuvm.stjohns.edu Post messages to: addult@sjuvm.stjohns.edu SO_ADD_SUPPORT-L For significant others of adults with ADD Subscription address: listserv@netcom.com Post messages to: so_add_support-lt@netcom.com Usenet newsgroups all.support.attn-deficit Top of PageBack to ERIC MenuBack to CEC Home Page copyright © 1996 ERIC Clearinghouse on Disabilities and Gifted Education Last updated: July 24, 1996 Send updates to: ericec@cec.sped.org URL: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm WT02-B20-97IA001-000011-B031-297http://www.cec.sped.org:80/ericec/bilngual.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101075523 text/html 4428HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 07:55:33 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 12-Aug-96 20:12:00 GMTContent-length: 4237Content-type: text/html Bilngual BILINGUAL EDUCATION With acknowledgment to the National Clearinghouse on Bilingual Education:ncbe.gwu.edu Language preservation Subscription address: listserv@cis.ncbe.gwu.edu Post messages to: langpres@cis.ncbe.gwu.edu Information exchange for meeting the needs of migrantchildren and families Subscription address: listserv@netcom.com Post messages to: migrant-l@netcom.com Refugee and immigrant education Subscription address: listserv@cis.ncbe.gwu.edu Post messages to: refuged@cis.ncbe.gwu.edu Students at-risk Subscription address: listproc@services.dese.state.mo.us Post messages to: starnet@services.dese.state.mo.us Teacher roundtable Subscription address: listserv@cis.ncbe.gwu.edu Post messages to: teacher@cis.ncbe.gwu.edu Title I/Title VII exchange Subscription address: listserv@cis.ncbe.gwu.edu Post messages to: t17exch@cis.ncbe.gwu.edu EARBILIT Early bi-literacy Subscription address: listserv@cis.ncbe.gwu.edu Post messages to: earbilit@cis.ncbe.gwu.edu EDREFORM Education reform Subscription address: listserv@cis.ncbe.gwu.edu Post messages to: edreform@cis.ncbe.gwu.edu EDTRAIN Education personnel training Subscription address: listserv@cis.ncbe.gwu.edu Post messages to: edtrain@cis.ncbe.gwu.edu LANGPRES MIGRANT-L REFUGED SPECED Special education Subscription address: listserv@cis.ncbe.gwu.edu Post messages to: refuged@cis.ncbe.gwu.edu STARNET TEACHER T17EXCH T2SUPP Title II support Subscription address: listserv@cis.ncbe.gwu.edu Post messages to: t2supp@cis.ncbe.gwu.edu Top of PageBack to ERIC MenuBack to CEC Home Page copyright © 1996 ERIC Clearinghouse on Disabilities and Gifted Education Last updated: July 24, 1996 Send updates to: ericec@cec.sped.org URL: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm WT02-B20-98IA001-000011-B031-304http://www.cec.sped.org:80/ericec/blindvis.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101075531 text/html 3686HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 07:55:41 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 12-Aug-96 20:13:00 GMTContent-length: 3495Content-type: text/html blindvis BLIND/VISUAL IMPAIRMENTS Blind news digest Subscription address: listserv@ndsuvm1.bitnet Post messages to: blindndws@ndsuvm1.bitnet Deaf-blindness Subscription address: listserv@ukcc.uky.edu Post messages to: deafblnd@ukcc.uky.edu National Association of Blind Students Subscription address: listserv@ucsbvm.ucsb.edu Post messages to: nabs-l@ucsvm.ucsb.edu Retinitis pigmentosa and low vision Subscription address: listserv@sjuvm.stjohns.edu Post messages to: rpilist@sjuvm.stjohns.edu ASTER-L AsTer (Audio System for Technical Reading) Subscription address: listproc@u.washington.edu Post messages to: aster-l@u.washington.edu BLINDFAM Effects of blindness of family life Subscription address: listserv@sjuvm.stjohns.edu Post messages to: blindfam@sjuvm.stjohns.edu BLINDJOB Employment as it relates to blind people Subscription address: listserv@sjuvm.stjohns.edu Post messages to: blindjob@sjuvm.stjohns.edu BLIND-L Computer use by and for the blind Subscription address: listserv@uafysyb.uark.edu Post messages to: blind-l@uafysyb.uark.edu BLINDNDWS DEAFBLND NABS-L NFB-L National Federation of the Blind Subscription address: listserv@netcom.com Post messages to: nfb-l@netcom.com RPLIST Top of PageBack to ERIC MenuBack to CEC Home Page copyright © 1996 ERIC Clearinghouse on Disabilities and Gifted Education Last updated: July 24, 1996 Send updates to: ericec@cec.sped.org URL: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm WT02-B20-99IA001-000011-B031-315http://www.cec.sped.org:80/ericec/deafhear.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101075540 text/html 7925HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 07:55:49 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 19-Dec-96 16:49:00 GMTContent-length: 7732Content-type: text/html deafhear DEAF/HEARING IMPAIRMENTS With acknowledgment to Christofer deHahn: shr.dec.com American Speech and Hearing Association open forum, forASHA members Subscription address:asha-aud-forum-request@postman.ncm.com Post messages to: asha-aud-forum@postman.ncm.com ASHA focused forum, topics published by list admin., for ASHAmembers Subscription address:asha-aud-focus-request@postman.ncm.com Post messages to: asha-aud-focus@postman.ncm.com Moderated list providing information for ASHAmembers Subscription address:asha-aud-headlines-request@postman.ncm.com Post messages to: asha-aud-headlines@postman.ncm.com Deaf culture Subscription address: listserv@connectamerica.com Post messages to: asl-l@connectamerica.com Hard-of-hearing and oral deaf people, especially SHHH andALDA Subscription address: majordomo@acpub.duke.edu Message: sub beyond-hearing yourfirstname yourlastname Post messages to: beyond-hearing@acpub-duke.edu Deaf Adoption News Service, waiting foreign deaf, hard ofhearing, "possible hearing-impaired children" in need of adoptive families. Service isfree. Subscription info: Send e-mail to berke@erols.com; include yourfull name; indicate whether you are deaf, hard of hearing, or a hearing sign-language user. Also see http://www.erols.com/berke/deafchildren.html For kids ages 3-19 only Subscription address: listserv@sjuvm.stjohns.edu Post messages to: deafkids@sjuvm.stjohns.edu Weekly magazine for the deaf Subscription address: listserv@listserv.deaf-magazine.org Post messages to: artcles@deaf-magazine.org Deaf sports Subscription address: listserv@gallux.gallaudet.edu Post messages to: deafsports@gallux.gallaudet.edu ACCESS Closed-captioning, audio description, and other media access issues Subscription address: listmanager@hookup.net Post messages to: access@hookup.net ASLING American Sign Language Subscription address: listserv@yalevm.bitnet Post messages to: asling-l@yalevm.bitnet ASHA-AUD-FORUM ASHA-AUD-FOCUS ASHA-AUD-HEADLINES ASL-L BEYOND-HEARING DANS DEAFBLND Deaf-blindness Subscription address: listserv@ukcc.uky.edu Post messages to: deafblnd@ukcc.uky.edu DEAFKIDS DEAF-MAGAZINE DEAFSPORTS DEAF-L Deafness and deaf culture Subscription address: listserv@siucvmb.siu.edu Post messages to: deaf-l@siucvmb.siu.edu EDUDEAF Curriculum, teaching strategies, IEPs, for educators of the deaf Subscription address: listserv@ukcc.uky.edu Post messages to: deaf-l@ukcc.uky.edu GESTURE-L Gestures, gesture systems, and alternate sign languages Subscription address: listserv@coombs.anu.edu.au Post messages to: gesture-l@coombs.anu.edu.au MRDEAF-L Education of the mentally retarded deaf Subscription address: majordomo@bga.com Message: sub mrdeaf-l yourfirstname yourlastname Post messages to: mrdeaf-l@bga.com SERVICE-DOGS About guide/hearing/service and other assistance dogs, including hearing dogs Subscription address: majordomo@acpub.duke.edu Post messages to: service-dogs@acpub.duke.edu SSLING-L Sign language linguistics Subscription address: listserv@yalevm.cis.yale.edu Post messages to: ssling-l@yalevm.cis.yale.edu TERPS-L Interpreters whose working language includes sign language Subscription address: listserv@admin.humberc.on.ca Post messages to: terps-l@admin.humberc.on.ca TFA Telephone for All; an international news service for the deaf or hard of hearing. Tosubscribe or submit news, send a message to rbweinstock@gallau.gallaudet.edu VOCEVAL Vocational evaluation, adaptive technology Subscription address: listserv@sjuvm.stjohns.edu Post messages to: voceval@sjuvm.stjohns.edu Top of PageBack to ERIC MenuBack to CEC Home Page copyright © 1996 ERIC Clearinghouse on Disabilities and Gifted Education Last updated: December 18, 1996 Send updates to: ericec@cec.sped.org URL: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm WT02-B20-100IA001-000011-B032-4http://www.cec.sped.org:80/ericec/dis-law.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101075548 text/html 5342HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 07:55:58 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 19-Dec-96 21:12:00 GMTContent-length: 5149Content-type: text/html dis-law DISABILITY/LEGAL ISSUES Disability within a social and relational context Subscription address: listserv@sjuvm.stjohns.edu Post messages to: disabled@sjuvm.stjohns.edu Higher education and career issues for students with disabilities Subscription address: listserv@marist.edu Post messages to: disacree@marist.edu Disability research Subscription address: listserv@ryerson.bitnet Post messages to: disres-l@ryerson.bitnet Disabled student services in higher education Subscription address: listserv@ubvm.bitnet Post messages to: dsshe-l@ubvm.bitnet Legal issues in education Subscription address: listserv@ukcc.uky.edu Post messages to: edlaw@ukcc.uky.edu Dual topic of abuse and disability Subscription address: listserv@ualtavm.bitnet Post messages to: icad-l@ualtavm.bitnet Physical and mental disabilities Subscription address: listserv@vm1.nodak.edu Post messages to: l-hcap@vm1.nodak.edu ADA-LAW ADA, other disability-related laws in the United States and similar laws in other countries Subscription address: listserv@vm1.nodak.edu Post messages to: ada-law@vm1.nodak.edu AWD Americans with disabilities Subscription address: majordomo@counterpoint.com Post messages to: awd@counterpoint.com ADVOCACY Issues of people with disabilities in bettering their lives and protecting their rights Subscription address: listserv@sjuvm.stjohns.edu Post messages to: advocacy@sjuvm.stjohns.edu AXSLIB-L Issues surrounding access to libraries by people with disabilities Subscription address: listserv@sjuvm.stjohns.edu Post messages to: axslib-l@sjuvm.stjohns.edu DDFIND-L Networking on disabilities Subscription address: listserv@rpitsvm.bitnet Post messages to: ddfind-l@rpitsvm.bitnet DISABLED DISACREE DISRES-L DSSHE-L DOITSEM Disabilities, Opportunities, Internetworking, and Technology in Science, Engineering, and Mathematics Subscription address: listproc@u.washington.edu Post messages to: doitsem@u.washington.edu EDLAW ICAD-L L-HCAP PERKACT Carl Perkins Vocational Education Act Subscription address: listserv@siucvmb.siu.edu Post messages to: perkact@siucvmb.siu.edu Top of PageBack to ERIC MenuBack to CEC Home Page copyright © 1996 ERIC Clearinghouse on Disabilities and Gifted Education Last updated: December 18, 1996 Send updates to: ericec@cec.sped.org URL: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm WT02-B20-101IA001-000011-B032-14http://www.cec.sped.org:80/ericec/for-kids.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101075558 text/html 3553HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 07:56:05 GMTLast-modified: Wednesday, 11-Dec-96 23:35:00 GMTContent-length: 3359Content-type: text/html for-kids FOR KIDS Internet and computers in K-12 schools Subscription address: listserv@suvm.syr.edu Post messages to: superk12@suvm.syr.edu Kids forum for CHATBACK Subscription address: listserv@sjuvm.stjohns.edu Post messages to: talkback@sjuvm.stjohns.edu BICOMPAL (Big Computer Pals) Big brother/sister/mentor relationships for those with similar disabilities Subscription address: listserv@sjuvm.stjohns.edu Post messages to: bicompal@sjuvm.stjohns.edu CHATBACK Project-oriented list for teachers using computer networks in their classrooms with children who have disabilities Subscription address: listserv@sjuvm.stjohns.edu Post messages to: chatback@sjuvm.stjohns.edu IECC International e-mail classrooom connection; cultural exchange Subscription address: iecc-request@stolaf.edu Post messages to: iecc@stolaf.edu KIDINTRO Penpal group for children Subscription address: listserv@sjuvm.stjohns.edu Post messages to: kidintro@sjuvm.stjohns.edu KIDSNET Global K-12 network planning list Subscription address: kidsnet-request@vms.cis.pitt.edu Post messages to: kidsnet@vms.cis.pitt.edu SUPERK12 TALKBACK WAYCOOL-L Student reviews of software Subscription address: listserv@UConnvm.UConn.Edu Post messages to: waycool-l@UConnvm.UConn.Edu Top of PageBack to ERIC MenuBack to CEC Home Page copyright © 1996 ERIC Clearinghouse on Disabilities and Gifted Education Last updated: December 11, 1996 Send updates to: ericec@cec.sped.org URL: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm WT02-B20-102IA001-000011-B032-30http://www.cec.sped.org:80/ericec/gifted.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101075614 text/html 4173HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 07:56:22 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 12-Aug-96 20:18:00 GMTContent-length: 3982Content-type: text/html gifted GIFTED EDUCATION GTOT-L Topics related to very young children (generally under 6 years of age) who are gifted Subscription address: listproc@eskimo.com Post messages to: gtot-l@eskimo.com Giftednet-l National (USA) Science and Language Arts Curriculum Projects for High Ability Learners Note that mailing list name ends in lowercase "ell" not numeral 1. Also note that the William and Mary curriculum now has its own limited distribution list (WMCURRIC-L). Subscription address: listserver@listserv.cc.wm.edu Post messages to: GiftedNet@cc.wm.edu TAG-L General discussion about all topics related to gifted children Subscription address: listserv@listserv.nodak.edu Post messages to: TAG-L@listserv.nodak.edu TAGFAM Discussion and support list for families of TAG or GT children Subscription address: listserv@sjuvm.stjohns.edu Post messages to: tagfam@sjuvm.stjohns.edu U-ACHIEV Academic underachievement and underachieving students, including gifted Subscription address: majordomo@virginia.edu Post messages to: u-achieve@virginia.edu WALDORF Waldorf education Subscription address: listserv@sjuvm.stjohns.edu Post messages to: waldorf@sjuvm.stjohns.edu WMCURRIC-L Limited to subscribers who have a specific interest in the William and Mary gifted curriculum units If you would like to subscribe to WMCURRIC-L or if you would like more information, please send an e-mail message to: LNBOYC@FACSTAFF.WM.EDU OHIOGIFT Local mailing list for discussion of issues specific to gifted education in Ohio Subscription address: listserv@lists.acs.ohio-state.edu Post messages to: ohiogift@lists.acs.ohio-state.edu DISD-TAG Discussion of TAG issues in the Dallas (TX) Independent School District Subscription address: listserv@netcom.com Post messages to: disd-tag@netcom.com Top of PageBack to ERIC MenuBack to CEC Home Page copyright © 1996 ERIC Clearinghouse on Disabilities and Gifted Education Last updated: July 24, 1996 Send updates to: ericec@cec.sped.org URL: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm WT02-B20-103IA001-000011-B032-46http://www.cec.sped.org:80/ericec/homeschl.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101075624 text/html 3429HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 07:56:32 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 19-Dec-96 21:14:00 GMTContent-length: 3236Content-type: text/html homeschl HOME SCHOOLING With acknowledgment to Jon's List of Home-School Resources for parts of this list URL: http://www.armory.com/~jon/hs/HomeSchool.html HOME-ED Home schooling; a very broad list with lots of traffic Subscription address: home-ed-request@world.std.com Include your e-mail address in the request as this is not an automated listserv. Post messages to: home-ed@world.std.com HOME-ED-POLITICS Strong Christian conservative/libertarians Subscription address: listproc@mainstream.com Post messages to: home-ed-request@cc.wm.edu HOMESCHOOL TRAIN_UP_A_CHILD Entirely Christian Subscription address: homeschool_train_up_a_child-request@mainstream.com Post messages to: homeschool_train_up_a_child@mainstream.com MONTESSORI-L Discussion of the Montessori teaching method Subscription address: listserv@listserv.aol.com Post messages to: montessori-l@listserv.aol.com TAFFIE For home schoolers in Texas Subscription address: listproc@jsoft.com Post messages to: taffie@jsoft.com TCS-LIST Taking Children Seriously Subscription address: listserv@netcom.com Post messages to: tcs-list@netcom.com UNSCHOOLING Unschooling Subscription address: majordomo@nilenet.com Post messages to: unschooling@nilenet.com Top of PageBack to ERIC MenuBack to CEC Home Page copyright © 1996 ERIC Clearinghouse on Disabilities and Gifted Education Last updated: December 18, 1996 Send updates to: ericec@cec.sped.org URL: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm WT02-B20-104IA001-000011-B032-57http://www.cec.sped.org:80/ericec/ld-sped.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101075636 text/html 10747HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 07:56:41 GMTLast-modified: Wednesday, 11-Dec-96 23:32:00 GMTContent-length: 10552Content-type: text/html LD-SPED LEARNING DISABILITIES/SPECIAL EDUCATION Behavior disorders in children Subscription address: listserv@asuvm.inre.asu.edu Post messages to: behavior@asuvm.inre.asu.edu Communication disorders Subscription address: listserv@kentvm.bitnet Post messages to: cdmajor@kentvm.bitnet Speech disorders Subscription address: listserv@rpitsvm.bitnet Post messages to: commdis@rpitsvm.bitnet Health of people with developmental disabilities Subscription address: listserv@relay.adp.wisc.edu Post messages to: ddhealth@relay.adp.wisc.edu Down syndrome Subscription address: listserv@vm1.nodak.edu Post messages to: down-syn@vm1.nodak.edu Fragile X syndrome Subscription address: majordomo@counterpoint.com Post messages to: fragilex@counterpoint.com ADD-PARENTS Parents of children with attention deficit disorders Subscription address: add-parents-request@mv.mv.com Post messages to: add-parents@mv.mv.com ADDULT Adults with attention deficit disorders Subscription address: listserv@sjuvm.stjohns.edu Post messages to: addult@sjuvm.stjohns.edu ALTLEARN Alternative approaches to learning for those with physical disabilities; for professionals Subscription address: listserv@sjuvm.stjohns.edu Post messages to: altlearn@sjuvm.stjohns.edu ANI-L Autistic people; and for promotion of civil rights Subscription address: listserv@utkvm.utk.edu Post messages to: ani-l@utkvm.utk.edu AUS-SPECIAL-ED Special education in Australasia; professional exchange Subscription address: lists@ usw.edu.au Post messages to: aus-special-ed@usw.edu.au AUTISM Autism and developmental disabilities Subscription address: listserv@sjuvm.stjohns.edu Post messages to: autism@sjuvm.stjohns.edu BEHAVIOR CDMAJOR COMMDIS CSHCN-L Deaf-blindness Subscription address: listserv@nervm.nerdc.ufl.edu Post messages to: cshcn@nervm.nerdc.ufl.edu DDHEALTH DOWN-SYN FRAGILEX INCLUSIVE EDUCATION Inclusive education Subscription address: mailbase-admin@mailbase.ac.uk INTERN-L Pre-service educators/practice teaching Subscription address: listserv@unbvm1.csd.unb.ca Post messages to: intern-l@unbvm1.csd.unb.ca ISPANET International School Psychologists Association Subscription address: Send e-mail request to maiser@psychology.dundee.ac.uk LD-List Learning disability information exchange Subscription address: ld-list-request@east.pima.edu Post messages to: ld-list@east.pima.edu LDWOMEN Adult women with learning disabilities Subscription address: listserv@uga.cc.uga.edu Post messages to: ldwomen@uga.cc.uga.edu ME-List Discrete-trials intervention for autism Subscription address: listserv@indycms.iupui.edu Post messages to: me-list@indycms.iupui.edu MRDEAF-L Education of the mentally retarded deaf Subscription address: majordomo@bga.com Post messages to: mrdeaf-l@bga.com OURKIDS Parents of children with developmental delays Subscription address: listserv@sjuvm.stjohns.edu Post messages to: our-kids@sjuvm.stjohns.edu PSYCH-DD Psychological and behavioral issues in developmental disabilities Subscription address: listserv@vm1.nodak.edu Post messages to: psych-dd@vm1.nodak.edu SEPRACT Special education practices Subscription address: majordomo@virginia.edu Post messages to: sepract@virginia.edu SNEtalk-l General discussion of special needs education Subscription address: listproc@schoolnet.carleton.ca Post messages to: SNEtalk-l@schoolnet.carleton.ca SNEparentalk-l For care providers of students with special needs Subscription address: listproc@schoolnet.carleton.ca Post messages to: SNEparentalk-l@schoolnet.carleton.ca SNEteachtalk-l For educators involved in special needs education Subscription address: listproc@schoolnet.carleton.ca Post messages to: SNEteachtalk-l@schoolnet.carleton.ca SPEDTALK Current issues in special education; professionally oriented Subscription address: majordomo@virginia.edu Post messages to: spedtalk@virginia.edu SPCEDS-L Special education students list Subscription address: listserv@uvbm.bitnet Post messages to: spceds-l@uvbm.bitnet SPECED-L Issues in special education Subscription address: listserv@uga.cc.uga.edu Post messages to: speced-l@uga.cc.uga.edu STUT-HLP Support for stutterers and families Subscription address: listserv@bgu.edu Post messages to: stut-hlp@bgu.edu STUTT-L Stuttering research and clinical practice Subscription address: listserv@templevm.bitnet Post messages to: stutt-l@templevm.bitnet SWSCNet National Statewide Systems Change Network For projects and individuals involved in systems change efforts. Coordinates the work of national, state,and local efforts that support the improvement, reform, and restructuring of school andcommunity supports to children and youth with disabilities and their families. Subscription address: mailserv@asri.edu Post messages to: SWSCNet@asri.edu Top of Page Back to ERIC Menu Back to CEC Home Page copyright © 1996 ERIC Clearinghouse on Disabilities and Gifted Education Send changes to: ericec@cec.sped.org Last updated: December 11, 1996 URL: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm WT02-B20-105IA001-000011-B032-73http://www.cec.sped.org:80/ericec/mental.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101075647 text/html 2817HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 07:56:57 GMTLast-modified: Tuesday, 17-Sep-96 13:33:00 GMTContent-length: 2625Content-type: text/html mental MENTAL HEALTH Unipolar disorders Subscription address: majordomo@world.std.com Post messages to: walkers@world.std.com EAT-DIS Eatingdisorders--discussion for mental-health professionals Subscription address: listserv@sjuvm.stjohns.edu Post messages to: eat-dis@sjuvm.stjohns.edu PANIC Agoraphobia and other panic disorders Subscription address: panic-request@gnu.ai.mit.edu Post messages to: panic@gnu.ai.mit.edu PENDULUM Bipolar affective disorder (manic depression) Subscription address: majordomo@ucar.edu Post messages to: pendulum@ucar.edu SCHIZOPH Schizophrenia Subscription address: listserv@vm.utcc.utoronto.ca Post messages to: schizoph@vm.utcc.utoronto.ca THISISCRAZY-L Fright, mood swings, voices, and vision Subscription address: listserv@netcom.com Post messages to: thisiscrazy-l@netcom.com WALKERS-IN-DARKNESS Top of PageBack to ERIC MenuBack to CEC Home Page copyright © 1996 ERIC Clearinghouse on Disabilities and Gifted Education Last updated: July 24, 1996 Send updates to: ericec@cec.sped.org URL: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm WT02-B20-106IA001-000011-B032-85http://www.cec.sped.org:80/ericec/acadsubj.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101075657 text/html 4714HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 07:57:04 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 12-Aug-96 21:20:00 GMTContent-length: 4523Content-type: text/html Acadsubj ACADEMIC SUBJECT-RELATED BIOPI-L High school and college biology and education Subscription address: listserv@ksuvm.ksu.edu Post messages to: biopi-l@ksuvm.ksu.edu CREWRT-L CREWRT-L Creative writing in education for teachers and students Subscription address: listproc@lists.missouri.edu Post messages to: crewrt-l@lists.missouri.edu ELEASAI ELEASAI Library and information science research e-conference Subscription address: listserv@arizvm1.ccit.arizona.edu Post messages to: listserv@arizvm1.ccit.arizona.edu GEOGED GEOGED Geography education Subscription address: listserv@ukcc.uky.edu Post messages to: geoged@ukcc.uky.edu MATHEDCC MATHEDCC Technology in math education Subscription address: listserv@vm1.mcgill.ca Post messages to: mathedcc@vm1.mcgill.ca MSPROJ MSPROJ The Annenberg/CPB Math-Science Project Subscription address: listserv@msu.edu Post messages to: msproj@msu.edu NCTM-L NCTM-L National Council of Teachers of Mathematics Subscription address: listproc@sci-ed.fit.edu Post messages to: nctm-l@sci-ed.fit.edu SS435-I SS435-l Elementary social studies education Subscription address: listserv@ualtavm.bitnet Post messages to: ss435-l@ualtavm.bitnet SUSIG SUSIG Math education Subscription address: listserv@miamiu.bitnet Post messages to: susig@miamiu.bitnet T321-L T321-L Teaching science in elementary schools Subscription address: listserv@mizzou1.missouri.edu Post messages to: t321-l@mizzou1.missouri.edu TAWL TAWL Teaching whole language Subscription address: listserv@listserv.arizona.edu Post messages to: tawl@listserv.arizona.edu TIPS TIPS Teaching psychology science discussion Subscription address: listserv@fre.fsu.umd.edu Post messages to: tips@fre.fsu.umd.edu Top of PageBack to ERIC MenuBack to CEC Home Page copyright © 1996 ERIC Clearinghouse on Disabilities and Gifted Education Last updated: August 12, 1996 Send updates to: ericec@cec.sped.org URL: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm >WT02-B20-107IA001-000011-B032-99http://www.cec.sped.org:80/ericec/adulted.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101075704 text/html 1645HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 07:57:14 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 12-Aug-96 20:10:00 GMTContent-length: 1454Content-type: text/html adulted ADULT EDUCATION ADLTED-L Canada-based adult education Subscription address: listserv@ureginal.uregina.ca Post messages to: adlted-l@ureginal.uregina.ca AEDNET Adult education Subscription address: listserv@alpha.acast.nova.edu Post messages to: aednet@alpha.acast.nova.edu Top of PageBack to ERIC MenuBack to CEC Home Page copyright © 1996 ERIC Clearinghouse on Disabilities and Gifted Education Last updated: July 24, 1996 Send updates to: ericec@cec.sped.org URL: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm WT02-B20-108IA001-000011-B032-117http://www.cec.sped.org:80/ericec/computer.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101075721 text/html 9109HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 07:57:23 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 19-Dec-96 21:17:00 GMTContent-length: 8916Content-type: text/html computer COMPUTER TECHNOLOGY ACSOFT-L Educational software Subscription address: listserv@wuvmd.wust1.edu Post messages to: acsoft-l@wuvmd.wust1.edu AI-ED Artificial intelligence Subscription address: ai-ed-request@sun.com Post messages to: ai-ed@sun.com AMTEC Media and technology in education Subscription address: mailserv@camosun.bc.caBR> Post messages to: amtec@camosun.bc.ca APP-L Computer applications in science and education Subscription address: listserv@vm.cc.torun.edu.pl Post messages to: app-l@vm.cc.torun.edu.pl CARET Capital Area researchers in educational technology Subscription address: listserv@gwuvm.gwu.edu Post messages to: caret@gwuvm.gwu.edu CNEDUC-L Computer networking in education Subscription address: listserv@tamvm1.tamu.edu Post messages to: cneduc-l@tamvm1.tamu.edu CTI-L Computers in teaching Subscription address: listserv@irlearn.ucd.ie Post messages to: cti-l@irlearn.ucd.ie ECID-L Educational computing and instructional development Subscription address: listserv@vm.cc.purdue.edu Post messages to: ecid-l@vm.cc.purdue.edu EDTECH Education and technology Subscription address: listserv@msu.edu Post messages to: edtech@msu.edu EDTECHPOL Educational technology policy Subscription address: listserv@umdd.umd.edu Post messages to: edtechpol@umdd.umd.edu EDUCAI-L Artificial intelligence in education Subscription address: listserv@uvnvm.wvnet.edu Post messages to: educai-l@uvnvm.wvnet.edu EDUTEL Education and technology Subscription address: listserv@vm.its.rpi.edu Post messages to: edutel@vm.its.rpi.edu ETCC-L Educational technology coordinating committee Subscription address: listserv@admin.humberc.on.ca Post messages to: etcc-l@admin.humberc.on.ca EUITLIST Educational uses of information technology Subscription address: listserv@bitnic.educom.edu Post messages to: euitlist@bitnic.educom.edu HYPEREDU Hypertext in education Subscription address: listserv@sjuvm.stjohns.edu Post messages to: hyperedu@sjuvm.stjohns.edu INFED-L Computers in the classroom Subscription address: listserv@ccsun.unicamp.br Post messages to: infed-l@ccsun.unicamp.br ITD-TOC Information and Technology for the Disabled Journal Subscription address: listserv@sjuvm.stjohns.edu Post messages to: ITD-TOC@sjuvm.stjohns.edu ITFS-L Instructional TV fixed service Subscription address: listserv@enm.uma.maine.edu Post messages to: itfs-l@enm.uma.maine.edu ITTE Information technology and teacher education Subscription address: listserv@deakin.oz.au Post messages to: itte@deakin.oz.au JEI-L Technology (especially CD-ROM) in K-12 Subscription address: listserv@umdd.umd.edu Post messages to: jei-l@umdd.umd.edu JTE-L Journal of Technology in Education Subscription address: listserv@vtvm1.cc.vt.edu Post messages to: jte-l@vtvm1.cc.vt.edu MATHEDCC Technology in math education Subscription address: listserv@vm1.mcgill.ca Post messages to: mathedcc@vm1.mcgill.ca MEDIA-L Media in education Subscription address: listserv@bingvbm.cc.binghamton.edu Post messages to: media-l@bingvmb.cc.binghamton.edu MEMO-NET Educational media Subscription address: listserv@vax1.mankato.msus.edu Post messages to: memo-net@vax1.mankato.msus.edu MMEDIA-L Multimedia education Subscription address: listserv@itesmvfl.bitnet Post messages to: mmedia-l@ites.mvfl.bitnet SIGTEL-L Telecommunications in education Subscription address: listserv@unmvma.unm.edu Post messages to: sigtel-l@unmvma.unm.edu SUPERK12 Internet and computers in K-12 schools Subscription address: listserv@suvm.syr.edu Post messages to: superk12@suvm.syr.edu WAYCOOL-L Student reviews of software Subscription address: listserv@UConnvm.UConn.Edu Post messages to: waycool-l@UConnvm.UConn.Edu WWWEDU Use of the World Wide Web in education Subscription address: listproc@kudzu.cnidr.org Post messages to: wwwedu@kudzu.cnidr.org Top of PageBack to ERIC MenuBack to CEC Home Page copyright © 1996 ERIC Clearinghouse on Disabilities and Gifted Education Last updated: December 18, 1996 Send updates to: ericec@cec.sped.org URL: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm WT02-B20-109IA001-000011-B032-131http://www.cec.sped.org:80/ericec/behave.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101075732 text/html 2242HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 07:57:41 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 12-Aug-96 20:12:00 GMTContent-length: 2051Content-type: text/html Discipline DISCIPLINE/VIOLENCE BEHAVIOR Behavior disabilities in children Subscription Address:listserv@asuvm.inre.asu.edu Post Messages To: behavior@asuvm.inre.asu.edu BULLY-L Bullying and victimisation in schools Subscription address: listserv@nic.surfnet.nl Post messages to: bully-l@nic.surfnet.nl CAVEAT-L Citizens Against Violence Everywhere Advocating its Termination Subscription address: listproc@fhs.mcmaster.cs Post messages to: caveat-l@fhs.mcmaster.cs LD-LIST Learning disabilities Subscription address: ld-list-request@east.pima.edu Post Messages To: ld-list@east.pima.edu Top of PageBack to ERIC MenuBack to CEC Home Page copyright © 1996 ERIC Clearinghouse on Disabilities and Gifted Education Last updated: July 24, 1996 Send updates to: ericec@cec.sped.org URL: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm WT02-B20-110IA001-000011-B032-142http://www.cec.sped.org:80/ericec/distance.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101075740 text/html 3577HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 07:57:50 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 08-Nov-96 20:56:00 GMTContent-length: 3386Content-type: text/html distanced DISTANCE EDUCATION AEDNET Adult education Subscription address: listserv@alpha.acast.nova.edu Post messages to: aednet@alpha.acast.nova.edu ASDEN Australian schools of distance education network (K-12) Subscription address: majordomo@cleo.murdoch.edu.au Post messages to: asden@cleo.murdoch.edu.au COLICDE Distance education research bulletin Subscription address: colicde-request@unixg.ubc.ca Post messages to: colicde@unixg.ubc.ca DEOS-L American Center for the Study of Distance Education (ACSDE) Subscription address: listserv@psuvm.bitnet Post messages to: deos-l@psuvm.bitnet DEOSNEWS Distribution list for monthly ACSDE electronic journal Subscription address: listserv@psuvm.bitnet Post messages to: deosnews@psuvm.bitnet DISTED Distance education Subscription address: listserv@uwavm.bitnet Post messages to: disted@uwavm.bitnet EDISTA Distance education (in Spanish) Subscription address: listserv@usachvm1.bitnet Post messages to: edista@usachvm1.bitnet OCC-L On-Line College Classroom For those who are teaching/planning to teach college classes on-line Subscription address: listproc@hawaii.edu Post messages to: occ-l@uhawaii.edu Selected Resources for Distance Education Top of PageBack to ERIC MenuBack to CEC Home Page copyright © 1996 ERIC Clearinghouse on Disabilities and Gifted Education Last updated: November 8, 1996 Send updates to: ericec@cec.sped.org URL: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm WT02-B20-111IA001-000011-B032-157http://www.cec.sped.org:80/ericec/elemed.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101075752 text/html 3382HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 07:58:00 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 12-Aug-96 20:16:00 GMTContent-length: 3191Content-type: text/html elemed ELEMENTARY EDUCATION ECENET-L Early childhood education Subscription address: listserv@uiucvm.uiuc.edu Post messages to: ecenet-l@uiucvm.uiuc.edu ECEOL-L Early childhood education online mailing list (K-12) Subscription address: listserv@maine.maine.edu Post messages to: eceol-l@maine.maine.edu ELED-L Elementary education Subscription address: listserv@ksuvm.bitnet Post messages to: eled-l@ksuvm.bitnet ELEMUG Elementary school users' group Subscription address: listserv@uiucvm.uic.edu Post messages to: elemug@uiucvm.uic.edu INTERN-L Pre-service educators/practice teaching Subscription address: listserv@unbvm1.csd.unb.ca Post messages to: intern-l@unbvm1.csd.unb.ca NOVAE Timely news articles for classroom teachers who really don't have time to drivethe Information Highway Subscription address: majordomo@uidaho.edu Post messages to: C6460101@idptv.idbsu.edu SS435-L Elementary social studies education Subscription address: listserv@ualtavm.bitnet Post messages to: ss435-L@ualtavm.bitnet T321-L Teaching science in elementary schools Subscription address: listserv@mizzou1.missouri.edu Post messages to: t321-l@mizzou1.missouri.edu Top of PageBack to ERIC MenuBack to CEC Home Page copyright © 1996 ERIC Clearinghouse on Disabilities and Gifted Education Last updated: July 24, 1996 Send updates to: ericec@cec.sped.org URL: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm WT02-B20-112IA001-000011-B032-167http://www.cec.sped.org:80/ericec/gened.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101075827 text/html 9069HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 07:58:34 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 19-Dec-96 21:20:00 GMTContent-length: 8876Content-type: text/html gened GENERAL EDUCATION Dead Teachers' Society List, a broad education discussion Subscription address: listserv@iubvm.ucs.indiana.edu Post messages to: dts-l@iubvm.ucs.indiana.edu Educational administration Subscription address: listserv@wvnvm.wvnet.edu Post messages to: edad-l@wvnvm.wvnet.edu Education policy discussion Subscription address: listproc@wais.com Post messages to: edpol@wais.com Educational resources on the Internet Subscription address: listserv@unb.ca Post messages to: edres-l@unb.ca Educational styles Subscription address: listserv@sjuvm.stjohns.edu Post messages to: edstyle@sjuvm.stjohns.edu EDUCOM's news update Subscription address: edupage@educom.edu Post messages to: edupage@educom.edu AEELIST The Association for Experimental Education Subscription address: listserv@pucc.princeton.edu Post messages to: aeelist@pucc.princeton.edu BGEDU-L Educators' forum on reform Subscription address: listserv@ukcc.uky.edu> Post messages to: bgedu-l@ukcc.uky.edu CESNEWS Coalition of essential schools news Subscription address: listserv@brownvm.brown.edu Post messages to: cesnews@brownvm.brown.edu DECTEI-L DEC's education initiative Subscription address: listserv@ubvm.cc.buffalo.edu Post messages to: dectei-l@ubvm.cc.buffalo.edu DTS-L EDAD-L EDPOL EDPOLYAN Education policy analysis Subscription address: listserv@asuvm.inre.asu.edu Post messages to: edpolyan@asuvm.inre.asu.edu EDRES-L EDSTYLE EDUPAGE EFFSCHPRAC Effective school practices Subscription address: mailserv@oregon.uoregon.edu Post messages to: effschprac@oregon.uoregon.edu HOLMESGP HOLMES ED school reform Subscription address: listserv@msu.edu Post messages to: holmesgp@msu.edu INTERN-L Pre-service educators/practice teaching Subscription address: listserv@unbvm1.csd.unb.ca Post messages to: intern-l@unbvm1.csd.unb.ca INTERVERSITY Discussion of the present and future of education Subscription address: majordomo@dewey.lc.missouri.edu Post messages to: interversity@dewey.lc.missouri.edu K12ADMIN Educational administration Subscription address: listserv@suvm.syr.edu Post messages to: k12admin@suvm.syr.edu LRNASST Learning assistance Subscription address: listserv@arizvm1.ccit.arizona.edu Post messages to: lrnasst@arizvm1.ccit.arizona.edu LRN-ED Support and information for K-12 teachers Subscription address: listserv@suvm.syr.edu Post messages to: lrn-ed@suvm.syr.edu MIDDLE-L Discussion of middle school-aged children Subscription address: listserv@vmd.cso.uiuc.edu Post messages to: middle-l@vmd.cso.uiuc.edu MONTESSORI-L Discussion of the Montessori teaching method Subscription address: listserv@listserv.aol.com Post messages to: montessori-l@listserv.aol.com MULTC-L Multicultural education Subscription address: listserv@umdd.umd.edu Post messages to: multc-l@umdd.umd.edu NEWEDU-L New patterns in education Subscription address: listserv@uhccvm.uhcc.hawaii.edu Post messages to: newedu-l@uhccvm.uhcc.hawaii.edu PHILOSED Philosophy of education Subscription address: listserv@suvm.syr.edu Post messages to: philosed@suvm.syr.edu TAG-L Talented and gifted education Subscription address: listserv@listserv.nodak.edu Post messages to: tag-l@listserv.nodak.edu TEACHEFT Teaching effectiveness Subscription address: listserv@wcupa.edu Post messages to: teacheft@wcupa.edu VOCNET Vocational education Subscription address: listserv@cmsa.berkeley.edu Post messages to: vocnet@cmsa.berkeley.edu WALDORF Waldorf education Subscription address: listserv@sjuvm.stjohns.edu Post messages to: waldorf@sjuvm.stjohns.edu WWWEDU Use of the World Wide Web in education Subscription address: listproc@kudzu.cnidr.org Post messages to: wwwedu@kudzu.cnidr.org Top of PageBack to ERIC MenuBack to CEC Home Page copyright © 1996 ERIC Clearinghouse on Disabilities and Gifted Education Last updated: December 18, 1996 Send updates to: ericec@cec.sped.org URL: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm WT02-B20-113IA001-000011-B032-179http://www.cec.sped.org:80/ericec/research.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101075838 text/html 3929HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 07:58:47 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 12-Aug-96 20:22:00 GMTContent-length: 3738Content-type: text/html research RESEARCH AERA The American Educational Research Association runs the following sublists. The subscription address for all these lists is: listserv @ asu.edu. AERA-GSL Graduate studies list (faculty, admin, and students) AERA-A Educational administration forum AERA-B Curriculum studies forum AERA-C Learning and instruction AERA-D Measurement and research methodology AERA-E Counseling and human development AERA-F History and historiography AERA-G Social context of education AERA-H School evaluation and program development AERA-I Education in the professions AERA-J Postsecondary education AERA-K Teaching and teacher evaluation COLICDE Distance education research bulletin Subscription address: colicde-request@unixg.ubc.ca Post messages to: colicde@unixg.ubc.ca DISRES-L Disability research Subscription address: listserv@ryerson.bitnet Post messages to: disres-l@ryerson.bitnet DRUGABUS Drug abuse education and research Subscription address: listserv@umab.bitnet Post messages to: drugabus@umab.bitnet GRANTS-L NSF grants information Subscription address: listserv@msu.edu Post messages to: grants-l@msu.edu Top of PageBack to ERIC MenuBack to CEC Home Page copyright © 1996 ERIC Clearinghouse on Disabilities and Gifted Education Last updated: July 24, 1996 Send updates to: ericec@cec.sped.org URL: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm WT02-B20-114IA001-000011-B032-189http://www.cec.sped.org:80/pd/nom/hug.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101075847 text/html 3989HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 07:58:55 GMTLast-modified: Wednesday, 06-Nov-96 15:36:00 GMTContent-length: 3795Content-type: text/html Clarissa Hug Award Clarissa Hug Teacher of the Year Award Deadline: Nominations must be postmarked by November 15, 1996. Background: This award was established in 1984 by the Delegate Assembly to recognize an outstanding teacher of exceptional children. Candidate: Must be currently involved in the provision of direct services to students who have disabilities and/or are gifted and talented. Should have demonstrated exemplary performance over a period of time as a teacher or provider of direct services, exhibiting such qualities as innovativeness, imagination, creativity, and the ability to inspire, as indicated by achievements clearly recognized by members of the profession and others knowledgeable of the candidate. Must be a CEC member in good standing both currently and for at least the previous 5 years. Should be an appropriately qualified teacher or related specialist as recognized by state/provincial and professional authorities. Nominator: Nominations can be accepted only from federations, branches or divisions. Only one nominee can be accepted from each federation, branch or division. Print out nomination form below, or request forms and information sheets from CEC Headquarters: Office of the Executive Director, 1920 Association Drive, Reston, VA 20191-1589. 1997 Hug Award: Nomination Form Nomination of ______________________________________________ Address __________________________________________________ __________________________________________________ Telephone No. (Work) ________________________ (Home) ____________________ Nominating Federation, Branch or Division ________________________ -------------------------- Person Submitting Nomination _________________________________ CEC Officer Position ________________________________________ Address __________________________________________________ __________________________________________________ Telephone No. (Work) ________________________ (Home) ___________________ Signature of Person Submitting Nomination _______________________ Information Needed to Complete Nomination 1. All information requested on the above nomination form. 2. Description of the outstanding professional contributions of the nominee in the delivery of direct services. If submitting a portfolio, please limit it to 30 pages. Seven copies must be submitted. 3. Vita of nominee. 4. Letters of recommendation (no more than 5). 5. Verification of membership (obtainable from CEC headquarters). Send nominations to: Executive Director The Council for Exceptional Children 1920 Association Drive Reston, VA 20191-1589 Call for NominationsBack to MenuBack HomeWT02-B20-115IA001-000011-B032-205http://www.cec.sped.org:80/pd/nom/wal.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101075858 text/html 4081HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 07:59:06 GMTLast-modified: Wednesday, 06-Nov-96 15:37:00 GMTContent-length: 3887Content-type: text/html J. E. Wallace Wallin Award The 1997 J. E. Wallace Wallin Award Deadline: Nominations must be postmarked by November 15, 1996. Background: This award was established in 1963 by the Board of Governors to honor a professional who has made outstanding contributions to the education of children and youth with exceptionalities. The award was named for and begun with the assistance of Dr. Wallin, a pioneer in the development of clinical psychology and special education in the United States. Candidate: All CEC members are eligible for the award as are Canadian and U.S. citizens who are not members of CEC. (Posthumous nominations are not accepted.) The award honors an individual who has made a significant contribution to the education of children and youth with exceptionalities. This person will have a prominent reputation nationally or internationally in one or more of the following areas: publications; research; development of new concepts, approaches, or programs; new techniques for diagnosis or rehabilitation; improved psychological or educational evaluation procedures; improved administrative procedures; practical application of improved teaching devices; and/or dynamic leadership. Nominator: Nominations can be accepted from individuals or CEC units. Print out nomination form below, or request forms and information sheets from CEC Headquarters: Office of the Executive Director, 1920 Association Drive, Reston, VA 20191-1589. 1997 Wallin Award: Nomination Form Nomination of ______________________________________________ Address __________________________________________________ __________________________________________________ Telephone No. (Work) ________________________ (Home) ____________________ Nominating Federation, Branch or Division ________________________ -------------------------- Nominating Individual or Unit _________________________________ CEC Officer Position and Unit Represented (if nomination is from a CEC unit) _________________________________________________________ Address __________________________________________________ __________________________________________________ Telephone No. (Work) ________________________ (Home) ___________________ Signature of Person Submitting Nomination _______________________ Information Needed to Complete Nomination 1. All information requested on the above nomination form. 2. A two-page description of the significant professional contributions of the nominee. 3. Vita of nominee (maximum of 20 pages). 4. Other supportive documentation, including 5 (maximum) letters of recommendation. Send nominations to: Executive Director The Council for Exceptional Children 1920 Association Drive Reston, VA 20191-1589 Call for NominationsBack to MenuBack HomeWT02-B20-116IA001-000011-B032-217http://www.cec.sped.org:80/pd/nom/out.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101075907 text/html 4442HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 07:59:16 GMTLast-modified: Wednesday, 06-Nov-96 15:36:00 GMTContent-length: 4248Content-type: text/html CEC Outstanding Contributor Award The 1997 CEC Outstanding Contributor Award Deadline: Nominations must be postmarked by November 15, 1996. Background: This award was established in 1988 by the Board of Governors to recognize a CEC member who has been part of the driving force that has resulted in the Council's being recognized for its commitment, leadership, and dedication to service for exceptional children and youth. Candidate: Must be a current CEC member and must have maintained involved membership over an extended, continuous period of time. Must provide documentation of personal contributions at the local, provincial/state, national and/or international levels. Evidence should attest to the impact of the individual's contributions to the goals of the Council and should include but not be limited to a description of: (a) Leadership roles accepted and executed by the individual. (b) Participation in the activies of the Council, e.g., conferences, symposia, and academies. (c) Contributions to CEC publications; program initiations and/or development; development and/or implementation of standards; development of curricular materials or technical aids; actions related to legislation and judicial decisions; and documentation of tested practices. Nominator: Nominations can be accepted only from CEC units, and the nomination must be accompanied by the signature of the president of the unit. Number of Awards:The Professional Standards and Practice Committee has the authority to give one to three awards in any given year or to deny granting the award in any given year. Print out nomination form below, or request forms and information sheets from CEC Headquarters: Office of the Executive Director, 1920 Association Drive, Reston, VA 20191-1589. 1997 Contributor Award: Nomination Form Nomination of ______________________________________________ Address __________________________________________________ __________________________________________________ Telephone No. (Work) ________________________ (Home) ____________________ Nominating Unit ____________________________________________ -------------------------- Person Submitting Nomination ________________________________ CEC Officer Position ________________________________________ Address __________________________________________________ __________________________________________________ Telephone No. (Work) ________________________ (Home) ___________________ Signature of Unit President _______________________ Information Needed to Complete Nomination 1. All information requested on the above nomination form. 2. Description of the nominee's contributions to the goals of the Council. 3. Vita of nominee (maximum of 20 pages). 4. Five (maximum) letters of support regarding nomenee's commitment and personal contributions to CEC. 5. Verification of membership (obtainable at CEC headquarters). Send nominations to: Executive Director The Council for Exceptional Children 1920 Association Drive Reston, VA 20191-1589 Call for NominationsBack to MenuBack HomeWT02-B20-117IA001-000011-B032-227http://www.cec.sped.org:80/pd/nom/res.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101075914 text/html 4998HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 07:59:24 GMTLast-modified: Wednesday, 06-Nov-96 15:37:00 GMTContent-length: 4804Content-type: text/html CEC Research Award The 1997 CEC Research Award Deadline: Nominations must be postmarked by November 15, 1996. Background:This award was established in 1989 by the Board of Governors to recognize an individual, group of individuals, institution, or agency whose research has contributed to the body of knowledge about the education of exceptional children and youth leading to the improvement of their education. Candidate(s): May be an individual, group of individuals, institution, or agency. Nominator: Nominations can be accepted from individuals or CEC units. Award: The Professional Standards and Practice Committee has the authority to give one award each year or to deny granting the award in any given year. Print out nomination form below, or request forms and information sheets from CEC Headquarters: Office of the Executive Director, 1920 Association Drive, Reston, VA 20191-1589. 1997 CEC Research Award Nomination of ______________________________________________ Contact Person (If Nomination is for a Group, Institution, or Agency) __________________________________________________________ Address __________________________________________________ __________________________________________________ Telephone No. (Work) ________________________ (Home) ____________________ Nominating Individual or Unit _________________________________ CEC Office and Unit Represented (if nomination is from a CEC unit) _________________________________________________________ Address __________________________________________________ __________________________________________________ Telephone No. (Work) ________________________ (Home) ___________________ Signature of Person Submitting Nomination _______________________ Information Needed to Complete Nomination Please submit six copies of each of the following: 1. All information requested on the nomination form. 2. Vita of each nominee or description of the institution or agency nominated, including its purpose and history. 3. Description of the program in research, including copies of the published works, relevant reviews, and articles. Because this material cannot be returned, submit no more than five exemplars. 4. Evidence of how the program of research has contributed to the education of exceptional children and youth, including: (a) The extent to which the research has had a direct impact on practice, programs, or policy and a statement of how the research is impacting on the quality of education for exceptional children and youth. (b) Three to five (maximum) letters of recommendation describing the importance and impact of the research on the delivery of programs and services to exceptional children and youth. (c) Three to five (maximum) letters, each from an official at a different field-site, describing how the research has been used to positively enhance the education and/or development of exceptional children and youth, improve programs and/or services, enhance assessment practices, develop other research programs which have grown from the original research, impact policy, and/or affect the preparation of personnel. (d) A listing of literature citations of the research (publications, technical reports, conference citations, presentations, media productions, etc.) to demonstrate the usage of the research findings by others in the field. Please submit six copies of all requested materials in one complete package. Send nominations to: Executive Director The Council for Exceptional Children 1920 Association Drive Reston, VA 20191-1589 Call for NominationsBack to MenuBack HomeWT02-B20-118IA001-000011-B032-240http://www.cec.sped.org:80/pd/nom/bus.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101075925 text/html 4971HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 07:59:33 GMTLast-modified: Wednesday, 06-Nov-96 15:36:00 GMTContent-length: 4777Content-type: text/html CEC Business, Agency, and Community Award The 1997 CEC Business, Agency, and Community Award Deadline: Nominations must be postmarked by November 15, 1996. Background:This award was established in 1992 by the Board of Governors to recognize a business, agency, or community that has promoted and provided for the enhancement, awareness, and employment of individuals with exceptionalities* in order to promote and support their full participation within the community. Candidate(s): Nominees may be private or public businesses or agencies. Nominator: Nominations can be accepted from individuals or CEC units. *Individuals with exceptionalities includes individuals with disabilities as well as individuals who are gifted and talented. Print out nomination form below, or request forms and information sheets from CEC Headquarters: Office of the Executive Director, 1920 Association Drive, Reston, VA 20191-1589. 1997 CEC Business, Agency, and Community Award Nomination of ______________________________________________ Contact Person _____________________________________________ Address __________________________________________________ __________________________________________________ Telephone No. (Work) ________________________ (Home) ____________________ Nominating Individual or Unit _________________________________ CEC Office and Unit Represented (if nomination is from a CEC unit) _________________________________________________________ Address __________________________________________________ __________________________________________________ Telephone No. (Work) ________________________ (Home) ___________________ Number of Employees _______________________ Signature of Person Submitting Nomination _______________________ Information Needed to Complete Nomination 1. All information requested on the nomination form. 2. Description of the business or agency nominated, including its purpose and history. 3. Description of the efforts of the business or agency to meet at least three (3) of the following criteria: (a) Demonstrated a particular accommodation for a person with a disability, including innovative individualized accommodations or more general building-wide accommodations. (b) Demonstrated an active hiring campaign to encourage the employment of individuals with disabilities. (c) Demonstrated physical modification of the environment to accommodate individuals with disabilities. (d) Maintained an ongoing, long-term hiring/accommodation practice. (e) Demonstrated a formal relationship with schools for the sponsorship of work-study sites, community-based training experiences, and transitioning opportunities for individuals with exceptionalities. (f) Sponsored a mentoring program for students with exceptionalities. (g) Supported a career development program for students with exceptionalities. (h) Provided a scholarship program for individual students with exceptionalities. (i) Offered onsite specific skill training programs for students with exceptionalities. (j) Sponsored public awareness activities showing the contributions to society of individuals with exceptionalities. (k) Demonstrated an active public relations campaign which enhances awareness about the needs of individuals with exceptionalities. 4. Three to five letters of recommendation documenting the nominee's efforts in meeting the criteria for the award. Send nominations to: Executive Director The Council for Exceptional Children 1920 Association Drive Reston, VA 20191-1589 Call for NominationsBack to MenuBack HomeWT02-B20-119IA001-000011-B032-254http://www.cec.sped.org:80/pd/nom/pub.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101075934 text/html 4262HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 07:59:43 GMTLast-modified: Wednesday, 06-Nov-96 16:35:00 GMTContent-length: 4068Content-type: text/html CEC Outstanding Public Service Award The 1997 Outstanding Public Service Award of The Council for Exceptional Children Criteria for Selection 1. The Council for Exceptional Children shall consider a person for this award on the basis of actions in the governmental and political arena which have enhanced, directly or indirectly, the education of exceptional children with disabilities and/or who are gifted. Such actions may include any of the following: promotion of beneficial legislation; protection of beneficial legislation; executive branch leadership on behalf of exceptional children; and/or outstanding public advocacy as a spokesperson. 2. CEC shall consider for this award only a person whose actions have been of national significance, that is, actions which have nationwide impact of a positive nature, either directly or indirectly upon the education of exceptional children. 3. CEC shall consider for this award persons who performed actions in the governmental and political arena in either the United States or Canada. Procedures for Selection 1. Any member, group of members, or constituted unit of The Council for Exceptional Children may recommend to the Executive Committee a candidate to receive the CEC Award for Outstanding Public Service. The recommendation shall be offered through the established format of a resolution. 2. Any such formal resolution shall include: name of the initiator of the resolution, whether an individual or constituted unit of The Council for Exceptional Children; name of the candidate; position(s) held by the candidate when actions were performed which form the basis for recommending the candidate; and a statement describing the actions of the candidate which would justify the candidate being a recipient of the award. 3. The resolution should be submitted in writing to the CEC Executive Committee no later than the time of their convention-week meeting (Saturday prior to the convention). It is preferable for the resolution to be submitted to the Executive Committee at least four months prior to the Convention to allow sufficient time for investigation, study, and recommendations as appropriate. If such sufficient time is not allowed, final disposition of the resolution may be delayed until the subsequent annual convention. 4. The resolution will be referred to CEC�s Advocacy and Governmental Relations Committee. The AGRC shall recommend to the Executive Committee what action should be taken respecting the resolution. 5. Following Executive Committee consideration, the resolution will be presented to the Board of Governors. The resolution may be presented to the Board with or without recommendations. 6. Following the Board of Governors' consideration, the resolution will be presented to the Delegate Assembly. The resolution may be presented to the Assembly with or without recommendations. 7. The Delegate Assembly shall approve, amend, or disapprove the resolution. Send nominations to: Department of Public Policy The Council for Exceptional Children 1920 Association Drive Reston, VA 20191-1589 Call for NominationsBack to MenuBack HomeWT02-B20-120IA001-000011-B032-271http://www.cec.sped.org:80/pd/nom/stu.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101075956 text/html 6193HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 08:00:02 GMTLast-modified: Wednesday, 06-Nov-96 15:37:00 GMTContent-length: 5999Content-type: text/html Outstanding Student CEC Member of the Year 1996-1997 Outstanding Student CEC Member of the Year Nomination Form for Undergraduate and Graduate Student Award (Please type the following information.) Candidate's Name: ________________________________________________________ Complete Mailing Address: _________________________________________________________ _________________________________________________________ Telephone No.: ____________________ CEC I.D.# : ________________________ (Nominee must be a current CEC member) Joined CEC: Month _______________ Year ________________ (Can be approximate date) Undergraduate or Graduate Student: ________________________ Chapter Name: _________________ Number ________________ Advisor's Name: ________________________________________ College Attending: ______________________________________ Name and Address of Individual Completing This Form: _______________________________________________________ _______________________________________________________ _______________________________________________________ Return to: Student CEC Honors Committee c/o Coordinator of Student Activities The Council for Exceptional Children 1920 Association Drive Reston, Virginia 20191 MUST BE POSTMARKED NO LATER THAN DECEMBER 2, 1996. NOTE: All undergraduate nominees for this award will also be considered for the Shana Breen Memorial Award. The recipient of the Shana Breen Memorial Award will be selected by Ms. Lisa Breen, founder of the Shana Breen Memorial Fund. --------------------------------------------------------- 1996-1997 Outstanding Student CEC Member of the Year Nomination Form for Undergraduate and Graduate Student Award Candidate's Name: _______________________________________ Reason for Nomination: ______________________________________________________ ______________________________________________________ ______________________________________________________ ______________________________________________________ ______________________________________________________ ______________________________________________________ ______________________________________________________ ______________________________________________________ ______________________________________________________ ______________________________________________________ ______________________________________________________ ______________________________________________________ ______________________________________________________ ______________________________________________________ ______________________________________________________ ______________________________________________________ ______________________________________________________ ______________________________________________________ ______________________________________________________ ______________________________________________________ Continue on additional pages if necessary. Please do not exceed more than two additional pages. Material submitted beyond the two additional pages will not be considered. Background Information Please do not use abbreviations when referring to programs or organizations. Involvement With Student CEC: ______________________________________________________ ______________________________________________________ ______________________________________________________ ______________________________________________________ ______________________________________________________ ______________________________________________________ Other Experiences with Exceptional Children: ______________________________________________________ ______________________________________________________ ______________________________________________________ ______________________________________________________ ______________________________________________________ ______________________________________________________ Academic/Community Honors, Awards, and Leadership Responsibilities: ______________________________________________________ ______________________________________________________ ______________________________________________________ ______________________________________________________ ______________________________________________________ ______________________________________________________ Other Pertinent Information: ______________________________________________________ ______________________________________________________ ______________________________________________________ ______________________________________________________ ______________________________________________________ ______________________________________________________ Continue on additional pages if necessary. Please do not exceed more than two additional pages. Material submitted beyond the two additional pages will not be considered. Call for NominationsBack to MenuCEC HomeWT02-B20-121IA001-000011-B032-287http://www.cec.sped.org:80/pd/nom/phi.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101080005 text/html 2263HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 08:00:14 GMTLast-modified: Wednesday, 06-Nov-96 15:36:00 GMTContent-length: 2069Content-type: text/html  Susan Phillips Gorin Award The 1997 Susan Gorin Phillips Award Background and Candidates: The Susan Phillips Gorin Award was initiated in 1981 by Student CEC to honor a regular CEC member who has demonstrated exemplary personal and professional qualities while making outstanding contributions to Student CEC and to exceptional children. Nomination for this award includes two letters of recommendation, one which must be from a current Student CEC member. The following is information needed to complete the nomination: 1. Each letter of recommendation should be no more than two pages. 2. No less than two and no more than four letters of recommendation should be received per nominee. One must be from a current Student CEC member. 3. Letters of recommendation should include: a. Nominee's contribution in providing leadership and involvement opportunities for Student CEC members. b. Nominee's involvement with exceptional children and within the field of special education. Deadline: Nominations must be postmarked by December 2, 1996. Send to: Student CEC Executive Committee c/o Coordinator of Student Activities 1920 Association Drive Reston, VA 20191-1589 Call for NominationsBack to MenuBack HomeWT02-B20-122IA001-000011-B032-302http://www.cec.sped.org:80/pd/nom/gra.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101080015 text/html 6693HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 08:00:23 GMTLast-modified: Wednesday, 06-Nov-96 15:36:00 GMTContent-length: 6499Content-type: text/html Student CEC Graduation Awards 1996-1997 Student CEC Graduation Awards During the 1994 annual convention in Denver, the Student CEC Board of Governors created two graduation awards to be awarded annually, one to an undergraduate Student CEC member and the other to a Student CEC member in a graduate or doctoral program. The winners of the award will receive $350 upon graduation with part of the money going towards professional CEC membership. Purpose of the Award To better increase the retention rate of Student CEC members transitioning to CEC membership as well as provide support for expenses incurred while in school, two awards of $350 will be offered annually: 1) to an undergraduate Student CEC member and 2) to a graduate (doctoral or master's candidate) Student CEC member upon completion of their education at their university or college. Eligibility Criteria to Apply for the Award The following is a list of criteria that must be met in order to apply for the award: 1. An undergraduate and/or graduate (doctoral or master's candidate) student enrolled at an accredited college or university who will be graduating in the academic year the award is given (i.e. in order to receive the award in 1997, each applicant must be graduating sometime in 1997). 2. Overall grade point average of 3.0 or better or marks equal to a B or higher. 3. Member of Student CEC. Application Process To be considered for the award, the following information must be submitted to the Student CEC Honors Committee by December 2, 1996 (postmarked): 1. Application Cover Sheet 2. Documentation of your GPA or marks 3. A list of college, community, Student CEC and other extracurricular activities 4. A two page essay (double spaced) explaining: your experience with persons with exceptionalities; your desire to work with persons with exceptionalities; your view of the exceptional person in the classroom; and what you hope to accomplish as a professional. 5. Two letters of recommendation addressing your commitment to special education and Student CEC from: your Student CEC advisor (in collaboration with your chapter's executive committee); and an academic advisor, employer or professor. Selection Process and Criteria The winners of the award will be chosen by the Student CEC Honors Committee. The Honors Committee must receive all applications postmarked by December 2, 1996. They will review the applications and make their selections based on: 1) the responses in the essay, namely experience with persons with exceptionalities, the desire to work with persons with exceptionalities and future goals as a professional; 2) the letters of recommendation; 3) the grades/marks and other extracurricular activities; and 4) Student CEC activities. Awards Process The undergraduate and graduate (doctoral and master's candidate) members winning the award each receive $350 with part of this money going to renewal of professional membership. The monetary award will be given upon receipt of a final transcript indicating the degree conferred which must be sent to the Coordinator of Student Activities within two months of graduation. The winners will be recognized at the Student CEC awards presentation during the annual convention but do not need to be present to win. ------------------------------------------------------------------------------ Application Form (Please type the following information.) Candidate's Name: ________________________________________________________ Complete Mailing Address: _________________________________________________________ _________________________________________________________ Telephone No.: ____________________ CEC I.D.# : ________________________ (Nominee must be a current CEC member) Joined CEC: Month _______________ Year ________________ (Can be approximate date) Undergraduate or Graduate Student: ________________________ (Please specify) Chapter Name: _________________ Number ________________ Advisor's Name: ________________________________________ Certification of Graduation: I certify that ______________________________________ (Name of applicant) will graduate from ________________________________________ in (month) ______________ 1997. ________________________________ (Signature of advisor) Please Attach the Following Information: 1. Documentation of your GPA or marks. 2. A list of college, community, Student CEC and other extracurricular activities. 3. A two-page essay (double spaced) explaining: your experience with persons with exceptionalities; your desire to work with persons with exceptionalities; your view of the exceptional person in the classroom; and what you hope to accomplish as a professional. 4. Two letters of recommendation addressing your commitment to special education and Student CEC from: your Student CEC advisor (in collaboration with your chapter's executive committee); and an academic advisor, employer or professor. Must Be Postmarked No Later Than December 2, 1996 . Send to: Student CEC Executive Committee c/o Coordinator of Student Activities 1920 Association Drive Reston, VA 20191-1589 Call for NominationsBack to MenuBack HomeWT02-B20-123IA001-000011-B032-316http://www.cec.sped.org:80/pd/nom/eth.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101080025 text/html 4749HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 08:00:33 GMTLast-modified: Wednesday, 06-Nov-96 15:36:00 GMTContent-length: 4555Content-type: text/html Student CEC Ethnic Diversity Scholarship Student CEC Ethnic Diversity Scholarship Student CEC is offering a $500 scholarship to be awarded annually to a student who is a member of an ethnic group and who is currently pursuing a degree in Special Education. The Council for Exceptional Children (CEC) serves over 55,000 international members who are dedicated to quality education for all exceptional children. CEC works to achieve: access to special education, effective systems of delivery, improved professional practice through the application of research and technology, appropriate standards for certification, and improved resources. The Student Council for Exceptional Children is a program of CEC whose purpose is to facilitate leadership training and professional development for members. About 20% of CEC's members are students majoring in special or regular education. Criteria To Apply for the Student CEC Ethnic Diversity Scholarship: 1. Student member of CEC. 2. Citizen of the United States or Canada. 3. Member of an ethnic group. 4. Junior, senior, or graduate student enrolled in an accredited college/university for the 1996-97 year and majoring in Special Education. 5. G.P.A. of 2.5 on a 4.0 scale. Application Process: To be considered for the Student CEC Ethnic Diversity Scholarship, please submit 4 copies of the following: 1. The Scholarship Application Cover Sheet. 2. Documentation of financial need and your G.P.A. (list of financial assistance and your current transcripts from the university.) 3. A list of Student CEC and/or other activities relating to individuals with disabilities in which you are involved and provide a brief biography responding to the following questions. Please do not exceed two type-written (double-spaced) pages. Why did you choose special education as your career? How do you view the role of special educators? What do you hope to accomplish as a special education teacher? 4. Two letters of recommendation, one from a faculty advisor, addressing your commitment to the teaching profession. All materials must be postmarked no later than December 2, 1996. -------------------------------------------------------------------------- Student CEC Ethnic Diversity Scholarship Application Please complete this application cover sheet. Submit it along with your two-page essay, two letters of recommendation, and documentation of your financial need and your GPA. Four copies of this information should be sent to CEC Headquarters. Name: __________________________________________________ CEC I.D.# : ________________________ Complete Mailing Address: _________________________________________________________ _________________________________________________________ Home Phone: ____________________ School Phone: ____________________ Ethnic Background _____ African American or Black _____ American Indian, Alaska Native, or Native Canadian _____ Hispanic _____ Asian or Pacific Islander _____ Other_________________________ University/College Attending: _____________________________ Specific Major: _________________________________________ Degree Presently Pursuing: ______________________________ Other Endorsements: ____________________________________ Will you be a junior, senior, or graduate student? ______________ Postmark Deadline is December 2, 1996. Send to: Coordinator of Student Activities 1920 Association Drive Reston, VA 20191-1589 Call for NominationsBack to MenuBack HomeWT02-B20-124IA001-000011-B032-331http://www.cec.sped.org:80/pd/nom/cau.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101080034 text/html 4876HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 08:00:42 GMTLast-modified: Wednesday, 06-Nov-96 15:36:00 GMTContent-length: 4682Content-type: text/html Student CEC/Black Caucus Scholarship Student CEC/Black Caucus Scholarship The Black Caucus of CEC, through Student CEC, is offering a $500 scholarship to be awarded annually to an African American student who is currently pursuing a degree in Special Education. The Black Caucus of Special Educators has a 25-year history of advocating for improved and quality services for African American youth who demonstrate disabilities warranting special education services. The Council for Exceptional Children (CEC) serves over 52,000 international members who are dedicated to quality education for all exceptional children and youth. CEC works to achieve: access to special education, effective systems of delivery, improved professional practice through the application of research and technology, appropriate standards for certification, and improved resources. The Student Council for Exceptional Children is a program of CEC whose purpose is to facilitate leadership training and professional development for members. About 20% of CEC's members are students majoring in special or regular education. Criteria To Apply for the Student CEC/Black Caucus Scholarship: 1. Student member of CEC. 2. Citizen of the United States or Canada. 3. African American 4. Junior, senior, or graduate student enrolled in an accredited college/university for the 1997-98 year and majoring in Special Education. 5. G.P.A. of 2.5 on a 4.0 scale. Application Process: To be considered for the Student Scholarship, sponsored by the Black Caucus of CEC, please submit 4 copies of the following: 1. The Scholarship Application Cover Sheet. 2. Documentation of financial need and your G.P.A. (list of financial assistance and your current transcripts from the university.) 3. A list of Student CEC and/or other activities relating to individuals with disabilities in which you are involved and provide a brief biography responding to the following questions. Please do not exceed two type-written (double-spaced) pages. Why did you choose special education as your career? How do you view the role of special educators? What do you hope to accomplish as a special educator? 4. Two letters of recommendation, one from a faculty advisor, addressing your commitment to the teaching profession. All materials must be postmarked no later than December 2, 1996. -------------------------------------------------------------------------- Student CEC/Black Caucus Scholarship Application Please complete this application cover sheet. Submit it along with your two-page essay, two letters of recommendation, and documentation of your financial need and your GPA. Four copies of this information should be sent to CEC Headquarters. Name: __________________________________________________ CEC I.D.# : ________________________ Home Address: _________________________________________________________ _________________________________________________________ School Address: _________________________________________________________ _________________________________________________________ Home Phone: ____________________ School Phone: ____________________ University/College Attending: _____________________________ Specific Major: _________________________________________ Degree Presently Pursuing: ______________________________ Other Endorsements: ____________________________________ Will you be a junior, senior, or graduate student? ______________ Postmark Deadline is December 2, 1996. Send to: Coordinator of Student Activities 1920 Association Drive Reston, VA 20191-1589 Call for NominationsBack to MenuBack HomeWT02-B20-125IA001-000011-B032-345http://www.cec.sped.org:80/pd/pds3.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101080046 text/html 5089HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 08:00:53 GMTLast-modified: Tuesday, 04-Jun-96 16:00:00 GMTContent-length: 4897Content-type: text/html CEC--Professional Development Series '96--Nashville,Tennessee Professional Development Series '96 Nashville, Tennessee Professional Development Series '96 Nashville, Tennessee November 7-8, 1996 Come to Nashville this fall and let some of the rhythm, rhyme, and harmony wash overyou. Take some of those elements back to your school and classroom by learningvarious strategies for teaching, accommodating, managing, and inspiring students withexceptionalities. Together with expert presenters and dedicated colleagues, you willfind resources to make your educational program more effective. 1. Transition: Student Center Planning Examine the critical features of transition that will lead students to quality,realistic outcomes in the community as well as the classroom. Learn to assesstransition needs of exceptional students and develop solid transition plans based onstudents' needs, goals, and aspirations. Address self-determination strategies toinvolve students with their own goal-setting and futures planning. RobertMiller, Mankato State University, Mankato, Minnesota 2. Accommodations for An Inclusive Classroom Thiscomprehensive workshop will address many areas of instruction for adapting curriculum materials, instructional techniques, and the environment to exceptional students in thegeneral content classroom. Learn to reach the "hard-to-teach" in a classroom thatsupports learning for all students. Judy Wood, Virginia CommonwealthUniversity, Richmond, VA 3. Student Violence and Aggression: Effective PreventionPrograms in Your School and Classroom Explore factors that lead to the development of aggression amongstudents. Examine ways to assess the nature of violence and violence prevention inyour school or classroom. Promote problem-solving activities and conflict resolutionskills in your repertoire with students. Richard Van Acker, University ofIllinois at Chicago 4. Successful Inclusion of Students withEmotional and Behavioral Disorders Minimize the behavioral barriers that prevent students from being includedin general education classrooms. Examine the obstacles that hinder a teacher's abilityto reach and teach students who choose disruption and confrontation over learningand participation. Teacher collaboration, social skills instruction, peer tutoring, andinstructional/curricular accommodation will be discussed. Kevin Callahan,University of North Texas, Denton, Texas About the Presenters Robert Miller, Associate Professor and Interim Director of Grants andSponsored Programs/Research Office at Mankato (MN) State College, has access tothe latest research and practices relating to the transitional activities of students withdisabilities. He also has an extensive resume of training and publications addressing such topics as technology preparation, post-secondary education, and inclusiveschools. Judy Wood is a professor of special education at VirginiaCommonwealth University and director of the Responsive Education Institute. She hasconducted many workshops for both general and special educators nationally as wellas internationally on topics such as adapting instruction to exceptional students, mainstreaming, teaching at-risk students, and improving test performance in allstudents. Richard Van Acker is an associate professor and chairperson ofthe special education department within the College of Education at the University ofIllinois. He was one of the principal investigators on the Metropolitan Area Child Study,a longitudinal research study on the prevention of violence in children, funded by theNational Institutes of Health. His presentations emphasize teacher collaboration,diversity in the school, classroom management, and teacher preparation. Kevin Callahan is an assistant professor of special education at the Universityof North Texas, Denton, Texas. Kevin presented and published numerous topicsaddressing the management and instruction of students with severe behavioraldisorders. His emphasis is on the inclusive environment, making his presentations pertinent to today's special and general educators.WT02-B20-126IA001-000011-B032-362http://www.cec.sped.org:80/pd/reginfo.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101080055 text/html 2758HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 08:01:03 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 08-Aug-96 14:14:00 GMTContent-length: 2565Content-type: text/html CEC--Professional Development Events '96--RegistrationInformation Professional DevelopmentEvents Registration Information Registration Information FOR QUESTIONS regarding content and application of workshop,contact Brian Carroll. FOR ATRAINING BROCHURE, call toll-freeat 1-800-224-6830. TO REGISTER for a CEC workshop or institute, sendthe following information with a check, money order, purchase order, or credit cardinformation to: The Council for Exceptional Children ATTN: ProfessionalDevelopment 1920 Association Drive Reston, VA 20191 *CEC professional development events are accessible and materials are available inalternative formats. Please notify Ginny Jenkins when registering if you need special assistance. Costs: Members, $199 Student Members, $150 Nonmembers, $249 5th member of team attends free (applications must be sent together forteams). Title ofEvent:__________________________________________________Name/Title:_____________________________________________________ CEC Member Number (please write "Non-Member" here if you are not a member or ifyour membership has lapsed):________________________ Organization:_____________________________ Mailing Address (indicate Home or Office):______________________________ City:__________________________________ State/Province:__________________________ Zip/Postal Code:_________________________ Country (if other than United States):_________ Daytime Phone:____________________ Evening Phone:____________________ FAX:____________________________ If registering by credit card, please include Card Number and Expiration Date. OnlyVISA and MasterCard are accepted. Note: Some training events require selection of sessions. Be sure to include your officeand home telephone numbers so we can contact you if a selection is required for yourtraining event. A confirmation letter that includes hotel registration information will besent upon receipt of application. WT02-B20-127IA001-000011-B033-12http://www.cec.sped.org:80/pd/reginfo2.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101080106 text/html 2445HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 08:01:13 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 15-Nov-96 19:42:00 GMTContent-length: 2254Content-type: text/html CEC--Professional Development Events '96--RegistrationInformation 1997 Symposium onCulturally and Linguistically Diverse Exceptional Learners Registration Information Mail registration and payment (check, money order, purchase order, or credit cardinformation) to: The Council for Exceptional Children PO Box 79026 Baltimore, MD 21279-0026 [Please note: The address above is NOT the address of CEC Headquarters.] *CEC professional development events are accessible and materials are available inalternative formats. Please notify Ginny Jenkins when registering if you need special assistance. Costs: Preregistration until 12/11/96 On Site Members, $199 Members, $255 Nonmembers, $249 Nonmembers, $310 Title ofEvent:__________________________________________________Name/Title:_____________________________________________________ CEC Member Number (please write "Non-Member" here if you are not a member or ifyour membership has lapsed):________________________ Organization:_____________________________ Mailing Address (indicate Home or Office):______________________________ City:__________________________________ State/Province:__________________________ Zip/Postal Code:_________________________ Country (if other than United States):_________ Daytime Phone:____________________ Evening Phone:____________________ FAX:____________________________ If registering by credit card, please include Card Number and Expiration Date. OnlyVISA, MasterCard, and Discovery are accepted. WT02-B20-128IA001-000011-B033-30http://www.cec.sped.org:80/nw/cortes.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101080117 text/html 3806HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 08:01:24 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 19-Dec-96 15:06:00 GMTContent-length: 3613Content-type: text/html CEC/DDEL 1997 Multicultural Symposium CEC Announces Carlos Cortés as Keynote Speaker at Multicultural Symposium January 8-10, 1997 Radisson Hotel New Orleans, Louisiana Dr. Carlos Cortés, internationally known author and speaker in the field of diversity and multiculturalism, will be the keynote speaker for CEC's 1997 Symposium on Culturally and Linguistically Diverse Exceptional Learners. The symposium will be held January 8-10, 1997, at the Radisson Hotel in New Orleans, LA. In his keynote speech, Cortés will look at future trends in multiculturalism and what they mean for education. The symposium audience will get a new perspective on how schools and educators must change to provide educational content and strategies that prepare students to function in a world that must accommodate peoples of all cultures, nationalities, and ethnicities. Cortés' presentation will outline changes in educational practices that allow students of all abilities and disabilities to build on their individual strengths and backgrounds. He will address issues that today's educators face as they work with students of diverse cultures, such as language development, adapting curriculum, the development of social skills, and assessment. Cortés gained international recognition for his publications on multicultural issues, including Three Perspectives on Ethnicity: Blacks, Chicanos, and Native Americans and Beyond Language: Social and Cultural Factors in Schooling Language Minority Students. He has also lectured widely throughout the United States, Latin America, Europe and Asia on multiculturalism and diversity and has served as a consultant to government agencies, school systems, universities, mass media, businesses, and other organizations. In addition, Cortés was named Professor Emeritus of History at the University of California, Riverside. Cortés has received several awards for his work, including the National Multicultural Trainer of the Year Award, the Faculty Public Service Award, the Smithsonian Institution Public Lecturer, and the Hilda Taba Award of the California Council for Social Studies. The symposium's sessions address the most compelling and critical issues involving students with special needs of diverse backgrounds, giving insights into current problems as well as practical tools and solutions. The symposium is co-sponsored by CEC's Division for Culturally and Linguistically Diverse Exceptional Learners and the Louisiana State Department of Education. For more information call 800/224-6830 or jump to the CEC/DDEL Multicultural Symposium web page. Back to HighlightsBack to MenuBack to CEC Home Page copyright © 1996 The Council for Exceptional Children Last updated: December 19, 1996 Send comments to CEC's Internet Coordinator URL: http://www.cec.sped.org/ WT02-B20-129IA001-000011-B033-47http://www.cec.sped.org:80/nw/multi-cu.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101080127 text/html 3198HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 08:01:36 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 16-Dec-96 17:20:00 GMTContent-length: 3007Content-type: text/html CEC/DDEL 1997 Multicultural Symposium Symposium Offers Solutions to the Challenges of Educating Students from Diverse Cultural Backgrounds The Council for Exceptional Children�s (CEC�s) 1997 Symposium on Culturally and Linguistically Diverse Exceptional Learners provides new strategies for educating students with disabilities and/or gifts and talents who are from diverse cultures. The Symposium will be held January 8-10, 1997, at the The Raddison Hotel New Orleans. Over the course of three days, renowned leaders in the field will address the most compelling and critical issues involving students with special needs of diverse backgrounds, giving insights into current problems as well as practical tools and solutions. The Symposium focuses on the following areas: Overrepresentation of Minorities in Special Education Social/Behavior Management for Students of Diverse Cultures Effective Instruction for Language Minority Students with Disabilities Creating Environments for Learning in a Multicultural Classroom The Negative Impact of Grade Point Averages and Test Results on the Achievement of Students from Diverse Cultures Gifted Education for Students from Diverse Cultures Key presenters include: Margaret Wang, Principal Investigator, The National Center on Education in the Inner Cities Carmen Arrega-Mayer, Researcher, Juniper Gardens Children�s Project Russell Gersten, Researcher, Eugene Research Institute Beth Harry, Professor, Professor, University of Miami Sharon Ishii-Jordan, Professor, University of Nebraska Esther Leung, Professor, Eastern Kentucky University Cathy Kea, Professor, North Carolina A&T State University Robert Rueda, Professor, University of Southern California The Symposium is co-sponsored by CEC�s Division for Culturally and Linguistically Diverse Exceptional Learners (DDEL). For more information call 800/224-6830 or jump to the CEC/DDEL Multicultural Symposium web page. Back to HighlightsBack to MenuBack to CEC Home Page copyright © 1996 The Council for Exceptional Children Last updated: December 16, 1996 Send comments to CEC's Internet Coordinator URL: http://www.cec.sped.org/ WT02-B20-130IA001-000011-B033-64http://www.cec.sped.org:80/nw/reply.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101080140 text/html 4400HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 08:01:50 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 25-Nov-96 18:37:00 GMTContent-length: 4209Content-type: text/html Reply to TIME</EM> CEC President Gerald Hime Responds to "The Struggle to Pay for Special Ed." In a letter to the editors of Time magazine, CEC President Gerald Hime took issue with Time's November 4, 1996 article, "The Struggle to Pay for Special Ed." (Bolston, pp. 82-83), disputing the story's assertion that special education is too expensive. The article cited an example of "community outrage" in rural South Dakota resulting from the cost of tuition and travel for a local student with autism. The author stated that "the cause of the community outrage was the money for [the student's] special education comes, under the legal requirements of the Individuals With Disabilities Education Act, from the budget of the local school district." The article further pointed out that although federal and state laws have passed laws requiring special education for students with disabilities, Congress and the states "have been parsimonious with the money to pay the added costs" spawning "intense conflict between parents and school officials." President Hime's response to the story: November 11, 1996 TIME Magazine Letters Time & Life Building Rockefeller Center, New York, NY 10020 Dear TIME Magazine Letters Editor: I was very disappointed to see TIME perpetuate the myth that special education is unaffordable (EDUCATION, Nov. 4). You made it appear that special education is not only exorbitantly expensive but that local districts must bear the brunt of its cost. In fact, educating a child with special needs costs, on average, two and one-half times that of a general education student. Across the nation, states provide 56 percent of the funds for that cost; local sources provide 36 percent. But the real savings is that as a result of special education more students with disabilities are becoming productive, independent citizens than ever before--approximately 70 percent of students with disabilities are employed, and an ever increasing number are attending college and other post-secondary educational institutions. It should also be noted that federal appropriations have lagged behind the levels set forth in the legislation guaranteeing a free, appropriate public education for students with disabilities. Though the federal contribution to special education was supposed to cover 40% of its costs, federal spending for these programs has hovered around 7%. Hopefully, the recent Congressional funding increase for special education (approximately $750 million) marks a commitment to fully fund the federal/state special education partnership. The cost of providing public assistance to an individual who has not gained the skills necessary for employment equals approximately $36,000 a year, plus loss of productivity and tax revenue. Given these facts, the real question is Can America afford not to provide special education for its children? Sincerely, Gerald Hime President, The Council for Exceptional Children For further information about CEC policies regarding the delivery of services to exceptional children, please jump to the CEC Policies page. Back to HighlightsBack to MenuBack to CEC Home Page copyright © 1996 The Council for Exceptional Children Last updated: November 21, 1996 Send comments to: cec@cec.sped.org URL: http://www.cec.sped.org/ WT02-B20-131IA001-000011-B033-81http://www.cec.sped.org:80/nw/yic.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101080149 text/html 2175HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 08:01:58 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 22-Nov-96 14:28:00 GMTContent-length: 1984Content-type: text/html Yes I Can! Awards Yes I Can! Awards Recognize Students With Disabilities Each year at the "Yes I Can!" awards, CEC and the Foundation for Exceptional Children (FEC) recognizes students whose courage and determination have helped them achieve despite their disabilities. Established in 1981, the Yes I Can! awards help students with disabilities know that their efforts are appreciated and that they, too, can be recognized for their accomplishments. Each year 35 students are selected for the international awards, which are presented at a special ceremony and reception at the annual convention. In addition, all nominees receive a certificate for their achievements. Do you know of a student who deserves recognition? If so, nominate them for a Yes I Can! award. These students bring pride and hope to the entire special education community. Nominees for the Yes I Can! award must be 2 to 21 years old. Each nominee is eligible in one category. For more information, contact FEC at 703/620-1054, or jump to the Yes I Can! web page. Back to HighlightsBack to MenuBack to CEC Home Page copyright © 1996 The Council for Exceptional Children Last updated: November 21, 1996 Send comments to: cec@cec.sped.org URL: http://www.cec.sped.org/ WT02-B20-132IA001-000011-B033-90http://www.cec.sped.org:80/nw/ncate.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101080157 text/html 2633HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 08:02:07 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 22-Nov-96 14:27:00 GMTContent-length: 2442Content-type: text/html NCATE Approves CEC's Accreditation Status NCATE Approves CEC's Accreditation Status By Linda Blanton On October 15, 1996, the Specialty Areas Studies Board of the National Council for the Accreditation of Teacher Education (NCATE) approved CEC's guidelines for preparing special education professionals. As a result of this action, the 40 states that now have partnerships with NCATE will have to align their state standards for preparing special education professionals with CEC's. Eleven of those states (AK, CT, DL, IL, MD, MS, RI, SC, VA, WA, and WV) will require colleges and universities to submit their special education professional preparation programs to CEC for approval in order to retain state accreditation. In the remaining? for non-NCATE partnership states, colleges and universities seeking NCATE accreditation will also have to seek CEC approval of their special education programs by demonstrating that they meet the standards. By including CEC's Knowledge and Skills for Beginning Special Education Teachers within the CEC/NCATE standards for program approval, CEC has merged certification standards with accreditation standards and set the stage for special education teachers graduating from CEC/NCATE approved institutions to teach throughout the United States and Canada. For further information on the CEC standards, the accreditation process, or related assistance, contact CEC's Publications and Professional Standards unit at 703/264-9408 or cec.pro@cec.sped.org. Back to HighlightsBack to MenuBack to CEC Home Page copyright © 1996 The Council for Exceptional Children Last updated: November 21, 1996 Send comments to: cec@cec.sped.org URL: http://www.cec.sped.org/ WT02-B20-133IA001-000011-B033-111http://www.cec.sped.org:80/bk/campbell.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101080207 text/html 22187HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 08:02:15 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:22:00 GMTContent-length: 21993Content-type: text/html CEC Author Online Sharing Ideas About Teaching Effectively: Using Technology toCollaborate by Pam Campbell and Jack Tierney What is the goal of education? The answer seems simple: to educate all studentsequitably and effectively. Teachers who accept this responsibility, however, face manychallenges (Ysseldyke & Algozzine, 1995). What works for teachers in the followingsituations? Teaching students with disabilities in general educationclassrooms at the secondary level. Managing disruptions with students inelementary schools. Planning reading instruction for a diverse group of learners. Providing consistency across settings for students with disabilities. Thisarticle provides some answers--through technology and some pioneering preserviceteachers. As the student population becomes more diverse, planning instructionbecomes more complex. As greater numbers of students with special needs are placedin general education classrooms, educators are looking for effective ways to manageclassrooms and provide instruction. Teachers are seeing a need for ongoing evaluationof instruction, and they are concerned about meaningful outcomes for students. In thislight, traditional methods seem less useful. If teachers begin to doubt their abilityto meet these challenges, then their best intentions could weaken and theireffectiveness could be compromised (Spaulding, 1992); students with special needswould be particularly at risk in their classrooms. A New Collaborative Climate Teachers know that when they can share their collective expertise, they can achieveexpected and unexpected outcomes for all students (Hudson, Correa, Morsink, &Dykes, 1987), even in the face of rapid societal change. Teachers themselves are richand valid resources of information about effective instruction; and they know theirclassrooms and students in ways that others cannot (Goswami & Stillman, 1987). Theysimply need a way to share these data in a useful, efficient way; to compile andorganize a large body of information about diverse student needs; and to collaboratewith one another about what works in today's classrooms. Technology and hypertextenvironments are helping them respond to these challenges by expanding the universeof effective instruction. Effective instruction was the topic of a Special Focus inthe Spring 1994 issue of Teaching Exceptional Children. Several articles (Aber,Bachman, Campbell, & O'Malley, 1994; Algozzine, Ysseldyke, & Campbell, 1994;Campbell & Olsen, 1994) highlighted the model of effective instruction and assessmentdeveloped by Algozzine and Ysseldyke (1992) and how teachers in elementary andsecondary classrooms have used the model to guide their practice. Whatfollows is a description of how preservice teachers have used technology andcollaboration to apply those same principles to teach all students, including those withdisabilities, more effectively. Hypertext Help Sharing Ideas About Teaching Effectively (SITE) is a computer program that usesa hypertext environment to create a database of effective teaching tactics. Tactics arethe actions that teachers take to influence learning in their classrooms. SITE enablesteachers to collect and organize their tactics on individual cards within an easy-to-usedatabase. For example, working alone or in groups, teachers might record a tacticthemselves or browse through tactics previously entered by their colleagues. Teachers can offer their own suggestions or comments as to theeffectiveness of a tactic, as well as the level (elementary, secondary), classroom setting(inclusive, special education), student (general, special education), or content area(reading, mathematics, science, etc.). They can also link their tactic to a teachingstrategy in Algozzine and Ysseldyke's (1992) model of effective instruction. Problems, Interests, Needs? Check SITE! SITE provides teachers with an exceptional resource when they face problems in theclassroom. For example, Linda, a special educator in an elementary school, wanted herstudents to manage their classroom responsibilities when she was not present.Browsing through the database at her school, she found several tactics that suggestedways for her students to use self-recording or work with peers in their general educationclassrooms. Other teachers might want to look for ways to develop effective inclusiveclassrooms that include not only students with special needs but also additionalteaching colleagues. Using SITE, teachers can select an area of interest reading,for example browse through the tactics, then select and print tactics that seem useful.They can also make comments about a tactic. Their feedback may be supportiveor suggest ways in which the tactic might be used more effectively. For example, theymight provide one or more of the following suggestions for a tactic: Itwould be effective in another content area, as well. The tactic might be less usefulat the secondary level. It could be used with all students. The tactic was successful in a general education classroom, as well as therecommended special education setting. SITE enabled a group ofprospective teachers to create a large resource that was easily accessible andresponsive to their individual diverse needs (see box, "Preservice Teaching On-SITE").Many of their ideas are included in the following discussion. Responding to the Challenges The contents of SITE were organized to reflect the principles of effective instruction(see Algozzine & Ysseldyke, 1992; Algozzine, Ysseldyke, & Campbell, 1994). Itsgreatest value, however, may lie in the collaborative dialogue it fostered among itsusers. Accessible Information. The SITE program makes informationimmediately accessible a critical factor if teachers are to use their time efficiently andeffectively. Its contents are easily and quickly recorded, reviewed, and retrieved. Torecord a tactic, a teacher simply types in a title and brief description of the tactic, andthen makes recommendations for its use. For example: Tactic Title: Light Up That Mind! Description: Frequently students find it difficult to remain on task because theysee no connection between the activity and its practical application. Teachers shouldbridge lessons to real-life experiences and activities that are socially and culturallysignificant to their students. This will ensure greater student interest, participation, anda format for longer retention. Recommended for: both elementary andsecondary, general and special education students, in both inclusive and specialeducation classrooms, all content areas. Teachers have several options when reviewing and retrieving tactics. They mightsearch by level, setting, type of student, content area, or any part of the effectiveteaching model (component, principle, or strategy). The program then selects thetactics that fit the review profile; the user can then quickly scan that group of tactics andretrieve and print those that seem appropriate. Diverse Needs. SITE reflects the needs and expertise of its users;it also reflects the ways in which it is used. The information compiled by preserviceteachers in their version of SITE provides a glimpse into the perspective of novice(preservice) teachers and reveals the diversity of their own concerns at that time. Manyof their tactics related to keeping students on task, making instruction relevant, andmanaging behavior; a database compiled by another group of preservice orexperienced teachers might be very different. The database would continue to changeas new information was recorded, reviewed, and retrieved. The content of SITEalso changes according to the ways in which it is used. Whereas some teachers mightuse it as a personal, ever-changing resource of teaching tactics, others might expandthe conversation to include other teachers in their school. Teachers who shareresponsibility for a group of students might create a subset of tactics that would containentries related to their specific instructional needs such as teaching students withhearing impairments, physical disabilities, or language differences. Another group ofteachers might use the database to organize their collective expertise in a specificcontent area or grade level. Finally, a database might serve as a resource to a schoolto address issues such as inclusion, integrating the community into the school, or theunique challenges of teaching in urban or rural settings. EffectiveInstruction. SITE is anchored to effective teaching principles (Brophy & Good, 1986;Englert, Tarrant, & Mariage, 1992; Rosenshine & Stevens, 1986) within the structuredeveloped by Algozzine and Ysseldyke (1992). Their model organizes effectiveinstruction into four components (planning, managing, delivering, and evaluatinginstruction) with related principles and strategies (Algozzine, Ysseldyke, & Campbell,1994). Teachers place their own teaching tactics within this template by selecting thestrategy that is most appropriate or logical. The SITE program then automaticallyassociates that tactic and strategy with its related principle and component. Forexample: The previous tactic "Light Up That Mind!" was linked to the strategy "MakeLessons Relevant," which is contained within the principle "Presenting Instruction" andthe component "Delivering Instruction." This feature aligns classroom practicewith effective teaching principles and also provides a way to search for tactics based ona teacher's individual interest or concern. If a teacher wanted to search on the strategy"Make Lessons Relevant," he or she might find "Light Up That Mind!" among a group ofother entries related to that strategy. Teachers can search for tactics at any level of themodel strategy, principle, or component. Browsing through a series of tactics related toone aspect of this template enables teachers to consider a range of alternatives on aspecific issue. Collaboration. The SITE program encourages ongoingprofessional development among individual teachers. Through collaboration anddialogue with other teachers, however, educators in many classrooms can addressissues related to the needs of students with disabilities. Interaction amongteachers can occur in several ways. When recording tactics, teachers have anopportunity to recommend their use in other settings, with other students, and in othercontent areas. Their suggestions are an integral part of each tactic and often providethe basis for another teacher's search. Teachers often find excellent ideas suggestedby teachers in totally different grade levels or specializations. Teachers can alsocomment on tactics provided by a colleague: Tactic Title: State the Question Before the Student Name Description:Frequently students will not pay attention when they hear that a question is beingdirected to only one particular student. If the teacher states the question beforedirecting it to a student, all students will be on task and trying to think of an answer.Pose the question, give all students time to think, and allow them to generate ananswer on their own. Then, call on one student. This tactic will maintain students'attention because they will constantly be wondering if the next question will be directedtoward them. Recommended for: elementary students, both general andspecial education, in both mainstream and special education classrooms, all contentareas. Peer Comment: This is a very effective tactic: it encourages studentparticipation and gives students a reason to learn. Another teacher suggested the following to colleagues: Tactic Title: Five-Minute Math Technology Description: To increase student's proficiency in basic addition, subtraction,multiplication, and division, design a 100-problem practice worksheet and allow 5minutes for possible completion. Correct the worksheet if students complete 95 or moreitems. This allows you to measure student's automaticity of the skill and measureprogress over time. Once they meet the goal, they advance to the next level. Recommended for: elementary, general and special education students, in bothinclusive and special education classrooms, all content areas. PeerComment: This tactic may not be good for all students because it is also testing howfast students can write. The time limit could cause some students stress. This may notbe a good tactic for some students with disabilities. The program enables all teachers-- novice or expert, elementary or secondary, specialor general, reading or music-- to share and support their ideas about good teaching.One student, a music major, entered the following tactic: Tactic Title: Evaluating During Class Without Disturbing Class Description: During a choral rehearsal, if you want to evaluate students' sightreading progress but do not want to stop your rehearsal for a test, set up a taperecorder in another room and have students leave one at a time. They can identifythemselves on the tape, sing the example you have left for them, and then return toclass while having missed barely 5 minutes. Recommended for:secondary, general and special education students, inclusive classrooms, music Peer Comment: [from a colleague in special education] This tactic could beadapted for many other instructional areas such as: letter recognition, oral reading,color words, or thinking processes/ strategies as a word problem is being solved. Expanding a Teacher's Universe Morsink, Thomas, and Correa (1991) have suggested that effective communication isthe key to collaboration among teachers. Because the goal of the SITE program is toextend information about effective teaching among colleagues, the ideas need to bepresented clearly and positively with opportunities for constructive and supportivefeedback. In a self-paced tutorial, the program provides clear instructions forentering data in succinct and supportive language. The program requires teachers toconsider recommendations that may reach beyond their own classroom into those oftheir colleagues. Our preservice teachers demonstrated this ability when, forexample: Teachers in general education entered tactics for teachers ofstudents with special needs. Teachers in special education maderecommendations for teachers in general education. Teachers of musicrecommended tactics for students in general or special education programs. Teachers at the secondary level recommended tactics for students at theelementary level. The SITE database has demonstrated that a sizablecollection of effective teaching tactics could be compiled in a brief period of time. Final Thoughts Technology enables us to design resources according to our own needs and use themto search effectively and efficiently for solutions to instructional challenges. Berthoff(1987) would call this "RE-searching"looking once again for a better way to teachthrough reflection on practice. In fact, according to Little (1982), the extent to whichteachers are able to discuss their practice collaboratively and inform and critique oneanother is a measure of successful schools. Goodlad (1994) extended this notion toinclude a broader school community and suggested that a great deal of reflectiveconversation participants is often the signature of healthy educational settings (p.18). SITE addresses these needs and creates a unique conversation betweenpedagogy and practice, university and school-based classrooms, and novice and expertteachers. It is, however, the many entries in which preservice teachers madesuggestions to one another, regardless of their area of specialization, that areparticularly encouraging. These entries suggest that teachers can be informed andneed not be constrained in their thinking by labels neither their own nor those of theirstudents. SITE demonstrates that a teacher's area of specialization does not inhibit anhonest conversation about another teacher's ideas. These preservice teachers haveprovided a model for the kinds of conversations that can take place among anyteachers who seek to educate all students. References Aber, M. E., Bachman, B., Campbell, P., & O'Malley, G.(1994). Improving instruction inelementary schools. TEACHING Exceptional Children, 26(3), 42-50. Algozzine, B., & Ysseldyke, J. (1992). Strategies and tactics for effective instruction.Longmont, CO: Sopris West. Algozzine, B., Ysseldyke, J., & Campbell, P.(1994). Strategies and tactics for effective instruction. TEACHING ExceptionalChildren, 26(3), 34-36. Berthoff, A. (1987). The teacher as researcher. InD. Goswami & P. Stillman (Eds.), Reclaiming the classroom: Teacher research as anagency for change. Upper Montclair, NJ: Boynton/Cook. (ERIC DocumentReproduction Service No. ED 277 022) Brophy, J. E., & Good, T. L. (1986).Teacher behavior and student achievement. In M. C. Wittrock (Ed.), Handbookon research on teachers (3rd ed.). New York: Macmillan. Campbell, P., & Olsen,G. R. (1994). Improving instruction in secondary schools. TEACHING ExceptionalChildren, 26(3), 72-78. Case, C. W., Norlander, K. A., & Reagan, T. G.(1993). Cultural transformation in an urban professional development center: Policyimplications for school-university collaboration. Educational Policy, 7(1),40-60. Englert, C. S., Tarrant, K. L., & Mariage, T. V. (1992). Defining andredefining instructional practice in special education: Perspective on good teaching.Teacher Education and Special Education, 15, 62-86. Goodlad, J. I.(1994). Educational renewal: Better teachers, better schools. San Francisco:Jossey-Bass. Goswami, D., & Stillman, P. (1987). Reclaiming the classroom:Teacher research as an agency for change. Upper Montclair, NJ: Boynton/Cook.(ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED 277 022) Hudson, P., Correa, V.,Morsink, C., & Dykes, M. (1987). A new model for pre-service training: Teacher ascollaborator. Teacher Education and Special Education, 10, 191-193. Little, J. W. (1982). Norms of collegiality and experimentation: Workplace conditions ofschool success. American Educational Research Journal, 19(3), 325-340. Morsink, C. V., Thomas, C. C., & Correa, V. (1991). Interactive teaming:Consultation and collaboration in special programs. New York:Merrill/Macmillan. Norlander, K. A., Campbell, P., Case, C. W., Reagan, T. G., &Strauch, J. D. (in press). The power of integrated teacher preparation: TheUniversity of Connecticut Story, in L. P. Blanton, C. Griffin, J. Winn, & M. Pugach.Teaching education in transition: Collaborative practices in general and specialeducation. Denver: Love. Norlander, K. A., Case, C. W., Reagan, T. G, &Campbell, P. (1996, April). Student-centered qualitative inquiry in teacher education.Paper presented at the 1996 Annual Meeting of the American EducationalResearch Association, NY. Rosenshine, B., & Stevens, R. (1986). Teachingfunctions. In M. C. Wittrock (Eds.), Handbook of research on teaching (3rd ed., pp.376-391). New York: Macmillan. Spaulding, C. L. (1992). Motivation in theclassroom. New York: McGraw-Hill. Ysseldyke, J. E., & Algozzine, B. (1995).Special education: A practical approach for teachers (3rd ed.). Boston: HoughtonMifflin. Pam Campbell (CEC Chapter 574), Associate Professor, Department ofEducational Psychology, University of Connecticut, Storrs. Jack Tierney, ExecutiveDirector, Educational Technologies, Inc., Glastonbury, Connecticut. We wish tocommend the students enrolled in Exceptionality II for the quality of their contributionsto the SITE program. We especially thank Sasha Barab, Tamberly Bukovchik, DonnaDakin, Greg DeCubellis, Alan Dow, Regina Doyle, Debra Esposito, Andy French, AmieGionet, Karen Glaser, Robert Johnston, Kim Kennedy, Donna Misiaszek, DawnOhanian, and Maureen Perkins for permitting us to share their teaching tactics. For additional information regarding the SITE program, please contact Pam Campbell,Box U-64, Department of Educational Psychology, University of Connecticut, Storrs, CT06269. Copyright 1996 CEC. Online Discussion of Article Top of PageBack to MenuBack to CEC Home Page copyright © 1996 The Council for Exceptional Children Last updated: October 24, 1996 Send updates to: cecpubs@cec.sped.org URL: http://www.cec.sped.org WT02-B20-134IA001-000011-B033-130http://www.cec.sped.org:80/nw/pcoord.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101080222 text/html 7767HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 08:02:29 GMTLast-modified: Wednesday, 27-Nov-96 16:37:00 GMTContent-length: 7573Content-type: text/html Position Vacancy November 27, 1996 POSITION VACANCY ANNOUNCEMENT Processing Coordinator ERIC Clearinghouse on Disabilities and Gifted Education The Council for Exceptional Children Classification: Category 6 (Non-exempt). Starting Salary Range Level 64--$29,138.20 to Level 75--$36,054.20 per annum. Department: Professional Development. Reports To: Associate Director for Database Development. Selection Procedure: Evaluation of written application materials, relevanteducation, experience, and references. Personal interview(s) of top-rated candidates. Application Procedure: Each candidate must submit a current resume and cover letter to: Human Resources Director The Council for Exceptional Children 1920 Association Drive Reston, Virginia 20191-1589. Voice: 703/620-3660; TTY: 703/264-9446; FAX: 703/264-9494. Persons requesting accommodation during the application process should also contact the Human Resources Director . Application Deadline: This position will remain open until filled. Interview will begin December 12, 1996. Fax on Demand Jobline: 24-hour access to updated information aboutemployment opportunities. Call 703/264-9421 from your fax machine. Position Description Purpose of Position: The Department of Professional Advancement provides leadership anddirection in the areas of professional development (continuing professional education andleadership development), publications, professional standards, and grants, contracts andresearch. The Processing Coordinator, under the supervision of the Associate Director (forDatabase Development) of the ERIC Clearinghouse on Disabilities and Gifted Education,coordinates all database production (input) activities for the development of the ECER andERIC databases. Also coordinates the work of the Processing Assistant. Eighty percent of this position is supported by federal contract funds from the U.S. Departmentof Education, the Office of Educational Research and Improvement. Current funding is approvedthrough June 14, 1998. Funding for either project may be extended beyond that date, but cannotbe guaranteed. The remaining 20 percent is supported by CEC's fee-supported programs. Responsibilities Establishes schedules and determines work flow to meet database deadlines. This involves coordination with the Acquisitions Coordinator to assure a constant flow and minimum backlog. Technical administration of BRS/Search databases. This includes: maintaining BRS/Search database files; troubleshooting and correcting problems in the database; providing technical assistance to staff; executing computer program to produce the weekly ERIC shipment (and scanning output for accuracy); running weekly system backups, and developing print output formats and other BRS programming routines, as necessary. Prepares and edits ECER abstract journal for publishing. Coordinates and performs (as necessary) the editing of ECER cataloging, abstracting and indexing. Trains, reviews, and coordinates the work of the Processing Assistant. This includes: input of initial data; input to the ERIC system's electronic Acquisitions Data Report; form letters to obtain reproduction releases, with associated follow up and file maintenance; creating and transferring diskette files for abstractors; and running the merge program against files returned by the abstractors. Coordinates and monitors workflow for all database processing functions following selection. This includes: obtaining reproduction releases (RIE documents only); assignment of documents and journals to abstractors and tracking the flow of assignments to and from abstractors; review of abstractors' invoices; weekly and monthly status reporting to supervisor, as well as participation in staff meetings; and running computer programs to verify and load data files into the databases. Edits (for both content and technical accuracy) all document records (cataloging, abstracting and indexing) that are put into the databases. Receives and transmits messages and files on the Internet and other electronic communication systems used by the ERIC system, including the telecommunication of the weekly database shipment files to the ERIC facility. Monitors the ERICDIR listserv daily for the most recent ERIC system information and directives relating to database processing. As necessary, trains new freelance abstractors/indexers in the rules and processes involved in cataloging, abstracting and indexing for the ERIC and ECER databases, including the use of the ERIC Thesaurus. As necessary trains staff in the use of the BRS/Search software, particulary for online searching. Assists supervisor in the production of electronic ECER products, such as CD-ROM, and in selected aspects of the marketing of those products. Perform other duties as assigned. Qualifications Bachelors' degree plus at least five years related experience in information management (clearinghouses) and/or special education. Professional experience in abstracting, thesaurus indexing, and editing, preferably in the ERIC system. Practical experience in using personal computers, including a high level of skill and accuracy in WordPerfect. Ability and willingness to learn at a technical level:(a) new computer systems and software, particularly BRS/Search, Filemaker Pro, and the Internet; (b) how to perform selected processes in both the UNIX and DOS environments; and (c) ERIC cataloging, abstracting and indexing rules and procedures. Familiarity with database management/search systems, online database searching, and telecommunications desirable. Excellent organizational skills, with the ability to attend to details, set (and adhere to) schedules and priorities, and supervise clerical support. Good interpersonal skills on the phone and in person, including a customer-service orientation and the ability to work in cooperation and collaboration with others. Back to Position Vacancy AnnouncementsWT02-B20-135IA001-000011-B033-142http://www.cec.sped.org:80/cl/1095last.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101080229 text/html 3425HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 08:02:39 GMTLast-modified: Wednesday, 24-Jul-96 20:25:00 GMTContent-length: 3231Content-type: text/htmlData in these fact sheets were provided by Institutions of Higher Education (IHEs) responding toCouncil for Exceptional Children (CEC) surveys, National Clearinghouse for Professions inSpecial Education (NCPSE) surveys and members of professional associations representing therelated services. NCPSE maintains databases of these data which are updated as new informationbecomes available. NCPSE makes no claim that these are a complete or comprehensivelist. Key to abbreviations used on these lists: Level of Program Advanced graduate program not leading to a degree -- A Program leading to and associate degree -- AS Program leading to certification for paraprofessionals -- CP Program leading to a doctoral degree -- D Post-baccalaureate or Master's Degree Program -- G Undergraduate or Bachelor's Degree Program -- UG Program and Preparation Disability Descriptors Autism -- AUT Deaf-Blindness -- DBL Emotional Disturbance/Behavioral Disorders -- EBD Generic Special Education -- GSPED Gifted/Talented Individuals -- GIFT Hearing Impairments/Deafness -- DEAF Learning Disabilities -- LD Mental Retardation -- MR Mild Disabilities -- MILD Moderate/Severe Disabilities -- MODSEV Multiple Disabilities -- MULT Orthopedic Impairments -- ORTHO Other Health Impairments -- HLTH Severe Disabilities -- SEVR Speech/Language Impairment -- SPCH Traumatic Brain Injury -- TBI Visual Impairments/Blindness -- BLD Related Services Descriptors Adapted Physical Education -- ADPE Art Therapist -- ART Audiologist -- AUD Dance Therapist -- DNCE Interpreter for the Deaf -- DFINT Music Therapist -- MSIC Occupational Therapist -- OT Physical Therapist -- PT Rehabilitation Counselor -- RHAB School Counselor -- COUN School Nurse -- NRS School Psychologist -- PSYCH School Social Worker -- SOCW Speech-Language Pathologist -- SLPTH Therapeutic Recreation -- TREC Other Descriptors Administration -- ADMIN Bilingual Education -- BILING Consulting/Collaboration -- CONS Correctional Special Education -- CORR Curriculum and Instruction -- CURRIN Diagnostician -- DIAG Elementary Special Education -- ELEM Multicultural Concerns -- MCULT Infant/Toddler Intervention -- INFT Preschool Intervention -- PRES Resource Teacher -- RES Secondary Special Education -- SEC Technology, Assistive -- ASTEC Technology, Computer -- COTEC Transition -- TRAN Vocational Special Education -- VOC back to CEC Home Page || back to NCPSE Home Page || back to Personnel Preparation Menu || top ofpage copyright © 1996 National Clearinghouse for Professions in Special Education Last updated: July 24, 1996 Send updates to: ncpse@cec.sped.org URL: http://www.cec.sped.org/ncpse.htm WT02-B20-136IA001-000011-B033-155http://www.cec.sped.org:80/cl/1095lst.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101080239 text/html 2765HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 08:02:49 GMTLast-modified: Tuesday, 03-Sep-96 22:54:00 GMTContent-length: 2573Content-type: text/html Personnel Preparation Programs for the State of : (Click on the state below for a list of schools for that state) Alabama ;Alaska ;Arizona ;Arkansas ;California ;Colorado ; Connecticut ; Delaware ; Districtof Columbia ; Florida ; Georgia; Hawaii ;Idaho ;Illinois; Indiana ; Iowa ; Kansas;Kentucky ; Louisiana ; Maine; Maryland ; Massachusetts ;Michigan ; Minnesota ; Mississippi ; Missouri; Montana ; Nebraska ; Nevada;New Hampshire ; New Jersey ; New Mexico ; New York ; NorthCarolina ; North Dakota ; Ohio ; Oklahoma ; Oregon; Pennsylvania ; Puerto Rico; Rhode Island ; South Carolina ; South Dakota; Tennessee ; Texas ; Utah; Vermont ; Virginia ; Washington ; WestVirginia ; Wisconsin ; Wyoming back to CEC Home Page|| back to NCPSE Home Page || Back to Personnel Preparation Menu copyright © 1996 National Clearinghouse for Professions in Special Education Last updated: August 26, 1996 Send updates to: ncpse@cec.sped.org URL: http://www.cec.sped.org/ncpse.htm WT02-B20-137IA001-000011-B033-188http://www.cec.sped.org:80/cl/aidmenu.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101080303 text/html 1622HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 08:03:13 GMTLast-modified: Wednesday, 24-Jul-96 20:31:00 GMTContent-length: 1428Content-type: text/html Financial Aid Menu as of 5/10/95 Financial Aid Resources The National Clearinghouse for Professions in Special Education (NCPSE) makes available thefollowing financial aid information resources to students preparing for careers in special educationand related service professions. Financial Aid Resource Guide State Financial Aid Agencies Guaranteed Loan Agencies Selected Financial Aid Resources for Special Education and TeacherEducation Selected Financial Aid Resources for Related Services Selected Financial Aid Resources for Students from Culturally/EthnicallyDiverse Backgrounds Selected Financial Aid Resources for Students from withDisabilities Top of Page || Backto NCPSE Menu || Back to CEC Home Page copyright © 1996 National Clearinghouse for Professions in Special Education Last updated: July 24, 1996 Send updates to: ncpse@cec.sped.org URL: http://www.cec.sped.org/ncpse.htm WT02-B20-138IA001-000011-B033-202http://www.cec.sped.org:80/cl/2696.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101080313 text/html 6024HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 08:03:20 GMTLast-modified: Tuesday, 03-Sep-96 22:53:00 GMTContent-length: 5832Content-type: text/html VOLUNTEER! National Clearinghouse for Professions in Special Education 1920 Association Drive Reston, VA 20191-1589 800-641-7824 (Toll Free); 703-264-9480 (TTY) Find Out More about Careers in Special Education andRelated Services What Do Volunteers Do? Depending upon your time, availability, and interests,you may choose to become involved in a one-time event, a short-term projector a long-term commitment working with individuals with disabilities. Forexample, you may choose to tutor students either in a classroom or afterschool. Or you may want to be a "buddy" to someone with a disabilityby going out to lunch or dinner, seeing a movie, or just visiting witheach other. Why Should You Volunteer? One way to learn about careers in special education and related servicesprofessions is to talk to professionals already practicing in the field.Another way is to become a volunteer. If you have never worked with anindividual who has a disability, you may want to test your interest throughvolunteer activities that can provide hands-on experience. Tips for Finding Volunteer Opportunities 1. Contact a special education teacher or administrator in your localschool district to find out about classroom, playground, or related opportunitieswhere you can volunteer to work with students with disabilities. 2. Check with a department of special education or employment bulletinboard at a nearby college or university to see if they know of volunteeropportunities. 3. Call Big Brothers, Big Sisters, Boy Scouts, Girl Scouts, YMCA,YWCA or similar local organizations to see if they have programs throughwhich you can help an individual with disabilities participate in the organization'sactivities. 4. There are many organizations and agencies that serve people withdisabilities. These organizations provide excellent opportunities for gettingto know individuals with disabilities, as well as offer various opportunitiesto learn about career options. Contact the National Information Centerfor Children and Youth with Disabilities (NICHCY) (800/695-0285 Voice/TTY)for information on organizations in your area. 5. Volunteer clearinghouses or placement bureaus in your communityfunction as employment agencies and do their best to match the interests,skills, and talents of potential volunteers with community needs. Lookin the yellow pages of your telephone book or contact your local UnitedWay. Sources for Volunteer Experiences Contact the national organizations for names and addresses of localcontact persons: The Arc, 500 East Border Street, Suite 300, Arlington, TX 76010; Tel: 817/261-6003; The Arc WebPage ; E-mail The Arc Big Brothers/Big Sisters of America, 230 North 13th Street, Philadelphia,PA 19107; Tel: 215/567-7000; E-mail BBBSA Boy Scouts of America, 1325 West Walnut Hill Lane, P. O. Box 152079,Irving, TX 75015-2079; Tel: 214/580-2000; BSA Headquarters Girl Scouts of the U.S.A., 420 Fifth Avenue, New York, NY 10018-2798; Tel: 800/247-8319; GS U.S.A. HeadquartersWeb Page ; E-mail GS U.S.A. National Easter Seal Society, 230 W. Monroe Street, Chicago, IL 60606; Tel: 312/726-6200 / 800/221-6827; NESS WebPage ; E-mail Easter Seals National Information Center for Children and Youth with Disabilities(NICHCY), P. O. Box 1492, Washington, DC 20013-1492; Tel: 202/884-8200 or 800/695-0285 (Voice/TTY); NICHCYWeb Page; E-mail NICHCY Special Olympics International, 1325 G. Street, N.W., Suite 500,Washington, DC 20005; Tel: 202/628-3630. United Way of America, 701 North Fairfax Street, Alexandria, VA 22314-2045; Tel: 703/836-7100. Very Special Arts, 1300 Connecticut Avenue, N.W., Suite 700, Washington,DC 20036; Tel: 202/628-2800 (Voice), 202/737-0645 (TTY); VerySpecial Arts Web Page YMCA of USA, 101 North Wacker Drive, Suite 1400, Chicago, IL 60606; Tel: 800/872-9622; YMCA of the USA Web Page YWCA of USA, 726 Broadway, New York, NY 10003; Tel: 212/614-2700; E-mail YWCA NCPSE Product number 26.95 creation date: 12/95 Top of Page || Backto NCPSE Menu || Backto CEC Home Page copyright © 1996 National Clearinghouse for Professions in Special Education Last updated: August 26, 1996 Send updates to: ncpse@cec.sped.org URL: http://www.cec.sped.org/ncpse.htm WT02-B20-139IA001-000011-B033-218http://www.cec.sped.org:80/cl/supdem.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101080326 text/html 2084HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 08:03:30 GMTLast-modified: Tuesday, 03-Sep-96 22:53:00 GMTContent-length: 1892Content-type: text/html Supply and Demand Menu NationalClearinghouse for Professions in Special Education 1920 Association Drive Reston, VA 20191-1589 800-641-7824 (Toll Free); 703-264-9480 (TTY) 703-620-2521 (Fax); 703-264-9476 (Voice) Special Education and Related ServicesPersonnel Supply and Demand Information Excerpts from the 17th Annual Reportto Congresson the implementation of the Individuals With DisabilitiesEducation Act Need for Special Education and Related Service Professionals Demand for Special Education Teachers and Staff Creation Date: June, 1996 Top of Page || Backto NCPSE Menu || Back to CEC HomePage copyright © 1996 National Clearinghouse for Professions in Special Education Last updated: July 24, 1996 Send updates to: ncpse@cec.sped.org URL: http://www.cec.sped.org/ncpse.htm WT02-B20-140IA001-000011-B033-242http://www.cec.sped.org:80/ab/neb-reg.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101080342 text/html 2978HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 08:03:48 GMTLast-modified: Wednesday, 16-Oct-96 19:43:00 GMTContent-length: 2784Content-type: text/html Nebraska CEC Federation--Professional Development Events--Registration Information Professional DevelopmentEvents Registration Information Name_____________________________________________________ Address___________________________________________________ City:______________________________________________________ DaytimePhone:_____________________________________________ E-mailAddress:_____________________________________________ CECMembership Number:____________________________________ PleaseCheck the Sessions You Wish to Attend: _____21st Century School and Beyond _____School Reform: What It Means for Teachers _____Discipline for At-Risk Kids _____Multiple Intelligences: New Ways to Teach! One (1) graduate credit available to persons attending 6 of the 8telecasts through Drake University at a cost of $135. Register for this credit onsite. Conference Attendance Site: _____ Lincoln _____ Omaha _____ Hastings - Central Community College _____ North Platte _____ Scottsbluff - Panhandle Education Center _____ Wayne - Wayne State College Registration Fee Enclosed:* _____ 1 session (CEC members, $40; nonmembers, $60) _____ 2sessions (CEC members, $70; nonmembers, $110) _____ 3 sessions (CECmembers, $100; nonmembers, $160) _____ 4 sessions (CEC members,$130; nonmembers, $210) _____ Full-time students, half price (advisor'ssignature required) ___________________________________________________ * Onsite registration: $50, members; $70, nonmembers). Registrations must bepostmarked 10 days prior to the telecast to be eligible for preregistration rates. Makecheck or money order payable to: Nebraska CEC. NO PURCHASE ORDERS,PLEASE! Mail registrations to: Sandra Peterson ESU #3 6949 S 100 Street Omaha, NE 68128-5722 FAX: 402/597-4811 Top of PageBack to MenuBack to CEC Home Page copyright © 1996 The Council for Exceptional Children Last updated: October 15, 1996 WT02-B20-141IA001-000011-B033-257http://www.cec.sped.org:80/osep/1introdu.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101080351 text/html 9368HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 08:04:00 GMTLast-modified: Tuesday, 29-Oct-96 21:52:00 GMTContent-length: 9176Content-type: text/html ERIC RESEARCH IN THE EDUCATION OF INDIVIDUALS WITHDISABILITIES Innovation and Development in Special Education Directory of Current Projects 1996 Edition U. S. Department of Education Office of Special Education Programs The Division of Innovation and Development Anmarie Kallas, Editor ISBN 0-86586-279-6 A product of the ERIC/OSEP Special Project The ERIC Clearinghouse on Disabilities and Gifted Education Stock No. R5141 This publication was developed by the ERIC/OSEP Special Project, which is operated by the ERIC Clearinghouse on Disabilities and Gifted Education, under a contract between The Council for Exceptional Children and the Office of Special Education Programs, U.S. Department of Education. The ERIC Clearinghouse on Disabilities and Gifted Education is operated under a contract with the Office of Educational Research and Improvement, U.S. Department of Education. The contents of this publication do not necessarily reflect the views of OSEP, OERI, or any other agency of the U.S. government. PREFACE To be meaningful, research must respond to the needs of the community it is meant to serve, and the focus of research must evolve as that community's priorities change. The Division of Innovation and Development (DID), the research and development arm of the Office of Special Education Programs (OSEP), has taken up this challenge bysupporting closer relationships between research and practice, exchanging findings and needs with broader audiences, encouraging the development of projects in key areas, and providing direct service to researchers and users. The work and achievements of DID have helped pioneer many common practices found in classrooms today. For example, the Division was one of the first agencies to fund research on cooperative learning and on the effects of early childhood intervention. The Division also has funded seminal work in reciprocal teaching, direct instruction, peer tutoring, learning strategies, and behavioral interventions that have led to dozens of strategies with greater success and enhanced efficiencies for children and youth withdisabilities. In fact, the Division's R&D efforts have touched on virtually every aspect of teaching and learning, from exploring the influences of parents and families on learning to teacher planning; from psychosocial development to outcomes-based learning; andfrom understanding how to best use technology in classrooms to exploring how students use their own language and communication systems to learn. The Division has taken on many of the biggest research challenges facing education today, with results that continue to reshape how educators, policy makers, and the public think about teaching and learning. DID is responsible for four discretionary programs, funded at nearly $40 million in fiscal year 1995 and authorized under the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA). A brief description of each program is provided below: Research ($20.6 million). Authorized by Part E of IDEA, The Research in Education of Individuals with Disabilities Program provides support to advance and improve the knowledge base and improve the practice of professionals, parents, and others providing early intervention, special education, and related services including professionals in regular education environments to provide children with disabilities effective instruction and enable these children to learn successfully. Technology, Educational Media, and Materials ($10.8 million).Authorized by Part G of IDEA, the Technology, Educational Media, and Materials for Individuals with Disabilities Program supports projects and centers for advancing the availability, quality, use, and effectiveness of technology, educational media, and materials in the education of children and youth with disabilities and the provision of related services and early intervention services to infants and toddlers with disabilities. Serious Emotional Disturbance ($4.1 million). Authorized by Part C of IDEA, the Program for Children and Youth with Serious Emotional Disturbance supports projects designed to improve special education and related services to children and youth with serious emotional disturbance. Types of projects that may be supported under the program include, but are not limited to, research, development, and demonstration projects. Funds may also be used to develop and demonstrate approaches to assist and prevent children with emotional andbehavioral problems from developing serious emotional disturbance. Special Studies ($3.9 million).Authorized by Part B of IDEA, the Special Studies Program supports the collection of data, studies, investigations, and evaluations to assess the impact and effectiveness of programs and projects assisted under IDEA. Over the last decade, DID has supported ongoing changes in special and general education and efforts to support knowledge production and use as well as knowledge access. DID has moved toward an agenda that focuses on results achieving better outcomes for children and youth with disabilities. This transformation was motivated by a commitment of DID leadership to assure that the research knowledge in which they have heavily invested is accessed and used by practitioners and policy makers to improve their practices, programs, and policies. This directory of project abstracts will provide an overview of the ongoing efforts of researchers supported by DID who are helping to advance DID's results-oriented mission. Division of Innovation and Development Staff: Louis Danielson, Director and Acting Chief, Special Studies Branch Doris Andres, Deputy Director and Acting Chief, Research and Development ProjectsBranch Ellen Schiller, Chief, Directed Research Branch Carole Allan Scott Brown Claudette Carey Joe Garrett Linda Glidewell Tom Hanley Jane Hauser David Malouf Susan Sanchez Helen Thornton Jane Williams INTRODUCTION The 1996 edition of Innovation and Development in Special Education: Directory of Current Projects provides basic information on all research projects funded by the Division of Innovation and Development, Office of Special Education Programs, U.S. Department of Education, through September 1995. In this edition of the directory are abstracts of approximately 250 projects separated into 11 sections according to the primary focus of the study. The 11 sections include: Assessment; Cultural Differences; Infants, Young Children, and Families; Instructional Effectiveness, Models, and Learning; Policy, Outcomes, and Program Evaluation; Restructuring and Service Delivery Issues; Secondary Education and Postsecondary Outcomes; Serious Emotional Disturbance and Behavioral Disorders; Severe Disabilities; Teacher Training, Retention, and Supply and Demand; and Technology and Software. The information in this directory is taken directly from OSEP's in-house database of research grants. If any errors are found in this material, they should be reported to the ERIC/OSEP Special Project so that the database, and future editions of this directory, will be as accurate as possible. Anmarie Kallas Editor Top of Page Back to ERIC Menu Back to CEC Home Page copyright © 1996 ERIC Clearinghouse on Disabilities and Gifted Education Last updated: October 29, 1996 Send updates to: ericec@cec.sped.org URL: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm WT02-B20-142IA001-000011-B033-273http://www.cec.sped.org:80/osep/6assessm.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101080400 text/html 35263HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 08:04:09 GMTLast-modified: Tuesday, 29-Oct-96 19:06:00 GMTContent-length: 35070Content-type: text/html OSEP Special Education Research Projects 1. ASSESSMENT PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Allinder, Rose M. University of Nebraska - Lincoln 303 Administration Building Lincoln, NE 68583-0430 402-472-5457 Exploring the Relationship Between Curriculum-Based Measurement and Teacher Effectiveness GRANT NUMBER: H023C30111 BEGINNING DATE: 4/01/93 ENDING DATE: 3/30/96 ABSTRACT PURPOSE: This project will examine the effects of curriculum-based measurement (CBM) on teacher effectiveness variables through a series of three studies. METHOD: Each of the substudies planned will include 30 special education resource teachers assigned randomly to treatment and control groups, plus 60 children with mild disabilities. The first study will investigate the effects of CBM on teacher characteristics and school organizational factors important for teacher effectiveness. The second study will explore the effects of CBM on pre- and postinstructional variables which are related to teacher effectiveness. The third study will examine effects of CBM on teachers' behaviors while delivering instruction. ANTICIPATED PRODUCTS: Results of this research will add to the current knowledge base regarding how to enhance and increase teacher effectiveness and thus student achievement. Scholarly articles describing research findings will be submitted to appropriate professional journals. Findings and training procedures will be shared at state and national professional conferences. Technical reports on all aspects of the project will also be written and made available upon demand. PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Bullock, Charles University of North Carolina Center for Recreation & Disability Studies 730 Airport Road Suite 204 Chapel Hill, NC 27599-8145 919-962-0534 Link in Leisure Education GRANT NUMBER: H023C20199 BEGINNING DATE: 10/01/92 ENDING DATE: 9/30/97 ABSTRACT PURPOSE: This investigation will focus on understanding and documenting the extent to which self-determination skills can be facilitated using an individualized leisure education planning process with students with mental retardation. METHOD: The first phase of research will feature a pilot study using a quasi-experimental single subject research design. Phase 2 will incorporate a pretest/posttest quasi-experimental design using curriculum-based measures to investigate the effect of the leisure education intervention on dependent variables. Phase 3 will focus on generalization to the regular education setting, using a sample of students with mental retardation from grades 6 through 8 who have been referred for leisure intervention services. ANTICIPATED PRODUCTS: Specific outcomes expected include: (1) development of a systematic individualized leisure education planning process; (2) development of a comprehensive teacher training program promoting inclusion of leisure education as part of the special education curriculum; (3) development of a family training program to help families become active participants in their children's education; (4) documentation of the relationship of the leisure education program of self-determination and recreation participation; and (5) documentation of the role and significance of home-school collaboration and follow-up. Products will include: (1) internally printed reports and monographs; (2) articles submitted to journals and magazines; (3) presentation of results at professional conferences; (4) easy-to-read parent/family brochures and booklets; and (5) model program guidelines. PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Elliott, Stephen Kratochwill, Thomas Wisconsin Center for Education Research 1025 West Johnson Street Office 453 Madison, WI 53706 608-262-8841 Performance Assessment and Standardized Testing for Students with Disabilities: Psychometric Issues, Accommodation Procedures, and Outcome Analyses GRANT NUMBER: H023F50007 BEGINNING DATE: 9/01/95 ENDING DATE: 8/31/98 ABSTRACT PURPOSE: The project will attempt to gain an understanding of how students with a wide range of disabilities perform on and react to on-demand and in-class performance assessment tasks in mathematics and science. METHOD: This investigation will focus on the use of performance assessment tasks as operationalized in a statewide student assessment system and by classroom teachers, with a sample of 4th- and 8th-grade students (N=200 per year) with varying academic abilities. A two-tiered, cross-sectional group design with two levels of independent variables (nondisabled and disabled) and two levels of subject matter (mathematics and science) will be used. Students' responses to performance assessment tasks and standardized multiple-choice tests, as well as post-assessment interviews with students, will provide data to answer questions concerning psychometric issues, accommodation procedures, and the utility of different types of assessments for evaluating academic outcomes. Teachers (at least 20) involved in the administration of the performance assessment instruments will also be interviewed via a structured questionnaire to provide additional data on accommodation procedures and the functioning of students with disabilities on performance assessment tests. Data analysis will involve MANOVA, multiple regressions, correlational analyses, and descriptive or qualitative features. ANTICIPATED PRODUCTS: Project results will achieve widespread dissemination through the principal investigators' writing and speaking efforts. Paper presentations and national conferences on children, assessment, and schooling as well as manuscripts submitted to journals will further enhance the impact of this project and facilitate advancement of research on performance assessment with students with disabilities. PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Farmer, Tom Van Acker, Rick The Center for Developmental Science 521 South Greensboro Street CB #8115 Chapel Hill, NC 27599-8115 919-962-0333 Social Relations of Students with Disabilities in Mainstream Classrooms GRANT NUMBER: H023A50033 BEGINNING DATE: 9/01/95 ENDING DATE: 8/31/96 ABSTRACT PURPOSE: This project will examine characteristics of peer associates among elementary students with emotional and behavioral disabilities (EBD)and learning disabilities (LD) in general education settings. The project will examine social network factors in determining these associations, and todevelop a social context assessment battery to facilitate full inclusion of these students by identifying social barriers to their social and academic success. METHOD: This study will include 50 students with EBD and 50 with LD from the 4th- and 5th- grades of schools in metropolitan Chicago as well as rural, suburban, and urban areas of North Carolina. A multi-method survey design will be used to assess features of students and their classroom social networks. Group surveys will examine social cognitive maps, peer assessments of behavioral and social features, self-reports of academic, social and behavioral features, and self-reports on school conduct, academic achievement, and school violence. General and special education teachers will also rate students on academic, social, and behavioral characteristics. A semi-structured interview will be conducted with special education personnel to determine each school's strategies for inclusion. Statistical analysis will then assess similarity of associates on each social construct identified as well as demographic and social differences between students who do not have disabilities and whether or not they affiliate with students with disabilities. ANTICIPATED PRODUCTS: A technical report will be prepared to outline the application of this study's findings to the training needs of general and special educators who work with students with disabilities in general education classrooms. Articles will be prepared for publication in scholarly special education, general education, and educational psychology journals. Findings will also be disseminated to community schools through workshops, written reports, and direct consultation. PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Gabrys, Robert Maryland State Department of Education 200 West Baltimore Street Baltimore, MD 21201 410-767-0236 Examining Alternatives for Outcome Assessment for Children with Disabilities GRANT NUMBER: H023F50008 BEGINNING DATE: 9/01/95 ENDING DATE: 8/31/98 ABSTRACT PURPOSE: This project will conduct a total of 12 studies forming a systematic research program on assessment accommodations and alternative assessment approaches that facilitate inclusion of all students in state-wide assessment programs. METHOD: The planned research program will include three methodological approaches: (1) comparative studies involving a qualitative examination of the assessment systems in Kentucky and Maryland, as well as an investigation of characteristics of participating students with disabilities and their performance within those systems; (2) studies which involve secondary analyses of existing databases to address critical technical and implementation issues in the assessment of educational outcomes for students with disabilities; and (3) experimental field studies that involve the collection of new data to address several technical issues crucial to the development and modification of state assessment policies. These studies will incorporate data from approximately 40,000 students with disabilities in these states, and subsamples of students with disabilities who will be exposed to the experimental comparisons. These studies will explore the following issues: the ways in which assessment and accountability systems must be conceptualized and developed to have the range and flexibility to accommodate all students, including those with disabilities; the relationships between instructional accommodations and accommodations in assessment; issues and concerns of reliability and validity in the use of testing accommodations and adaptation, alternative assessments, and specification of standards and outcomes; and the use of alternative assessments for students with severe cognitive disabilities. ANTICIPATED PRODUCTS: The work of project staff will be of immediate use to those at national, state, and local levels who are striving toward educational systems that are accountable for all students, including those with disabilities. Reports will be prepared on the synthesis and comparison of the Maryland and Kentucky systems, the summary of data from analysis of secondary data bases, and the findings from experimental field studies on the possible effects of various accommodations and assessment approaches. PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Gilbert, Sharon L. Auburn University Department of Rehabilitation & Special Education 1234 Haley Center Auburn, AL 36849 334-844-5943 Parent and Teacher Congruency on Variations of a Screening Instrument: An Examination GRANT NUMBER: H023B50009 BEGINNING DATE: 10/01/96 ENDING DATE: 9/30/97 ABSTRACT PURPOSE: The project will investigate whether variations in the screening instrument format influence congruence of scores among both parents and the child's teacher. METHOD: The screening instrument to be used is the Developmental Observation Checklist System (DOCS). The DOCS will be varied by (1) adding pictorial illustrations and examples and (2) adding a response category to the existing response options. The sample will consist of 100 sets of parents and 100 teachers of children chronologically below the age of 6 years with and without developmental delays, drawn from early intervention and child care programs in Alabama and Georgia. A 2x2x3 mixed measure analysis of variance will be used to analyze the effects variations in screening instruments have on score congruency among fathers, mothers, and teachers. Two between-subjects factors with two levels each and one without-subjects factor with three levels will be included in this design. An equal number of mothers, fathers, and teachers will complete versions of the screening instrument, and a control group of mothers, fathers, and teachers will complete the screening instrument in its original format. ANTICIPATED PRODUCTS: This project will provide current research on parental and professional assessment congruency and information on the impact of variations in the screening instrument on this congruency. Findings will be disseminated through conference presentations, journal articles and a doctoral dissertation paper. PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Greene, Ross University of Massachusetts 100 Morrissey Boulevard Boston, MA 02155-3393 617-287-7250 The Influence of Teacher Characteristics on the Academic Performance and Behavioral Adjustment of Students with Attention Deficit/ Hyperactivity Disorder GRANT NUMBER: H023C50118 BEGINNING DATE: 9/01/95 ENDING DATE: 8/31/98 ABSTRACT PURPOSE: The purpose of this project is improve understanding of the characteristics of teachers that influence both their interactions with students with Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) and the behavioral adjustment and academic performance of these students. METHOD: The research will be based on a three-year study involving two groups of students, one with ADHD and one of matched comparison students. In Year One, students with ADHD and matched comparisons will be identified, screened, and assessed for baseline characteristics. In Years Two and Three, the behavioral adjustment and academic performance of students will be assessed within and between two teachers and two classroom environments to determine the impact of teacher characteristics on school outcome. The study will include a multimethod assessment of teacher characteristics, student characteristics, and student outcome (behavioral adjustment and academic performance), along with observations of teacher-student interactions. Statistical analyses will include structural regression procedures based on a hierarchical linear modeling approach to examine change over time. ANTICIPATED PRODUCTS: Research findings will be incorporated into inservice training workshops throughout New England, and presentations will be made at meetings of national organizations of regular and special educators, school psychologists, parents of children with ADHD, and clinical and developmental psychologists. Findings will be published in professional journals, and will also be assimilated into University of Massachusetts' masters-level programs in regular and special education, counseling, and school psychology. PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Gresham, Frank University of California at Riverside School of Education Riverside, CA 92521 909-787-5228 Longitudinal Affective and Social Outcomes of Special Education Placement Options for Students with Mild Disabilities GRANT NUMBER: H023C30103 BEGINNING DATE: 7/01/93 ENDING DATE: 6/30/98 ABSTRACT PURPOSE: This project will assess the stability and change of the social and affectivecharacteristics of children with mild disabilities placed in "segregated" versus "integrated" settingscompared to "at-risk children" and children who are achieving normally. METHOD: A total of 300 referred third graders will be randomly selected and matched in termsof age, gender, and ethnicity to 100 third graders identified as achieving normally. Measurementof social and affective outcomes will include sociometric assessments to assess peeracceptance/rejection, teacher ratings of social skills, self-concept, loneliness, school attitudes, andcritical behavioral events. In addition, comprehensive assessments of students' school histories will be recorded and quantified from existing school records. The project will examine both short-term and long-term effects of various educational placements on students' social and affective development using a prospective longitudinal research design. ANTICIPATED PRODUCTS: Findings from this project will be targeted to have an impact in three areas: the academic community and other research activities, the cooperating schooldistricts, the California State Department of Education, and the department's special educationsection. In addition to the conventional outlets of published reports and conference presentations within the research community, personnel from state school districts will be involved in education community conference presentations and publications to target educators and policymakers. PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: MacMillan, Donald University of California at Riverside School of Education Riverside, CA 92521 714-787-5228 Utility of Alternative Assessment Models for Identification of Mildly Handicapped Children GRANT NUMBER: H023C20002 BEGINNING DATE: 7/01/92 ENDING DATE: 6/30/97 ABSTRACT PURPOSE: This project intends to establish the utility of alternative assessment vis-a-vis traditional assessment in establishing the eligibility of students with mild disabilities for special education and related services. METHOD: Two interrelated studies will be performed. The first study will compare the extent to which current referral practices and alternative assessment procedures result in identification of the same "at-risk" children as would traditional assessment procedures. The first study will consist of 135 students evenly divided among three ethnic groups. The students will be studied, assessed, and referred for formal assessment using alternative assessment procedures. The second study will compare the utility of four alternative assessment models (including dynamic assessment, achievement-achievement discrepancy, neuropsychological, and behavioral models). Investigators will evaluate 204 students, again stratified among three ethnic groups, using alternative assessment model and traditional assessment models, with order of testing randomized. Degrees of coincidence and agreement among ethnic groups and between alternative and traditional models will be studied. ANTICIPATED PRODUCTS: Findings from this project will inform policy makers on the utility of alternative assessment for reducing ethnic disproportions; moreover, it will permit informed decisions on the relative merits of the four commonly recommended alternatives. The project will also evaluate any ethnic bias among the models evaluated. PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Prinz, Philip San Francisco State University 1640 Holloway Avenue San Francisco, CA 94132 415-338-7655 A Path to Literacy for Deaf Children through English and American Sign Language (ASL) GRANT NUMBER: H023C30074 BEGINNING DATE: 8/01/93 ENDING DATE: 7/31/97 ABSTRACT PURPOSE: The project will assess the relationship between American Sign Language (ASL) competence and English literacy among deaf school children aged 8 to 15 years. METHOD: Approximately 200 students aged 8 to 15 enrolled in a residential school for the deaf will be tested annually for 3 years. ASL skills will be measured using a specially devised comprehension test, administered by videotape and requiring a nonverbal response. English literacy will be measured using the Woodcock-Johnson Psycho-Educational Test Battery--Revised and a psycholinguistic computer measure developed by the investigator. Performance IQ will also be assessed. Research questions will then address the synchronic and diachronic relationships between ASL skills and English literacy, as well as exploring at what age ASL plays its greatest role in facilitating gains in English literacy. ANTICIPATED PRODUCTS: Findings of research will be disseminated via published research reports, assessment guides, diagnostic manuals, and presentations at national conferences. Results will serve as a basis for future assessment of ASL and academic performance to be carried out at participating schools to further extend the database. Follow-up research is expected to implement and evaluate a full-scale literacy program using ASL and English for deaf children in the United States. This program will serve as a model to numerous groups advocating a "bilingual/bicultural" approach for deaf children, and will therefore have a direct impact on many thousands of deaf students, their families, and their teachers. PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Sharpe, Michael N. Rum River Special Education Cooperative 315 7th Lane, N.E. Cambridge, MN 55008 612-689-3600 A Study to Develop Braille Reading and Writing Norms and Instructional Interventions for Children Who Are Blind or Visually Impaired GRANT NUMBER: H023C50123 BEGINNING DATE: 7/01/95 ENDING DATE: 6/30/97 ABSTRACT PURPOSE: The project will develop normative information on the Minnesota Braille Skills Inventory (MBSI) and establish a compilation of teaching intervention strategies for use by educators in teaching Braille reading and writing skills. METHOD: Stage 1 activities will focus on collection of normative data, and will begin with a mailing to approximately 700-1000 teachers of the blind and visually impaired. Approximately 150-200 of these teachers are expected to participate in such project activities including obtaining parental consent, conducting MBSI assessments, generating effective teaching intervention strategies, and collecting related demographic and family data. Each teacher will collect this information for 3-5 students. Each student will receive family information and assessment packets, including background information and a full MBSI as well as a survey to collect information about the student's current level of academic and social-adaptive functioning. Concurrent with data collection activities, project staff will obtain technical assistance from a database development consultant to design the database, develop data entry systems, and train clerical staff to enter and conduct based analysis of information from teacher participants. As participants in Stage 2, teachers will be asked to provide a minimum of three teaching/intervention strategies they have found effective in teaching students Braille literacy. A Braille Intervention Strategies Committee will then be formed to compile these strategies and develop a teaching strategies manual. ANTICIPATED PRODUCTS: Through development and dissemination of the MBSI and its companion compilation of instructional interventions for teachers, teachers of the blind and visually impaired will have access to an instrument that reliably assesses students' reading and writing skills. Parents will also benefit from access to norm-referenced, performance-based information about their child's present level of Braille literacy. PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Singh, Nirbhay N. Commonwealth Institute for Child and Family Studies Department of Psychiatry Medical College of Virginia Box 489 Richmond, VA 23298-0489 804-371-7480 Commonwealth Institute ADHD Project: Effects of School, Child and Family Variables on Drug Responsiveness of Children with ADHD GRANT NUMBER: H023C30082 BEGINNING DATE: 9/01/93 ENDING DATE: 8/31/96 ABSTRACT PURPOSE: This project will utilize ecobehavioral principles and concepts, within the framework of a robust experimental design, to investigate the effects of school, child, and family variables on drug responsiveness of children with attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). METHOD: A sample of 250 children with ADHD, aged 6 to 12 years, will be enrolled in a within-subject, crossover, placebo-controlled, double-blind, dose-response study of methylphenidate, with the placebo and drug order to be determined according to a 3 x 3 Latin square design. Following a drug-free baseline, children will be randomly rotated through placebo and two active drug conditions, according to one of three experimental sequences. Drug responsiveness will be analyzed across several variables, including academic performance and curriculum-based measures, teacher and parent ratings of social and maladaptive behaviors, child attributions of treatment effects, and side effects. Four school variables, five child variables, and four family variables will also be analyzed alongside a host of sociodemographic variables. ANTICIPATED PRODUCTS: Due to the large sample size of this study, the project will be able to provide a mathematical model of drug interactions that will enable researchers to use smaller samples in future studies of this nature. The data from this study will provide the first comprehensive ecobehavioral assessment of the effects of methylphenidate on children with ADHD. PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Siperstein, Gary University of Massachusetts/Boston 100 Morrissey Boulevard Center for the Study of Social Acceptance Boston, MA 02125-3393 617-287-7250 Stress, Social Support and Adjustment to Middle School Transition in Children with Learning Disabilities GRANT NUMBER: H023C40155 BEGINNING DATE: 9/01/94 ENDING DATE: 8/31/98 ABSTRACT PURPOSE: The purpose of this project is to improve understanding of the stress students with learning disabilites experience during and after the transition to middle school, the social support systems they use, and the role that social support plays in the adjustment of these students to the middle school environment. METHOD: Project research will focus on: (1) the extent and nature of the stress students with learning disabilities experience during the first years of middle school; (2) the extent and nature of the social support students with learning disabilities receive from family, peers and school personnel; and (3) the role that social support plays in reducing stress and facilitating the adjustment of students with learning disabilities both during and after the transition to middle school. The subjects will consist of students from the 4th grade (N=360), including 120 students identified as having learning disabilities, 120 students identified as low achievers, and 120 students identified as nondisabled average achievers. During Project Year 1, staff will select students for the 3 study groups, focusing on those students who may be exhibiting extreme behavioral problems. At this time staff will also ask teachers to complete the School Climate Inventory to assess the heterogeneity of the elementary school represented in the sample. During Project Years 2 through 4, project procedures will involve the delivery of assessment instruments to students in individual interviews, and questionnaires mailed to the students' families. Staff will use interview and questionnaire results to assess both school and family climates. In following student interviews, staff will conduct a variety of stress scale tests to focus on changes in stressors the student is experiencing. In addition to formal assessment, project staff will monitor and track changes that may occur in family structure and composition, special education services for students, and changes within the school itself. ANTICIPATED PRODUCTS: With the information gained by this research, educators will be able to focus not only on ways to reduce the stressors of middle school, but on ways to help students with learning disabilities manage their stress with social support. This knowledge will serve as a foundation for the development of plans and programs designed to facilitate transitions between public school environments. PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Sugai, George Lewis, Tim University of Oregon Special Education 235 Education Eugene, OR 97403 503-346-1642 Project FACILE (Functional Analysis and Contextual Intervention in Learning Environments) GRANT NUMBER: H023C20040 BEGINNING DATE: 8/01/92 ENDING DATE: 7/31/97 ABSTRACT PURPOSE: Project FACILE will study individualized and system-level technologies for improving the educational experiences of students with at-risk behaviors. METHOD: The project will conduct a complete functional analysis, use the analysis results to determine the possible communicative function of the behavior in question, and design an intervention to replace the behavior with a prosocial response that serves the same communicative function. These assessment and intervention procedures will be systematically tested at individual and school or system levels. Normative rates of at-risk and appropriate social behaviors and social validation data will be used to evaluate the goals, procedures, and outcomes from this project. School building personnel will be trained to screen for at-risk children, conduct functional analyses, and to design and implement contextual interventions. ANTICIPATED PRODUCTS: Training materials based on empirically validated procedures will be produced to improve practitioners' ability to develop effective intervention strategies for students with at-risk behavior and reduce potential negative outcomes predicted for at-risk students who receive inadequate systematic interventions. Students with at-risk behavior will increase their prosocial skill level, thereby reducing academic and social risks. New research-validated knowledge and understanding of effective assessment and intervention strategies will be generated. Research findings will be disseminated through a variety of professional outlets. PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Sullivan, Nanci University of Pittsburgh 4K29 Forbes Quad Pittsburgh, PA 15260 412-648-7080 Educational Implications of Surviving Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia GRANT NUMBER: H023C50058 BEGINNING DATE: 7/01/95 ENDING DATE: 6/30/00 ABSTRACT PURPOSE: The project will attempt to describe and understand, from the multiple perspectives of the survivor and parents, siblings, teachers, and the medical team, the educational and psychosocial consequences of surviving cancer. The project will also consider the problems student survivors encounter upon returning to school. METHOD: In the first study, the sample will be individuals who were diagnosed with childhood leukemia at age 5-7 years, survived, and are now at least 18 years of age. These youth and their families will share their experiences, including the roles school and schoolwork played during and after treatment, including the response of the school to the illness and any learning difficulties that arose. A second study will examine survivors at 10-12 years of age, five years after diagnosis. This study will focus on subjects' recent re-entry experiences, and school personnel will be drawn into the interview sample. This study will explore what preparations (if any) were made for the child's return to school after treatment and what problems were encountered. The third study will follow survivors and their families as they experience school re-entry. Staff will observe students in their classrooms to understand the complex social and psychological issues associated with reintegration. ANTICIPATED PRODUCTS: A concerted effort will be made to ensure that research findings and products are widely disseminated and useful to diverse targeted audiences. The organization and summaries of findings in the preparation of conference presentations, reports to parents, reports toschools, reports to medical teams, submissions to refereed journals, submissions to teacher magazines, and other materials will therefore be tailored to address the interests and needs of parents, physicians, classmates, teachers, policymakers, and researchers. PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Winnick, Joseph SUNY, College at Brockport 350 New Campus Drive Brockport, NY 14420 716-395-2383 Project Target: Criterion-Referenced Physical Fitness Standards for Adolescents with Handicapping Conditions GRANT NUMBER: H023C30091 BEGINNING DATE: 6/01/93 ENDING DATE: 5/31/98 ABSTRACT PURPOSE: The project will establish and validate criterion-referenced physical fitness test items and standards for adolescents with selected disabilities. METHOD: Approximately 2,100 adolescents with sensory, orthopedic, or mental disabling conditions will be trained and/or tested on selected physical fitness parameters. Tests to be employed will include PHYSICAL BEST, the health-related test of the American Alliance for Health, Physical Education, Recreation, and Dance Fitnessgram; and the physical fitness test of the President's Council on Physical Fitness and Sport. Findings from these tests will be used as the basis for the statistical validity of developed criterion-referenced standards. In addition, a criterion-referenced Project Target Test of Physical Fitness and a corresponding educational program for the development of physical fitness would be created. ANTICIPATED PRODUCTS: As a result of project activities, four national tests of physical fitness will be made more valid, useable, and accessible for adolescents with disabilities. The project will extend the nation's current emphasis on criterion-referenced testing and programming to school-aged youngsters with disabling conditions. Top of Page Back to ERIC Menu Back to CEC Home Page copyright © 1996 ERIC Clearinghouse on Disabilities and Gifted Education Last updated: October 29, 1996 Send updates to: ericec@cec.sped.org URL: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm WT02-B20-143IA001-000011-B033-289http://www.cec.sped.org:80/osep/7cultral.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101080411 text/html 32109HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 08:04:18 GMTLast-modified: Tuesday, 29-Oct-96 19:07:00 GMTContent-length: 31916Content-type: text/html OSEP Special Education Research Projects 2. CULTURAL DIFFERENCES PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Arreaga-Mayer, Carmen Juniper Gardens Children's Project 1614 Washington Boulevard Kansas City, KS 66102 913-321-3143 Promoting Literacy through Ecobehavioral Assessment and ClassWide PeerTutoring for Racial/Ethnic Limited English Proficient Minority Students with Disabilities GRANT NUMBER: H023C40064 BEGINNING DATE: 6/01/94 ENDING DATE: 7/31/97 ABSTRACT PURPOSE: This project will investigate and validate instructional practices that willmaximize the literacy and academic achievement gains of racial and ethnic limitedEnglish proficient (LEP) minority and majority students with disabilities in self-contained,resource, and regular education settings. METHOD: Staff will utilize ecobehavioral assessment and analysis procedures as aresearch tool for identifying procedures associated with effectiveness criteria, andevaluating ClassWide Peer Tutoring (CWPT) as an intervention for LEP students with orwithout disabilities. The first of five project studies will utilize ecobehavioral assessmentprocedures to measure the classroom environment to determine ways to naturallyfacilitate literacy and academic progress in mainstream regular and special educationclassrooms. A total sample of 180 students will be selected for classroom observationsthat will be divided among self-contained, resource room, and regular educationsettings. Measures used will include demographic measures, process measures, andproduct measures. During Year 2, staff will conduct Studies 2 and 3 in order to evaluatethe effectiveness of CWPT as an instructional procedure that facilitates literacy andacademic progress. In each treatment group, 2 students will receive tutoring in reading,2 in spelling and 2 in math. Data will continue to be collected on the literacy, academicand language performance as a reflection of CWPT procedures. Study 3 will replicateStudy 2 findings using a larger sample of students. During Year 3, staff will conductStudy 4, in which 24 students without disabilities will serve as partners in tutoring targetstudents in reading, spelling, and math. At this time, staff will also conduct Study 5 toverify procedures from Study 4, refine those procedures, and implement CWPTprograms with a larger sample. ANTICIPATED PRODUCTS: This project will result in new knowledge concerning theecobehavioral features of instruction, systematic replication, adoption of an effectiveinstructional procedure (CWPT) to a new population, and the translation of research topractice. PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Blanes-Reyes, Maria University of Florida Department of Special Education G315 Norman Hall Gainesville, FL 32611-2053 904-392-0701 Puerto Rican Families Who have Children with Disabilities: A Comparison BetweeenFamilies Living in Puerto Rico and Families Living in Florida GRANT NUMBER: H023B50023 BEGINNING DATE: 9/01/95 ENDING DATE: 8/31/96 ABSTRACT PURPOSE: The project will identify factors that contribute to the understanding ofPuerto Rican families, particularly as those factors relate to the delivery of interventionservices of young children with disabilities. METHOD: This study will survey 40 Puerto Rican mothers of children ages birththrough five with disabilities currently living in Puerto Rico and another 40 living in theUnited States. Variables of interest will include family factors (such as socioeconomicstatus and parental education), child characteristics (including extent of disability), andfamily resources (such as family support systems and religiousity). All mothers willparticipate in a set of structured data collection activities designed to provide acomprehensive view of family needs and support systems. The sample will includemarried, single, and divorced mothers. Quantitative procedures to be used will includeT-tests, ANOVA, and Multiple Stepwise Regression Analyses to determine whichvariables influence families' expressions of need for help. ANTICIPATED PRODUCTS: Descriptions of the project, details of project findings,position papers, digests, summaries, fact sheets, news releases, and research reportswill be generated by project staff to disseminate findings. Results will be disseminatedthrough state and national professional conferences and related professional journals,as well as ERIC and the SpecialNet Electronic Bulletin Boards and databases. Findingswill also be disseminated in Puerto Rico through presentation at state conferences andpublication in local educational journals. PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Chang, Ji-Mei San Jose State University College of Education Division of Special Education and Rehabilitative Services San Jose, CA 95172-0130 408-924-3705 Advancing and Improving the Knowledge Base on Content/Scaffolded ReadingComprehension Strategies with Parental Involvement: An Asian LEP+LD StudentPerspective GRANT NUMBER: H023A50081 BEGINNING DATE: 7/01/95 ENDING DATE: 6/30/96 ABSTRACT PURPOSE: The project will advance and improve the research knowledge base onserving Asian students who are limited English proficient (LEP) and who have learningdisabilities (LD). The project will explore the extent to which a research-basedcontent/scaffolded reading comprehension intervention that has been previously foundeffective with Spanish speaking students who have learning disabilities and speakEnglish as a second language (ESL), can be generalized to students from distinctlyAsian backgrounds. METHOD: The research design will include parental involvement among two groups of30 third- through fifth-grade students from Asian backgrounds who have learningdisabilities. Phase I is designed to prepare LD resource specialists so they will developadequate knowledge of the content/scaffolded reading (CSR) intervention strategiesthrough working with non-target students. While data on these students will not becollected and analyzed, information and insights gained from this stage will beincorporated into the second phase of the study. In Phase II, the CSR intervention willbe delivered by participating LD resource specialists who facilitate the scaffolding,eventually leading reciprocal teaching. Phase III, Peer- and Parent-FacilitatedIntervention, is designed to facilitate target students' practicing and maintaining of CSRcomprehension strategies and content knowledge through in-class peer-mediatedcooperative learning groups and within-home parent-mediated practices through use ofstudents' native languages. A combination of descriptive, quantitative, and qualitativemeasures and data analysis will be utilized to address research questions on studentchange over time and comparison of Asian students' change against that ofEnglish-speaking students with learning disabilities. ANTICIPATED PRODUCTS: Both the research processes and products will advancethe current knowledge base with respect to: (1) educational needs of Asian studentswho are limited English proficient and have learning disabilities; (2) professional needsof monolingual English speaking LD resource specialists; (3) needs of parents fortraining and support in forging meaningful partnerships with teachers; and (4) needs ofschools to promote parental involvement in their child's school learning, particularlyinner-city Asian parents who are limited English proficient. Project findings will be incorporated into the Project Director's presentations at state, local, national andinternational conferences, journal article publications, professional developmentworkshops, and teaching of method courses in both special and bilingual specialeducation teacher training programs. PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Donovan, Margaret Hawaii Department of Education P.O. 2360 Honolulu, HI 96813 808-586-3587 Pihana Na Mamo: The Native Hawaiian Special Education Project GRANT NUMBER: H221A50002 BEGINNING DATE: 9/01/95 ENDING DATE: 8/31/00 ABSTRACT PURPOSE: The purpose of this project is to improve special educational servicesprovided to children and youth of native Hawaiian ancestry with special needs. METHOD: This project will focus on: (1) the development of comprehensive andculturally appropriate instructional models to effectively serve special educationstudents of Hawaiian ancestry in the least restrictive environment; and (2) on meetingthe needs of students at risk of being identified as needing special education in regularclassroom settings. Project staff will implement a state-wide parent and communityinvolvement component to encourage and support the participation of parents in schoolprograms. Parent involvement staff will be hired to coordinate efforts within eachcommunity to increase parental participation. Staff development activities will besponsored to support the use of direct instructional practices. Through the funding ofmaster teachers and part-time teachers, support will be provided for development andimplementation of school-wide plans. ANTICIPATED PRODUCTS: Outcomes from the project will include: improvededucational performance among special needs students of Hawaiian ancestry;increased participation of Hawaiian parents and community leaders in schools;improved school-level and district-level capacity to serve Hawaiian students in the leastrestrictive environment; and increased public awareness of the educational needs ofHawaiian students. PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Gersten, Russell Jimenez, Robert Eugene Research Institute 1400 High Street Suite C Eugene, OR 97401 503-342-1553 Parameters of Effective Instruction for Language-Minority Students with Disabilities and Those at Risk for School Failure: Research Synthesis and Dissemination GRANT NUMBER: H023E50013 BEGINNING DATE: 7/01/95 ENDING DATE: 6/30/97 ABSTRACT PURPOSE: The project will begin to develop a professional knowledge base oneffective teaching practices for language minority students with mild disabilities or whoare at risk for school failure. METHOD: This study will focus on instructional issues, specifically classroom practiceswhich demonstrate the greatest promise for improving the academic achievement oflanguage minority students with disabilities. Practices which break down barriersbetween school and home and those which assist in establishing proactive collaborationbetween educators and families will be targeted. Staff will combine Slavin's (1986)best-evidence synthesis and Ogawa and Malen's (1991) multi-vocal approach in orderto better grasp the wide range of studies within the literature bases that will haverelevance for addressing the working hypotheses. The technical quality of each pieceof literature will be assessed. The overall synthesis will be based on a set of workinghypotheses generated from earlier research and modified and refined with input from awide range of stakeholder constituencies. ANTICIPATED PRODUCTS: A series of audience-specific products will be developedcollaboratively with OSEP. The project will utilize input from the constituency groupsand from a national forum. PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Kimm, Christina Division of Special Education California State University at Los Angeles 5151 State University Drive Los Angeles, CA 90032-8144 213-343-4400 Transition from School to Work and Community Living: Asian-American Studentswith Disabilities and Their Needs in Transition GRANT NUMBER: H023N40016 BEGINNING DATE: 9/01/94 ENDING DATE: 8/31/97 ABSTRACT PURPOSE: The project will investigate parents' expectations and students' needs fortransition among students with developmental disabilities across six ethnoculturalsubgroups. METHOD: Ethnocultural subgroups of Asian-American students will include Chinese,Filipino, Japanese, Korean, Vietnamese, and other Asians. The project, will study thelevel of their awareness of available transition services. The project will also provideinformation about parent and student rights and available transition services in their ownlanguage. It will equip education professionals with important information forappropriate and effective transition planning, reflecting a child's cultural values, futureemployment preferences, and living arrangements. Ten families of Asian-Americanstudents between 16 and 22 years of age from each subgroup will be recruited from sixschool districts and through public announcements on ethnocultural radio and televisionbroadcasting systems in the greater Los Angeles area. Community leaders from the sixhighlighted ethnocultural subgroups will be invited to take part in disseminationactivities. A secondary demographic data analysis will be conducted, followed by astudy of parents' expectations and needs in transition using interview and surveymethods. ANTICIPATED PRODUCTS: A brochure in six different Asian languages, technicalreports, and peer-reviewed journal articles will be prepared as final products of thisproject. PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Kluwin, Thomas Gallaudet University 800 Florida Avenue Washington, DC 20002 202-651-5401 Predicting Minority Parent Participation GRANT NUMBER: H023C50038 BEGINNING DATE: 4/01/95 ENDING DATE: 3/31/96 ABSTRACT PURPOSE: The project will enhance the level of service to traditionally underservedminority group deaf or hard-of-hearing children by identifying parent characteristics thatdo not meet the expectations of current service delivery systems. METHOD: Hispanic, African-American, and Caucasian families (N=220 total) in fivecities, who have young children who are hard-of-hearing or deaf, will participate in thisstudy. A two-tiered attempt will be made to collect information from this populationthrough phone interviews, followed by home visits where necessary. The theoreticalframework for the study will address three general areas of mismatch between the valuesystems of those who design family services and traditionally underserved families:social support systems, family cohesion, and family decision making. Analysis of datawill address two questions: first, the degree and nature of minority parent involvement inthe education of their deaf and hard or hearing children; second, the degree to whichinvolvement is reduced as a function of membership in a minority group versus specificfamily traits and dyanmics. Once characteristics of parents with higher or lower levelsof involvement in their children's services and education are identified, this informationcould be used to identify children who might be better served through alternativemethods. For example, some children might be better served if information and trainingnormally earmarked for parents was rerouted to some other individual more likely toassist the child. ANTICIPATED PRODUCTS: The primary outcome of this work will be to expandcontact with underserved populations by giving practitioners a way to respond tofamilies who don't fit current models of service delivery. Initial dissemination will takethe form of presentations at annual meetings of major research, education, and specialeducation, organizations and those representing individuals who are deaf or hard ofhearing, followed by subsequent dissemination through the submission of articles torelevant journals. Additional dissemination will take place through GallaudetUniversity's Pre-College Outreach unit, which provides information and servicesnationwide through workshops for service providers. PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Lopez-Reyna, Norma University of Illinois 1040 West Harrison M/C 147 Chicago, IL 60607 312-996-4526 Effects of Use of Authentic Assessment Procedures on Literacy Development ofBilingual and Monolingual Students with Learning Disabilities GRANT NUMBER: H023C50097 BEGINNING DATE: 10/01/95 ENDING DATE: 9/31/98 ABSTRACT PURPOSE: The project will explore the assessment procedures that teachers use inorder to make decisions about the literacy instructional services of students, and tobetter understand learner characteristics which may often mask second languageacquisition problems when compounded with learning disabilities. METHOD: This will be an exploratory and descriptive investigation using the case studyapproach as the main research strategy from an ethnographic perspective. Threeschool sites within the Chicago Public Schools will represent one case study each. Bystudying the three educational settings as well as key figures within each (includingteachers, students, parents, and other school staff), it is expected that the particularculture of each school will illuminate larger issues about special education teachers'assessment practices. Teachers will be interviewed regarding their theories of learningdisabilities, their beliefs about literacy instruction and learning, and their knowledge ofwriting process and reading development. Meanwhile, research staff will engage inclassroom observations and videotaping to establish an ethnographic baselineunderstanding of teachers' practices prior to intervention. Teachers will then receivetraining and technical assistance in such assessment techniques as portfolioassessment, student self-evaluation, and reflecting on both process and productaspects on student work. In addition to describing in detail all participating school andclassroom cultures, comparative analyses will be conducted to examine sharedcharacteristics of teachers' assessment procedures. ANTICIPATED PRODUCTS: Findings will be incorporated into development of a seriesof videotape and other training materials on authentic assessment as it informs literacyinstruction. Ethnographic findings on interrelationships between second languageacquisition and learning disabilities will be disseminated through these training materialsas well as journal publications. PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Marfo, Kofi University of South Florida Department of Special Education 4202 East Fowler Avenue Tampa, FL 33620 813-974-3770 Accessibility to and Utilization of Intervention Services in the First 6 Years: ALongitudinal Study of African-American Families and Services and ServiceAgencies GRANT NUMBER: H023C40083 BEGINNING DATE: 9/01/94 ENDING DATE: 8/31/97 ABSTRACT PURPOSE: The project will examine the factors that influence early intervention serviceaccessibility and utilization within African-American families with children who aredevelopmentally disabled. METHOD: This research is based upon a conceptual framework that links serviceutilization to three major components: the personal, familial, and cultural characteristicsof potential users, dimensions of the service delivery system, and the socio-politicalcontext within which service delivery and utilization take place. The first of twolongitudinal components entails a survey of early intervention and related serviceagencies, designed to obtain data on: (1) the representation of African-Americanfamilies in intervention programs; (2) agency policies and actions regarding therecruitment of families from underserved populations; and (3) policies and practicesregarding the delivery of culturally sensitive and appropriate services. The longitudinaldesign will enable the research team to ascertain changes occurring in all three areasover the 3-year period of the study. The second component entails a study of theintervention experiences of African-American families of children with disabilities duringthe first 6 years of the child's life. The design for this component encompasses twocohorts of families (45 in each), one with children in the birth to 3-year range and theother in the 3- to 6-year range. Qualitative analyses will provide a holistic context forunderstanding responses to the various scales and questionnaires, while quantitativeanalyses will be used to explore the extent to which relationships implied in theconceptual model can be validated statistically. Analysis will also include determinationof the appropriateness, reliability, and validity of the various measures employed in thestudy so that the study's underlying conceptual model can be subjected to rigorousempirical testing in subsequent work. ANTICIPATED PRODUCTS: Through this project, researchers will learn the extent towhich existing early intervention and other related services are accessible toAfrican-American families of children with developmental disabilities, identify barriers toservice accessibility and utilization, and draw implications for policy, practice, and futureresearch. PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: McCarty, Laurie New Mexico State University Department of Special Education Communication Disorders Box 3SPE Las Cruces, NM 88003 505-646-5973 Discourse Analysis of Culturally and Linguistically Diverse Students withExceptionalities GRANT NUMBER: H023B50020 BEGINNING DATE: 8/01/95 ENDING DATE: 7/31/96 ABSTRACT PURPOSE: The project will conduct an in-depth analysis of bilingualism andsociolinguistic influences in various contexts. This analysis will provide insight into theexperiences of culturally and linguistically diverse students with exceptionalities. METHOD: The research site, La Mesa Elementary School, serves 408 students fromrural communities in southern New Mexico. Approximately fifty percent of the school'sstudents speak Spanish as their primary language. Classroom activities will beobserved three times per week for seven months, and interviews will be conducted withstudents, teachers, and family members. Student records will also be analyzed. Through classroom observations, videotaping, and interviews, project staff will identifyclassroom discourse and language use. The resultant data and documentation will alsobe analyzed to identify effective teaching strategies and unique educational andsociocultural needs of students. Emergent themes and grounded local theories will beidentified, and findings will then be disseminated. ANTICIPATED PRODUCTS: Research findings will be disseminated through variouschannels, including: presentations at appropriate conferences; publication in refereedjournals; information sharing with colleagues through computer networks; and inclusionof findings in coursework at New Mexico State University. A 20-minute videotape willalso be made of various classroom discourse contexts; this videotape will be used forpresentations, teacher training, and instruction. PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Plasencia-Peinado, Judith University of Oregon College of Education Eugene, OR 97403 503-346-2144 An Examination of the Effect of Three Spanish Reading Approaches on the ReadingAchievement of Limited English Proficient (LEP) Students with Learning Disabilities andLEP Students At-Risk for Learning Disabilities GRANT NUMBER: H023B50036 BEGINNING DATE: 9/01/95 ENDING DATE: 8/31/96 ABSTRACT PURPOSE: This project will examine the effectiveness of three instructional methodsdelivered in Spanish for teaching 1st grade students who are limited English proficient(LEP) and who have learning disabilities (LD), and for teaching 1st grade students whoare LEP and at risk for LD. METHOD: The first method, Literature-Based Spanish Reading Approach (LB-SRA), isbased on characteristics of effective reading instruction for students who are limitedEnglish proficient and have LD. The LB-SRA approach attempts to teach meaning byusing a strong literature component and combining reading, writing, and oral language. The LB-SRA does not teach phonics or phonological awareness. The second method,Systematic-Integrated - Spanish Reading Approach (SI-SRA), which teaches explicitphonic and phonological awareness as well as meaning, will integrate thecharacteristics of effective early reading instruction for students who are LEP and whohave learning disabilities with characteristics of effective early literacy instruction thathave already been validated through previous research with English-speaking students.The third method, General-Education-Spanish Reading Approach (GE-SRA) will be thestandard reading instruction already provided in the general education classroom, andcan be described as a program teaching meaning and implicit phonological awarenessand phonics. 120 1st grade students who have limited proficiency in English, from fourschools in Los Angeles, California, will be selected to participate in this study. Childrenwill be randomly assigned to one of the three methods of instruction. Treatment willinclude two weeks of baseline, followed by 20 weeks of daily, 60 minutes per dayintervention, ending with one week of followup intervention. A between-groups designwill be used to examine effectiveness of different approaches. Method of instruction willbe the independent variable and the dependent variable will be student performance. Student progress also be monitored twice weekly using curriculum-basedmeasurement, as well as letter naming and letter sound fluency tasks. Studentprogress will be examined using a Hierarchical Linear Modeling analysis. ANTICIPATED PRODUCTS: Planned project products include an annual project reportand a number of research papers, a handbook reporting on project procedures, ateacher handbook, and other publications of project outcomes. Dissemination activitieswill include inservice consultations, guest lectures, site visits, and presentations atprofessional conferences. PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Saccuzzo, Dennis San Diego State University 6363 Alvarado Court Suite 103 San Diego, CA 92120-4913 619-594-2844 Project SERVE LD: Successful Early Recognition of Variables in the Evaluation ofLearning Disabilities GRANT NUMBER: H023C30010 BEGINNING DATE: 10/01/93 ENDING DATE: 9/30/96 ABSTRACT PURPOSE: This project will attempt to reduce the theory-practice gap in identificationof and preparation of remediation plans for students with learning disabilities byanalyzing the decision process and identifying the salient variables that ultimately resultin final diagnosis and interventions for teachers, resource specialists, and psychologistsworking with children with learning disabilities. METHOD: Beginning with stated definitions and policies for disability determination andthe development of treatment plans, the project will study what actually happens inpractice for approximately 10,000 African-American, Asian, Caucasian, Filipino, Latino,Indochinese, and Native American children who will be referred and evaluated for alltypes of learning disabilities in the diverse San Diego City System. Through regressionanalysis, factor analysis, and discriminant analysis applied to approximately 100variables per child, the program will analyze the decision process, determine thevariables that are actually employed to qualify a child as learning disabled, describe thecharacteristics of children referred for, but not qualified as learning disabled, summarizethe process of developing treatment recommendations, and examine how treatmentplans are implemented. ANTICIPATED PRODUCTS: Information gained through this study will besystematically communicated to teachers, resource specialists, psychologists,administrators, and parents in order to have an immediate positive impact in terms ofstreamlining the process of learning disability determination and the development oftreatment plans. Findings will be further disseminated via reports to schooladministrators and parents in communities involved, through a monograph to bedeveloped and sent to local, state, and national agencies and to researchers in the field,through symposia presentations at professional conventions, and through publicationsin major journals. PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Starks, Joann University of Texas College of Education Department of Education Administration Building 310 Austin, TX 78713-1291 512-471-7551 A National Study of State Education Policies for Language Minority Students withDisabilities GRANT NUMBER: H023B50037 BEGINNING DATE: 9/01/95 ENDING DATE: 8/31/96 ABSTRACT PURPOSE: The project will: (1) identify State policies regarding educational servicesfor students with disabilities who are also identified as language minority students; and(2) synthesize experts' recommendations for improvements of these policies through aDelphi procedure. METHOD: Current state policies for serving language minority students with disabilitieswill be identified through document review and content analysis. Existing specialeducation policies, including statutes, rules, and regulations and state plans will bereviewed for the 50 states and the District of Columbia. State Education Agencies(SEAs) will also be contacted to obtain copies of relevant policy documents. Next, anexpert panel will review the policies found and make recommendations forimprovements, using a Delphi procedure. This technological forecasting techniquecollects the opinions of experts for analysis, and brings their opinions to consensus. The panel will include 15 representatives from the areas of bilingual education, specialeducation, bilingual special education, and educational policy. Electroniccommunication media will be used to facilitate this process. ANTICIPATED PRODUCTS: This research will provide recommendations to states thathave not developed specific policies and to those revising policies for educationalprograms for language minority students with disabilities. Copies of the project reportwill be made available to professional organizations and databases, as well as specialeducation representatives at each SEA and members of the Delphi expert panel (whorepresent colleges and universities nationwide.) Top of Page Back to ERIC Menu Back to CEC Home Page copyright © 1996 ERIC Clearinghouse on Disabilities and Gifted Education Last updated: October 29, 1996 Send updates to: ericec@cec.sped.org URL: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm WT02-B20-144IA001-000011-B033-316http://www.cec.sped.org:80/osep/8earlych.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101080429 text/html 89480HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 08:04:30 GMTLast-modified: Tuesday, 29-Oct-96 19:07:00 GMTContent-length: 89287Content-type: text/html OSEP Special Education Research Projects 3. INFANTS, YOUNG CHILDREN, AND FAMILIES PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Bailey, Don University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill Frank Porter Graham Child Development Center CB# 8180 Chapel Hill, NC 27599-8180 919-966-4250 A Longitudinal Study of Young Children with Fragile X Syndrome and TheirFamilies GRANT NUMBER: H023C30081 BEGINNING DATE: 7/01/93 ENDING DATE: 6/30/98 ABSTRACT PURPOSE: This project will conduct a longitudinal study of the development of at least100 boys with Fragile X syndrome between birth and 72 months of age. METHOD: Using growth curve analysis the project will characterize developmental patterns anddocument the attainment of key developmental milestones in five domains: cognitive,communicative, social, adaptive, and motor skills. The project will also documentstability and change in temperament and behavioral characteristics. Interviews andsurveys will be used to describe unique family contexts among subject children. A finalcomponent of the study will determine clinicians' perceptions of the unique learningstyles and instructional or therapeutic strategies needed for young children with FragileX syndrome. ANTICIPATED PRODUCTS: The project hopes to provide a foundation for futureproposals including a longitudinal life span study of persons with Fragile X syndromeand their families, as well as other research linking biological and environmental factorsto developmental outcomes. Dissemination efforts will include promotional brochures, amonthly newsletter, curriculum materials, and handbooks. PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Bailey, Don University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill Frank Porter Graham Child Development Center CB# 8180 Chapel Hill, NC 27599-8180 919-966-4250 Age of Peers and Its Effects on the Social Interactions of Preschoolers withDisabilities GRANT NUMBER: H023C20168 BEGINNING DATE: 10/01/92 ENDING DATE: 9/30/97 ABSTRACT PURPOSE: This project involves a 5-year series of studies that will investigate theextent to which age of peers influences the development of social skills amongpreschoolers with disabilities. METHOD: In the first 2 project years, 80 3- and 4-year-olds with mild disabilities will bepaired with four different play partners for two play sessions each. Sessions will beanalyzed for level, complexity, and nature of social interactions. The second series ofstudies will examine whether or not repeated opportunities for dyadic play with ayounger child improve generalized social skills of 4-year-old children with disabilities, ashas been observed to be the case with nondisabled children with low rates of socialinteraction. Thirty 4-year-olds with mild disabilities will be randomly assigned to dyadicplay with a same-age peer, dyadic play with a younger child, or a control group. ANTICIPATED PRODUCTS: These studies will increase understanding of how peersinfluence social interactions of young children with disabilities. Important information onthe need to consider peer characteristics when designing early intervention programs topromote social competence will result. Project findings will be disseminated throughjournal publications, presentations at conferences, and development of guidelines forteachers in child care settings serving young children with disabilities. PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Bailey, Don University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill Frank Porter Graham Child Development Center CB# 8180 Chapel Hill, NC 27599-8180 919-966-4250 Elementary School and Boys with Fragile X Syndrome GRANT NUMBER: H023C50034 BEGINNING DATE: 7/01/95 ENDING DATE: 6/30/00 ABSTRACT PURPOSE: This project will conduct the elementary school portion of a longitudinal,life-span study of boys with Fragile X syndrome. METHOD: Project staff are currently conducting the early childhood portion of thisstudy, gathering data on the early development, temperament, behavior, and patternsoffamily coping and adaptation of 100 boys. During the elementary phase, researchquestions will focus on: (1) developmental, functional, and school achievement growthpatterns; (2) factors that influence development and achievement; (3) the developmentof social competence and peer relations; (4) factors influencing social competence andpeer relations; (5) the nature and quality of school experiences provided during theelementary years; (6) the needs and concerns of teachers working with boys withFragile X syndrome; (7) effective strategies for enhancing achievement and socialcompetence; and (8) patterns of family coping and adaptation during the elementaryyears. Eighty boys and their families will be followed between 1st and 5th grade toanswer these questions. Mixed method designs and hierarchical linear analyses will beused to chart patterns of growth and change, identify correlates of change, anddetermine successful educational and intervention strategies. ANTICIPATED PRODUCTS: Research findings will be submitted to leading journals forpeer review and publication, and also presented at state, regional, and nationalconferences related to child development, education, and family support. Specificproject publications will include: a manual for parents describing in simple language theearly development and needs of children with Fragile X syndrome; a guide for teachersand therapists who work with these children and their families; and a professional guidesummarizing findings from the survey of professionals, which will also describeimportant factors to consider in working with families. PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Boyce, Glenna Utah State University Center for Persons with Disabilities Logan, UT 84322 801-750-1179 Parent-Child Interaction Systems: A Long Term Evaluation GRANT NUMBER: H023N30028 BEGINNING DATE: 10/01/93 ENDING DATE: 9/30/96 ABSTRACT PURPOSE: This project will use an existing parent-child interaction data set to improvethe usefulness of parent-child interaction scoring systems, and to further the knowledgeof the nature and effects of the mother-child interaction. METHOD: In addition to identifying parent and child behaviors that correlate withmeasures of child development, research will identify parent and child characteristicsand parents' perceptions of stress, social support, and resources that best correlatewithparent interaction behaviors. After the existing data set has been coded to measureboth mother and child behavioral dimensions in order to examine the bidirectionality ofthe interaction, a number of analyses will be performed, including: a factor analysis todetermine factor structures of all relevant systems, analyses to demonstrate criterionand predictive validity, and analyses to establish the relationship between the variablesset forth in project objectives. The stability and change within dyads of parent-childinteraction will further be examined over time. ANTICIPATED PRODUCTS: By establishing criterion-related and predictive validity ofcoding systems employed, staff will enable clinicians, practitioners, and researchers tobetter choose and employ the coding system best suited to their needs. A monographwill be produced by project staff and consultants during the final year. Summaries offindings will be disseminated through a newsletter and computer bulletin boards. PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Bruder, Mary Beth University of Connecticut Health Center School of Medicine - Pediatrics 263 Farmington Avenue Farmington, CT 06032 203-566-3410 An Analysis of the Effectiveness of Staffing Patterns for Young Children AttendingNatural Group Environments for Early Intervention GRANT NUMBER: H023C30072 BEGINNING DATE: 10/01/93 ENDING DATE: 9/30/96 ABSTRACT PURPOSE: This project will examine the effects of different service delivery structureson the development of toddler-age children with disabilities (and their families) receivingearly intervention within natural group environments. METHOD: The study will compare four different service delivery structures withinnatural group settings with toddler-age children with disabilities receiving services underthe Department of Mental Retardation. Children will be assigned staff and servicesthrough the Individualized Family Service Plan (IFSP) process. The four servicedelivery structures to be evaluated will include: (1) a full-time teacher within the groupenvironment the entire time the child attends and therapy (as needed) delivered withinthe group environment; (2) a full-time teacher within the group environment the entiretime the child attends and therapy delivered (as needed) outside the natural groupenvironment; (3) a teacher attending the natural group environment at least once aweek for consulting purposes and therapy delivered (as needed) within the naturalgroup environment; and (4) a teacher attending the natural group environment at leastone time a week for consulting purposes and therapy delivered outside the naturalenvironment. Evaluation of these service structures will occur on a 3-month basisduring a 12-month enrollment period for each child. ANTICIPATED PRODUCTS: The project will expand the current knowledge base onthe effects of receiving early intervention in natural group environments in a number ofways. Findings will be presented at state, local, and national conferences, and articlesand descriptions of service delivery practices will be prepared for journals andnewsletters. Research monographs will be generated on methodology and findings,and training manuals will be prepared on service delivery practices found to beeffective. PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Carta, Judith Juniper Gardens Children's Project 1614 Washington Boulevard Kansas City, KS 66102 913-321-3143 Longitudinal Study of Risk and Protective Factors Affecting the Development ofChildren Prenatally Exposed to Illicit Drugs and Alcohol GRANT NUMBER: H023C50111 BEGINNING DATE: 7/01/95 ENDING DATE: 6/31/00 ABSTRACT PURPOSE: The project will investigate early elementary school experiences anddevelopmental outcomes of children with documented exposure to illegal drugs duringpregnancy. METHOD: Cohorts of both drug-exposed and nonexposed children ages 5 - 9 years(N=60 children in each cohort) will be followed during their early schooling. Within eachcohort, 40 children will have had prenatal exposure to illegal drugs and/or alcohol andthe remaining 20 will be a comparison group with no documented exposure. For thefirst cohort, the work represents a four-year extension of a completed two yeardevelopmental study. For the second cohort, this study provides an opportunity toreplicate and cross-validate developmental trajectories and findings from the earlierresearch with Cohort 1. Since a wide variety of factors have been found to influencestudent outcomes and adjustment, measures of prenatal drug exposure; family risk andprotective factors, developmental status, child behavior at home and school,environmental factors, academic achievement, and social/emotional adjustment will allbe used. Individual testing, observations in the classroom and on the playground, andschool archival record searches will be employed to gather data for these measures. Data analyses will be conducted to: (1) examine differences between groups; and (2)explore the variance; accounted for by drug exposure, independent of other variables,inthe prediction of later school success and failure. ANTICIPATED PRODUCTS: Results of the first analytical study (of Cohort 1 from ages3-9) will be incorporated into preservice training in graduate university coursework. Annual reports will be developed and presentations will be made at national andregional gatherings of professionals, researchers, and educators, as well as articlessubmitted to professional journals to reach this same audience. PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Denning, Douglas National Academy of Sciences 2101 Constitution Avenue Washington, DC 20418 202-334-3377 Committee on Prevention of Reading Difficulties in Young Children GRANT NUMBER: H023S50001 BEGINNING DATE: 11/15/95 ENDING DATE: 11/14/97 ABSTRACT PURPOSE: The project will conduct a thorough study of contemporary research on thedevelopment of pre-reading and reading skills, the assessment of factors associatedwith reading problems, and the comparative effectiveness of formal and informalinterventions for young children who are at risk for developing reading problems. METHOD: The study will be carried out by a committee of experts in cognitive science,developmental psychology, neuroscience, teaching and learning, literacy, and specialeducation. The research that will be reviewed includes advances in cognitivepsychology, early childhood development, neurology, ethnography, and related fields. Promising methods for early identifiction of reading problems will be examined, as willthe scientific bases and effectiveness of various educational and other interventions forparticular groups of children, including those with cognitive or neurological deficiencies,those from impoverished or minority subcultures, and perhaps those with limitedEnglishproficiency. ANTICIPATED PRODUCTS: At the study's conclusion, the committee will issue ascholarly report identifying effective approaches to assessment, prevention, andintervention in a range of settings including schools, preschools, Head Start programs,child care centers, social service agencies, doctors' offices, health care clinics, and thehome. In addition, the committee intends to develop a series of concise publicationstailored to specific audiences, and will explore the possibility of separately fundeddissemination venues, including public media. PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Ferrell, Kay University of Northern Colorado College of Education Division of Special Education Greeley, CO 80639 303-351-1653 A Longitudinal Study of Developmental Patterns of Children Who are VisuallyImpaired GRANT NUMBER: H023C10188 BEGINNING DATE: 6/01/92 ENDING DATE: 9/30/96 ABSTRACT PURPOSE: This study will examine the sequence and rate of development of children,ages birth to 6, who are blind or visually impaired. Measures of visual acuity, behavior,temperament, and environment will be obtained in an effort to determine first, if thereare differences between development of blind and sighted children and, if there are,what variables might be identified as predictors or correlates to development. METHOD: This longitudinal study will be accomplished through a collaborative effort ofTeachers College, Columbia University, and a national consortium of six serviceproviders that will be established to cooperate in the collection of data. An assessmentbattery will be selected by the project Technical Advisory Committee, which will crossthe three domains of child variables (such as developmental quotient, visual acuity, andhealth status), family variables (such as socioeconomic status, demographics, andmother-child interaction), and program variables (such as home vs. hospital, supportservices, and curriculum). Project staff will conduct training of two project evaluatorsfrom each participating program who will collect data in their programs. Subjects will bechildren with visual disabilities who are referred to and served by the programsparticipating in this study; it is foreseen that the study will include a sample size of 300children per 1-year cohort. Yearly analyses will be conducted of the patterns emergingin the three sets of variables, their interaction, and their influence on child competenceand family adaptation. The normative data collected in this study will be analyzed bymeasures of central tendency, factor analysis, and discriminant analysis. ANTICIPATED PRODUCTS: Annual data will be pooled with previous data andreported to the field by means of project reports. Dissemination efforts will includethese annual reports, journal articles, and a final report. PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Foder-Davis, Julie University of Idaho Idaho Center on Developmental Disabilities (ICDD) 129 West Third Moscow, ID 83843 208-885-3559 Research on Treating Aggression in Young Children GRANT NUMBER: H023N40039 BEGINNING DATE: 10/01/94 ENDING DATE: 9/30/97 ABSTRACT PURPOSE: The project will systematically replicate and extend the findings of a pilotinvestigation, in which the rate of aggression across four children decreased tonormative levels through the use of observational learning of high status peers,individualized training scripts, and a self-evaluation paradigm. METHOD: Staff will develop an observation system and a computerized system ofsituation descriptions. Replication studies of pilot research will then be conducted,followed by two additional studies with Native American subjects. In a small groupsetting, children will watch high status peer models discriminate between positive andnegative examples of social interactions, state positive alternatives to aggression, andpractice positive social interactions using puppets. Following study of peer models,subjects will practice these same responses and will be tested with novel scenes forknowledge acquisition. Following training, the effects of a self-peer-teacher evaluationprocedure to enhance generalization from training settings to observational settings willbe tested. ANTICIPATED PRODUCTS: This research will create a training methodology whichwill: (1) reduce the probability of young children being placed in special education andsupport friendships and long-term inclusion in general class settings; and (2) reduceaggressive behaviors in young Native American children attending tribal public school,day care, and/or Head Start. In addition to dissemination of the computer program,observation system and training package, findings will be disseminated via a series ofjournal articles and conference presentations as well as a final report for the fundingagency. PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Goetze, Linda Utah State University Early Intervention Research Institute Logan, UT 84322-6580 801-797-3125 Early Intervention Benefit/Cost Longitudinal Study GRANT NUMBER: H023C20066 BEGINNING DATE: 7/01/92 ENDING DATE: 6/30/97 ABSTRACT PURPOSE: This project will provide credible evidence on the benefits and costs ofearly intervention programs, including programs that vary by intensity, the degree ofparent involvement, and age at start. METHOD: Data will be examined from a benefit-cost follow-up study of 430 childrenwith a variety of disabilities including visual impairments, intraventricular hemmorrhage,medical fragility, and others who received early intervention from the Early InterventionResearch Institute from 1985-1990. Subjects were randomly assigned to control andexperimental groups where both groups of children received treatment. Experimentaltreatment either began earlier, was more intensive, or added a parental involvementcomponent in addition to the control services. By following both groups of studentslongitudinally, the study will estimate benefits to families and society that result from theearly intervention received. ANTICIPATED PRODUCTS: By comparing dollars spent with dollars saved, thisprojectwill provide a perspective previously unavailable in the field of early intervention forchildren with disabilities and will help to answer questions regarding which earlyintervention programs serve children and the community best. PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Golden, Nancy Eugene School District 4J 200 North Monroe Street Eugene, OR 97402-4295 503-687-3360 Prevention of Antisocial Behavior Patterns Among Children Grades K-3 GRANT NUMBER: H237B20024 BEGINNING DATE: 10/01/92 ENDING DATE: 9/30/96 ABSTRACT PURPOSE: This project will develop, evaluate, and disseminate a model program forthe early identification and primary prevention of conduct disorders and antisocialbehavior patterns in kindergarten-level children. METHOD: The project will consist of four phases of approximately 1-year's durationeach, as follows: (1) Feasibility Study; (2) Intervention and Longitudinal Tracking; (3)Replication and Longitudinal Tracking; and (4) Longitudinal Tracking and Follow-up. The model intervention program to be developed will have a dual focus on direct childintervention and family support and intervention. A state of the art early interventionprogram will be developed for delivery by school-based consultants and a model familysupport component will also be developed focusing on: (1) improving target parents'effective parenting practice; and (2) accessing needed services available fromcommunity and state social service agencies. ANTICIPATED PRODUCTS: The components of this model program will be packagedin year 4 and selected, key school district staffs in the state of Oregon will be trained inthem. The final package will be broadly disseminated to the field and made available toprofessionals for the cost of reproduction and mailing. Training and technicalassistance to potential model program adopters will be negotiated as appropriate withinterested school districts and programs. PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Goldstein, Howard University of Pittsburgh CLIP-WPIC 3600 Forbes Avenue #500 Pittsburgh, PA 15213 412-624-0921 Programming Integration of Preschoolers (Project PIP): Developing PeerRelationships Between Children With and Without Developmental Disabilities GRANT NUMBER: H023C10167 BEGINNING DATE: 7/01/91 ENDING DATE: 6/30/96 ABSTRACT PURPOSE: The study will investigate the effects of interventions designed to enhancesocial-communicative interaction among preschoolers with developmental disabilties. METHOD: At least 40 preschoolers with developmental disabilities, and an equalnumber of nondisabled classmates will participate. Exchange theory will be applied toanalyzing interaction patterns and to generating strategies for modifying interactionpatterns to produce more acceptable outcomes for social partners and lessen thedesireto terminate interactions and relationships. Some basic characteristics ofpeer-mediated intervention tactics will be modified, such as spreading interventionsacross the day, rather than conducting concentrated training sessions. Interventionswill involve: (1) teaching typical peers to use ecobehaviorally derived strategies forinteraction with their disabled classmates; (2) teaching fundamental social skills tochildren with disabilities; and (3) a treatment package based on the functionalcomponents of these interventions. In addition, longitudinal effects will be monitoredand investigations of intervention components that appear necessary to ensure thatchildren with disabilities continue to interact with typical classmates and develop peerrelationships in subsequent educational placements will be conducted. Single-subjectexperimental designs will be used to evaluate outcomes. The effects of intervention willbe assessed with observational, sociometric, and teacher and parent rating measures. In addition to analyses of changes in the rates of social behavior demonstrated bychildren, conditional probability analyses of sequential data will be used to continue theprocess of identifying strategies that prove particularly effective in promoting sustainedinteraction. ANTICIPATED PRODUCTS: The experimental procedures developed and validated inthe studies will form the basis for two training manuals on: (1) daily intervention topromote constructive social-communicative interaction in integrated preschools, and (2)facilitating social adaptation of children with disabilities during transitions frompreschool. Dissemination efforts will include publication of the training manuals,research papers, papers focusing on the clinical procedures, and training workshops forpractitioners. PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Guess, Doug University of Kansas Institute for Life Span Studies 1052 Dole Lawrence, KS 66045 913-864-4954 Longitudinal Assessment of Emerging Behavior State Patterns Among Infants andChildren with Severe and Profound Disabilities GRANT NUMBER: H023C30029 BEGINNING DATE: 8/01/93 ENDING DATE: 7/31/98 ABSTRACT PURPOSE: This project will systematically investigate changes in state during the firstfew months and years of life, and will identify variables and conditions that potentiallyimpact the emergence of various state organization patterns. METHOD: A longitudinal research design will measure state behavior across earlymonths and years of life among 25 infants at high risk for profound and severedisabilities. Additionally, a General Systems Theory approach will be adopted toinvestigate the process of emerging state patterns in relation to other interactingvariables, such as: levels of cognitive, motor, and social development; quality andfrequency of rhythmic patterns; communicative skills; social interactions with caregivers;and medical interventions and health status. ANTICIPATED PRODUCTS: Results of this research will provide interventionprogramswith important information for assisting in the development of more stable and adaptivestate patterns in persons with profound and multiple disabilities. Findings from theproject will have additional implications for the assessment and treatment of traumaticbrain injury, and the behavioral changes and physical losses associated with aging. PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Haring, Kathryn University of Oklahoma Department of Educational Psychology 820 Van Vleet Oval Room 325 Norman, OK 73019-0260 405-325-5404 The Impact of Federal Policy and Resulting Legislation on Family Systems GRANT NUMBER: H023C10103 BEGINNING DATE: 12/15/91 ENDING DATE: 12/14/96 ABSTRACT PURPOSE: This project will study how early intervention provided to infants andtoddlers impacts families, and specifically, how families perceive these services. Thestudy will examine three assumptions: (1) families need and welcome these servicesand supports; (2) early interventionists know how to validly assess family needs anddevelop programs to meet them; and (3) these services will enhance the developmentalpotential of infants and toddlers who are disabled or at risk. METHOD: Researchers will collaborate with the University of Oklahoma MedicalCenterin the early identification of approximately 36 families of neonates who are at significantrisk due to genetic/congenital conditions, birth trauma or prematurity, and/orcombinations of maternal risk factors (e.g. age, substance abuse, AIDS, etc.). Over a5-year period, qualitative methodologies will be used to probe the perceptions andexperiences of parents (and when appropriate, siblings) of infants, toddlers, andpreschoolers. Twelve families will be identified in year 1 and followed over 3 years. Twelve new families will be added each of the first 3 years. A total of three intensive,audiotaped interviews will be conducted per year for each family, including interviewsconducted with a significant other outside the family, but involved in the family system inorder to triangulate the data collected. The first interview will be designed to probe theissues of: (1) initial communications with professionals from a variety of disciplines; (2)transitions from hospital to home; (3) contacts from and referrals to additional servicesand resources; (4) realizations and adjustments to the infant's needs; (5)self-perceptions and coping; and (6) perceptions of assistance received fromprofessionals and interpersonal networks. Follow-up interviews will further documentthe nature of services, supports and/or resources provided to or sought by thefamilies. ANTICIPATED PRODUCTS: Products will include five annual research reports, a finalmonograph, book, and field guidelines for parent involvement in early intervention. PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Jenkins, Joseph R. University of Washington Experimental Education Unit WJ-10 Seattle, WA 98195 206-543-4011 A Longitudinal Follow-up of Graduates from Two Contrasting PreschoolInstructionalModels: Phase 2 GRANT NUMBER: H023C30007 BEGINNING DATE: 7/01/93 ENDING DATE: 9/30/97 ABSTRACT PURPOSE: This project will study the lasting effects of two approaches to preschooleducation as well as the course of development of preschool graduates as theyprogress from childhood to adolescence, passing through two critical school transitionperiods. METHOD: The subjects of the study will be 197 elementary and middle school childrenwho qualified for special education and participated in a previous preschool interventionstudy. These children, who have mild to moderate delays in cognitive and languageskills, received either an academically based Direct Instruction model or a cognitivelybased Mediated Learning model for between 1 and 3 years of intervention. Subjectswill be followed through another five years of schooling and the associated transitions. Evaluation instruments will include a variety of cognitive, academic, social, adjustment,school placement, and employment measures. Data analysis will vary according to theresearch question addressed, and include repreated measures analysis of variance,multiple regression, survival analysis, and growth curve analysis techniques. ANTICIPATED PRODUCTS: The project will generate much-needed information on:the ability to match instructional programs to students; long-term effects of numerousmodels for early intervention, with some retrospective information on children'sreadiness to learn as a result of either model; key periods in school when children withdevelopmental delays are at risk for difficulty, or ready to experience a developmentalgrowth spurt; the relationship and mechanisms between early cognitive and linguisticfunctioning and later skill development; and validity of initial judgments of risk based onearly assessments. PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Kahn, James University of Illinois Institute for the Study of Developmental Disabilities College of Education P.O. Box 6998 M/C 551 Chicago, IL 60608 312-413-1563 Facilitation of Intersubjectivity to Remediate Language Delay of Preschool Childrenwith Mental Retardation GRANT NUMBER: H023C20077 BEGINNING DATE: 10/01/92 ENDING DATE: 9/30/96 ABSTRACT PURPOSE: This 4-year project will investigate the effectiveness of interventions tofacilitate language development of toddlers and preschoolers with mental retardation.The premise underlying the six studies in the project is that intersubjectivity must beestablished in order for the child with disabilities to utilize the verbal and nonverbalinformation from others with whom he or she interacts. The project will describe andtestexperimental efforts to facilitate the establishment of joint referential states forcommunicative exchanges. METHOD: The studies will examine both descriptively and experimentally theintegration of cognitive, affective, social, communicative, and language skills during thefirst 5 years of life. In Study 1, extant videotapes from at least 200 mother and infantdyads (infants ranging in mental age from 10-18 months) will be coded in real time toindicate their attentional state vis-a-vis both objects and their mothers. Thedevelopmentof joint attentional state will be described from this cross-sectional sample of youngchildren in comparison to published reports on normally developing children.Seventy-six children will be involved in the remaining five longitudinal experimentalstudies. Studies 2, 3, and 4 will utilize prototypic interactive computer games forsensorimotor skills and storybooks as one context to compare to more typical dyadicplay and storybook contexts in terms of the establishment of joint reference andcommunication. In Study 2, teachers will attempt to establish joint reference with youngchildren with disabilities in the context of an object permanance computer game ("Findthe Bunny") or during play with mechanical toys. Study 3 will be a replication of Study 2except that parents and their children with disabilities will be involved. Ongoinganalysisof videotapes of teaching sessions will provide the empirical basis for suggestionsaboutways to facilitate joint attention and communication within these contexts. A computercontrolled videotape analysis system will be used with both keyboard and voice input toexpedite the tape rating and feedback process. In Study 4, parents will be provided withinteractive, computerized storybooks or regular storybooks to examine the utility ofreading activities as joint referential and communication contexts. Study 5 will broadenthe study to establishment of joint reference and language production in a small groupsetting (3 children, 1 teacher) in which simple play scripts are enacted (e.g., snack time,putting a baby to bed). Half of the children will be involved in a small group with onechild who does not have disabilities and half will be in contexts including only childrenwith disabilities. In Study 6 the investigation of interventions to facilitate joint referentialstates and lanuguage production will be conducted in large group free play situations ina structured classroom which is integrated with children who do not have disabilities orin one that includes only children with disabilities. An intensive collection of data onlanguage use and sensorimotor skills will ensure comparability across the 276 subjectsinvolved in these cross-sectional and longitudinal studies. ANTICIPATEDPRODUCTS: In addition to the findings from the studies, an outcome of the project willbe the development of an observational technology from which complex social processdescriptions can be completed, analyzed, and used as the basis for suggestions onhowto modify interactions with young children with disabilities. The studies will provideevidence about the relative effectiveness of new language intervention techniques forearly childhood special educators who work with children who have both developmentaland language delays. PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Kraft/Lignugaris, Benjamin Utah State University Department of Special Education & Rehabilitation Logan, UT 84322-2865 801-797-2382 Using Behavioral Momentum to Increase Children's Instructional Engagement GRANT NUMBER: H023A50093 BEGINNING DATE: 8/01/95 ENDING DATE: 7/31/96 ABSTRACT PURPOSE: The project will determine the effects of behavioral momentum onchildren's instructional engagement within naturalistic instructional contexts. METHOD: In Study 1, high-probability mands will be interspersed with low-probability mands. Children's attempts to respond to low-probability mands, correct responses tolow-probability mands, and duration of time children are engaged in learning activitieswill be examined using a multiple probe design. Four students in a classroomaveraging12-15 preschool students will participate in Study 1 during center-time activities. Mandtesting will be conducted using high-interest, thematically-based sets of toys. In Study2, high-probability mands will be used prior to introducing low-probability responsesituations (response situations in which a child response is not required). Children'sattempts to respond and their correct responses will be examined in these situationswith low-probability behaviors and with high-probability behaviors. Study 2 will utilizesimilar students and preschool settings, but subjects will be provided withlow-probabilityresponse contexts (teacher self-questioning) instead of high-probability contexts. ANTICIPATED PRODUCTS: Research reports and manuscripts will be prepared forprofessional journals in special education. Research results and information onbehavioral momentum will also be presented at state professional conferences, and willbe integrated into the Department of Special Education and Rehabilitation's teachertraining program for early childhood special educators. PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Kratochwill, Thomas University of Wisconsin - Madison 1025 W. Johnson Street Madison, WI 53706 608-262-5912 An Exceptional Analysis of Teacher/Parent Mediated Interventions for Preschoolerswith Behavioral Problems GRANT NUMBER: H023C20172 BEGINNING DATE: 9/01/92 ENDING DATE: 8/31/97 ABSTRACT PURPOSE: This research project will empirically investigate the efficacy of anexpanded intervention appropach involving behavioral consultation with parents andteachers of preschool children who are at risk for social-emotional difficulties METHOD: Children experiencing social withdrawal and isolation and children experiencing conductdifficulties will be identified, treated, and monitored for approximately 3 to 5 years, frompreschool through early elementary school transitions. Screening procedures andteacher referrals will identify 120 3-5 year-olds in Head Start programs. Childrenselected for the project will be assigned randomly to experimental and controlconditions. In the experimental group, children will be further assigned randomly tobaselines in a multiple baseline design. Consultants trained in behavioral consultationwill work with parents and teachers to deliver a treatment package either for socialwithdrawal or for conduct disorders. Treatment programs will include social skillsinterventions supplemented with parent and teacher behavior management strategies. Consultants will also monitor students' progress as they make the transition intoelementary school. ANTICIPATED PRODUCTS: In the area of practice, products will include: (1) treatmentpackages for socially withdrawn and preschool students with mild conduct disorder; (2)treatment integrity checklists and rating scales for monitoring the implementation ofspecific treatments; and (3) foundation of an effective preschool consultation andintervention model put in place in a county Head Start organization. Contributions toresearch will increase understanding of effects of conjoint behavioral consultation withteachers and parents. PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Mahoney, Gerald Kent State University Family Child Learning Center 90 West Overdale Tallmadge, OH 44278 216-633-2055 Investigations of Early Motor Intervention Procedures GRANT NUMBER:H023C30127 BEGINNING DATE: 9/01/91 ENDING DATE: 8/30/96 ABSTRACT PURPOSE: The project will investigate the relative effectiveness of two motorintervention approaches for children with Down syndrome and children with cerebralpalsy: the Neurodevelopmental Therapy (NDT) approach, and the PeabodyDevelopmental Motor Program (PDM). METHOD: Interventions will be conducted with 60 children with Down syndomechildren and 60 children with cerebral palsy children (ages 6 to12 months at thebeginning of the study) during the first 3 years of their lives. Subjects will come fromapproximately 12 different sites from the southeastern portion of the United States,eachof which provides only one of the two treatment models being investigated. Treatmentswill be administered by the regular interventionists at these sites, who have beentrainedto proficiency in the model they are required to implement. The study is based on apre-post multifactorial design that will assess the relative contribution of several variables totwo major outcomes of intervention services: (1) the level of family involvement withtheir child after 12 and 24 months of services, and (2) the fine and gross motor gainsthat the children have attained after 12 and 24 months of intervention. Four factors willbe used to assess family involvement in the child's intervention program including theamount of time that primary caregivers engage in therapeutic motor exercises with theirchild, and the style of the primary parent/caregiver during interacting with the child. Both quantitative and qualitative procedures will be used to assess motor outcomesthatchildren attain. In addition, the study will determine whether the effects of thesecurricula are replicable across sites. A cost benefits analysis will examine themagnitude of motor gains that children attain in motor intervention programs as afunction of the monetary and family resource expenditures that are required to producethese gains. ANTICIPATED PRODUCTS: Dissemination activities will include a technical report tobe advertised for distribution after 12 months of intervention data, state and nationalconference presentations, and journal articles. PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: McConnell, Scott R. McEvoy, Mary A. University of Minnesota Department of Educational Psychology 1919 University Avenue 5th Floor St. Paul, MN 55104 612-624-6365 Prenatal Cocaine Exposure and Social Development of Young Children: A FieldInitiated Research Project GRANT NUMBER: H023C10092 BEGINNING DATE: 9/01/91 ENDING DATE: 8/30/96 ABSTRACT PURPOSE: This project will conduct a 5-year program of descriptive andintervention-based research that increases both knowledge regarding social and otherdevelopmental outcomes for young children exposed prenatally to cocaine andresources for providing early intervention to this group. METHOD: Subjects for all studies will be infants and young children (6 months to 6years of age) who were exposed to cocaine prenatally and (for Study 1, the longitudinalstudy, only) non-exposed matched controls. Cocaine-exposed children will be recruitedprimarily by contacting mothers served by the Mother Baby Chemical Health ProgramofGroup Health, Inc., in the Minneapolis-St. Paul metropolitan area. Throughout theseven studies, specific instruments have been selected to provide three different typesof measures of the social development of children exposed prenatally to cocaine: (1) ageneral, performance-based outcome measure of social competence; (2) measures ofthe type, quantity, and quality of social interactions in home and care/school settings;and (3) direct assessment of other aspects of the child's development. Study 1,involving 50 drug-exposed children and 50 non-exposed matched controls, will consistof a 5-year, longitudinal descriptive analysis of social and other developmentaloutcomes. Four experimental studies (focusing in turn on environmental arrangements,teacher-mediated interventions, affection training activities, and parent training topromote social interaction competence) will each produce a set of empirically validintervention procedures. In the final 2 years of the project, these separate interventionprocedures will be combined into a comprehensive treatment package, and the effectsof this package will be evaluated for both short- and long-term effects on the socialinteraction of young children. Data analysis will include ANOVAs and MANOVAs, andmulitple baseline across subjects designs for the intervention studies. ANTICIPATED PRODUCTS: Dissemination activities will be directed at earlyintervention personnel and researchers and will include journal articles, conferencepresentations, training materials, and teacher manuals. PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: McDonnell, Andrea P. University of Utah Department of Special Education MBH 221 Salt Lake City, UT 84112 801-581-3318 Maximizing Effective Teacher-Mediated Intervention in Inclusive PreschoolsImplementing Developmentally Appropriate Practice GRANT NUMBER: H023N40015 BEGINNING DATE: 9/01/94 ENDING DATE: 8/31/97 ABSTRACT PURPOSE: This project will develop and validate a package of teacher-mediatedintervention strategies that can be effectively used to teach preschool children withdevelopmental delays and disabilities. The children involved in the study are enrolled ininclusive preschool programs implementing developmentally appropriate practices. METHOD: The studies combine single subject methodology, eco- behavioralmeasures, a national survey, and social validity measures to examine: (1) theeffectiveness of the teacher-mediated intervention package across a variety ofparticipants and target skills, specifically addressing skill acquisition, generalization, andmaintenance; (2) the comparative effectiveness of the full teacher-mediatedinterventionpackage with two subcomponents of the package, including each interventionists' effecton child outcomes and their acceptability to the interventionist; (3) the effects ofimplementation of the package on subjects' level of enagagement, interactions withpeers, and selected variables within the classroom; (4) the extent to which a cumulativetraining package is effective in teaching preschool teachers to implement the packagefor the purpose of teaching skills to children with developmental disabilities; (5)perceptions of preschool teachers who have implemented the combined interventionpackage; and (6) the perceptions of parents of preschool children concerning theprocedures and outcomes of intervention. ANTICIPATED PRODUCTS: Project results will be disseminated through publication ofresearch reports to early childhood and special education journals, as well aspresentations at national conferences. A cumulative Effective Teacher-MediatedIntervention training manual will also be developed and disseminated along with atrainers' guide. PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: McWilliam, Robin University of North Carolina Frank Porter Graham Child Development Center CB #8180 Chapel Hill, NC 27599-8180 919-966-7485 Teaching Styles in Early Intervention: Responsiveness and Directiveness GRANT NUMBER: H023C40015 BEGINNING DATE: 7/01/94 ENDING DATE: 6/30/99ABSTRACT PURPOSE: This project will research the extent to which teachers of infants, toddlers,and preschoolers with disabilities should teach by: (1) responding to child initiations; (2)giving them directions; and (3) combining responsiveness and directiveness. METHOD: Staff will conduct research in three stages to address relevant issues: (1) naturalisticinquiry in classrooms; (2) experimental inquiry in classrooms; and (3) experimentalinquiry in one-on-one teaching situations. Ten teachers and their students (N=60: 20with disabilities; 40 without disabilities) at a university child care center will be used inStudy 1. The naturalistic inquiries will provide information about the current state ofpractice in a small sample of teachers and children, which will guide procedures andmeasurement systems for controlled experiments. The first controlled experiment,again with a small sample, will guide the development of procedures for a largefield-based controlled experiment. Four substudies in the first 2 years will beimplemented to conduct the naturalistic inquiry. First, the effects of teaching style onchild engagement will be investigated. Second, the antecedents of teaching styles willbe studied. Third, the long-term outcomes differentiated by teaching style will beresearched. Fourth, the classroom atmosphere will be investigated with qualitativeprocedures. The second major study, conducted in Year 3, will consist of trainingteachers to use three different styles and analyzing child engagement. The third majorstudy, conducted in Years 4 aqnd 5, will investigate engagement and task performanceof children in teacher-child dyads exposed to specific teaching styles. ANTICIPATED PRODUCTS: The results of this research will expand the knowledgebase regarding the relationship between teaching and child behavior in the field of earlyintervention, provide information of use to teachers and parents as they implementinterventions, and guide preservice and inservice efforts to train teachers to usedevelopmentally appropriate and effective methods. PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Santos, Rosa M. Utah State University Department of Special Education & Rehabilitation Logan, UT 83422-2865 801-797-2382 Research on Behavioral Momentum with Preschool Children with Disabilities GRANT NUMBER: H023B50056 BEGINNING DATE: 8/01/95 ENDING DATE: 7/31/96ABSTRACT PURPOSE: The project will examine variables that may influence the effects ofhigh-probability response situations on low-probability response situations. METHOD: This study will examine the effects on long and short inter-trial intervals betweenhigh-probability response opportunities. High probability responses to mands (i.e.,obligated commands that call for child response) will be followed by low-probabilitymands. Children's attempts to respond to low-probability response mands, correctresponses to low-probability response mands, and duration of time children areengaged in learning activities will be examined within an alternating treatments design. In addition, three early childhood special educators will be asked to sub- jectivelyevaluate the instructional procedures using a questionnaire. Participating subjects willbe ten preschool-aged children with develop-mental delays attending various localpreschool programs. The study will be conducted during center-time activities in theselected classrooms or at Head Start. ANTICIPATED PRODUCTS: This research will begin to identify systematicinstructionalprocedures in the natural environment that early childhood special educators may useto increase young children's instruc-tional engagement and teach them new skills andbehaviors. During this project, systematic teaching procedures will be identified anddisseminated through ERIC, journal publications, a state conference presentation andinearly childhood special education courses at the research university. PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Schaufler, Janet H. Pennsylvania State University Department of Education School Psychology and Special Education 216 CEDAR Building University Park, PA 16802-3109 814-863-2280 The Identification of Educational and Emotional Support Needs for Teen Fathers ofInfants with Special Needs: A Survey of Service Providers for Teen Parents GRANT NUMBER: H023B50006 BEGINNING DATE: 9/01/95 ENDING DATE: 8/31/96 ABSTRACT PURPOSE: The purpose of this project is to assist service providers in meeting theneeds of teen fathers of infants with disabilities by identifying needs for training,available services, major obstacles, and current levels of involvement of teen fathers incaring for their children. METHOD: Project staff will begin with a comprehensive mail and telephone survey toidentify agencies which provide support programs for teen parents, including fathers,with a special focus on programs that provide special programs to meet the parenttraining and emotional support needs of this population. Information gained from areview of the literature will then be analyzed to develop a survey instrument. After pilottesting in Pennsylvania, this survey instrument will be revised and sent to randomagencies from a nationwide list of agencies providing parent training and emotionalsupport programs for teen parents. Based on evaluative information gathered from thisnationwide survey, a plan for a model program will be developed. This model isexpected to consist of a menu of services and approaches to parent training andemotional support for teen fathers of infants with special needs, and will be reviewed byat least two agencies prior to finalization. The final model will draw on the strengthsandexperience of all agencies responding to the survey, and details of the model will bemade available to each identified agency. ANTICIPATED PRODUCTS: In addition to feedback to participating agencies, projectfindings will be disseminated through a variety of media. A presentation abstract will beprepared and submitted to a national conference on special education, and a briefsummary of project findings will be sent to newsletters for teen parenting and earlyintervention programs. A journal article on project findings will also be submitted to apeer-reviewed special education journal. PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Scott, Keith G. University of Miami 750 N.W. 15th Street Miami, FL 33136 305-547-6624 Studies of Infants and Toddlers Prenatally Exposed to Cocaine GRANT NUMBER: H023C30079 BEGINNING DATE: 7/01/93 ENDING DATE: 6/30/98 ABSTRACT PURPOSE: This project will investigate the effectiveness of several interventionmodelsfor serving infants and toddlers prenatally exposed to cocaine. METHOD: Theproject will include 3 intervention models: (1) a center-based program that will provideparticipating children with 25 hours per week of early intervention services withtransportation provided; (2) a home program which will provide participants with 3 hoursper week of home visits; and (3) a follow-up program which will not include any plannedintervention programs. Children in all three groups will receive medical monitoring anddevelopmental assessments. A parallel qualitative research effort will employ a casestudy methodology to provide a in-depth analysis of all three models. Three furtherstudies will include: (1) a comparison of motor intervention models; (2) an investigationof play and language development; and (3) a study of effects of early interventionmodels on the emergence of nonverbal communication. Costs of intervention modelswill also be studied. ANTICIPATED PRODUCTS: Expected outcomes of the field-initiated research effortwill include definitive knowledge of the early development of children prenatallyexposedto cocaine, the effects of three intervention service models on child outcomes, and thecost effectiveness of the three models. PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Severson, Herbert Oregon Research Institute 1899 Willamette Eugene, OR 97401 503-484-2123 Validation and Field Trial of a Multiple Gating Approach to Preschool Screening forBehavior Problems GRANT NUMBER: H023C30017 BEGINNING DATE: 10/01/93 ENDING DATE: 9/30/97 ABSTRACT PURPOSE: This research will assess the psychometric characteristics and validity of amultiple gating screening procedure designed to identify at-risk preschool children, ages3 through 5. METHOD: Researchers have developed a screening system known as PreschoolScreening for Behavior Problems (PSBP) that uses multiple gating. Procedures usedby PSBP consist of three interrelated stages cross-validating results. Stage oneinvolves preschool teachers ranking students using objective criteria for bothexternalizing and internalizing behavior dimensions. Children identified in this stage arethen targeted for teacher-completed behavior rating measures in the second stage. Students exceeding normative criteria on stage two measures pass this gate and areassessed further on stage three behavioral observation measures. These directobservations will be recorded in the classroom. Six separate studies in the first year willestablish the reliability and validity of the PSBP process. In the second yearresearchers will establish normative databases, cutoff scores, and decision criteria forstage two rating scales and stage three observational measures. In year three theefficacy and social validity of the PSBP will be assessed. The fourth and final projectyear will focus on disseminating results. ANTICIPATED PRODUCTS: This research will produce systematic, cost-effectiveprocedures and instruments for the early identification of preschool students exhibitingbehavioral profiles that put them at risk for more severe behavior disorders. Thevalidated PSBP will be a psychometrically sound, field tested procedure that can beeasily implemented by preschool personnel. PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Shapiro, Beppie Hawaii Department of Health 1600 Kapiolani Boulevard Suite 1401 Honolulu, HI 96814 808-942-8223 Evaluation of Part H Child Find GRANT NUMBER: H159A40001 BEGINNING DATE: 1/01/95 ENDING DATE: 12/31/96 ABSTRACT PURPOSE: This project will evaluate the effectiveness of child find operations inHawaii, what gaps and barriers may be impeding success, and how the child findcomponent could be strengthened. METHOD: Data from recent years will be collected from existing agency records. In aneffort to identify children "missed" by child find, records will be studied by samplingapproximately 400 of the 4000 children certified eligible each year. Impact data will becollected through surveys and interviews. The coordinating council (HEICC) and theEvaluation Advisory Group will create initial standards against which to evaluate theeffectiveness of child find. Interviews, focus groups, and surveys of families, programstaff and administrators will identify gaps and barriers to a more effective child findprogram. Samples of 40 families will be drawn from program records. A ProjectAdvisory Group will consider these identified gaps and barriers, and describe ways toimprove policy and practice. Necessary resources and impacts will be studied withinput from program and families. ANTICIPATED PRODUCTS: Information about Hawaii's process and service utilizationwill be summarized in a report that will provide a basis of comparison for other states asthey generate their own data. A Guide for Conducting Evaluations of Part H Child Findwill be produced. The guide will describe a model of evaluation of child find that can beadopted to examine and improve any state's system of services. PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Simmons, Deborah University of Oregon College of Education 5219 University Eugene, OR 97403-5219 503-346-3486 Project VOCABULARY: Understanding Early Growth & Remediation Effects forStudents with Disabilities or At Risk of Reading Failure GRANT NUMBER: H023C50121 BEGINNING DATE: 9/15/95 ENDING DATE: 9/14/00 ABSTRACT PURPOSE: The project will increase understanding of the early vocabulary growth ofchildren with disabilities or at risk of reading failure; and investigate parsimonious andefficacious means of remediating vocabulary delay. METHOD: Strand I (Measuring and Monitoring Vocabulary Growth) consists of fourstudies designed to develop and validate a classroom-based measure of vocabulary tomonitor growth over the critical period of kindergarten and first grade. The relationshipbetween early vocabulary growth and reading acquisition will also be examined. StrandII (Evaluating the Effects of Strategic Intervention) is comprised of two studiesexamining the independent and combined effects of incidental and explicit methods ofvocabulary learning. This strand of research will further investigate the level and type ofintervention necessary to promote and sustain vocabulary growth in students withdisabilities or at risk of reading failure. Research will be conducted over a five-yearperiod. Two distinct geographic regions will be included to increase the generalizabilityof findings. Twenty-four to thirty kindergarten and first grade teachers will participate ineach year of the project. Each teacher will nominate four students with learningdisabilities or vocabulary delay and four average achieving students. Vocabularyperformance will be correlated with the Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test-Revised. Published norm-referenced tests will be used to assess receptive and expressivevocabulary. A classroom-based measure of vocabulary knowledge will be used toassess the depth and breadth of words sampled from project classrooms. TheLanguage Sample Analysis will be used to assess important vocabulary indices emittedby students during natural speech, including mean length of utterance, number ofdifferent words, and total number of words. Finally, measures of reading fluency andcomprehension will be used to assess reading achievement. ANTICIPATED PRODUCTS: Outcomes of this project will include: (1) a relevant anduseful measure for gauging vocabulary growth in children with disabilities or vocabularydelay; (2) more thorough understanding of the vocabulary knowledge of children inrelation to curricular expectations; (3) validated methods to enhance vocabulary growth;and (4) methods of strengthening and supporting vocabulary growth over time. Theseoutcomes will be disseminated through research reports, inservice workshops,curricular materials, and a classroom-based index of vocabulary growth. PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Smith, Sylvia B. University of Oregon College of Education Behavioral Research & Training 230 Education DLIL Eugene, OR 97403-5262 503-346-3486 Efficiency and Efficacy of Phonological Awareness Instruction for Pre-ReadersAt-Risk for Reading Disabilities GRANT NUMBER: H023B50012 BEGINNING DATE: 7/01/95 ENDING DATE: 6/30/96 ABSTRACT PURPOSE: The project will extend the research base for children at risk of readingfailure by: (1) experimentally evaluating the efficacy and efficiency of two instructionalapproaches through a combination of formative and summative measures ofphonological awareness; and (2) investigating the developmental appropriateness oftwo sizes of phonological units of instruction. METHOD: From six kindergarten classrooms in two schools, approximately 150chidlren will be screened to determine those at risk for reading disabilities. Pre-intervention levels of phoneme segmentation ability will be defined with twostandardized normative and formative measures: scores from a standardized phonemicsegmentation instrument; and comparisons of school building segmentation norms andindividual levels of phonemic segmentation. Children falling below the 25th percentileinphonological awareness will be assigned to one of two instructional approaches for tenweeks of intervention; phonemic segmentation, or onset-time segmentation as ascaffolded step prior to phonemic segmentation. A control group of peers will be taughtphonological awareness from current basal curricular materials. An experimentaldesign with multiple methodologies will be used including measurements of time toproficiency, pre/post experimental control, and time series. Efficiency, the primarydependent variable, will be measured by comparing the levels in phonemicsegmentation over time to the number of sessions required to achieve proficiency. Efficacy will be determined by pre/post comparisons of phonemic segmentation abilityand a phonemic segmentation maintenance test two weeks after intervention. ANTICIPATED PRODUCTS: Primary outcomes from this study will include: (1)extension of the research base identifying efficient and effective methods for teachingphonological awareness to prereaders at risk for reading failure; (2) profile analysis ofindividual children's responses to phonological awareness instruction through formativeassessment; and (3) professional conference and inservice presentations and journalarticles articulating the relationship between design principles and efficiency, efficacy,and intensity in phonological awareness instruction for prereaders at risk for readingfailure. PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Strain, Phillip University of Colorado Campus Box 123 PO Box 173364 Denver, CO 80217 303-556-2771 Social Relationship Development in Community Contexts for Young Children withSevere Disabilities GRANT NUMBER: H023C50169 BEGINNING DATE: 7/01/95 ENDING DATE: 6/30/98 ABSTRACT PURPOSE: This project will conduct research to investigate the social relationshipsexperienced by young children with severe disabilities. METHOD: The project will undertake a series of studies which will focus on: (1)demonstrating the efficacy of intensive, longitudinally-applied intervention tactics; (2)understanding how young typical children's attitudes and behaviors can be made morefacilitative of relationship-building with peers who have disabilities; and (3) determininghow and why consumers adopt and use effective instructional practices in the socialrelationship domain. The first study will provide community-based social relationshipintervention for young children with autism. Study Two will include a psychometricstudy of existing methodology for assessing the presence or absence of preschoolers'stereotyped views of persons with disabilities in community contexts. An interventionstudy will then aim at maximizing positive and supportive attitudes and behaviors asexpressed by young children, who are not disabled, in community settings. The thirdstudy will solicit the concerns of potential adopters of intervention plans regarding theissues, incentives, and disincentives associated with adopting best practices. Thisassessment information will be followed by targeting community providers for adoptionof the interventions developed in the first two studies. ANTICIPATED PRODUCTS: The project will develop: (1) empirically basedarticles/chapters; (2) conceptual articles/chapters; (3) white papers synthesizing relatedpolicy issues; (4) intervention manuals for direct-line staff; (5) news segments; and (6)yearly monographs on the state of practice related to relationship-building interventions. PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Sturtz, Janey L. University of North Carolina Frank Porter Graham Child Development Center CB# 8180 Chapel Hill, NC 27599-8180 919-966-6634 Examining Child Care Providers' Attitudes Toward Substance Exposed ChildrenandTheir Familes GRANT NUMBER: H023B50051 BEGINNING DATE: 1/01/95 ENDING DATE: 12/31/96 ABSTRACT PURPOSE: This project will examine child-care providers' self-perceived knowledgeand skills, as well as their attitudes toward working with children who have beenexposed to controlled substances and their families. METHOD: Two surveys will be employed: Self Rating of Professionals' Knowledge andSkills and Attitudes Toward Special Populations Survey. The latter survey will alsoassess attitudes toward children with Down syndrome and chronically ill children forcomparison purposes. These surveys will be administered to 100 child care providersrecruited from public, private religious, and private secular child care settings prior to atwo-hour training session. The purpose of the training session is to increase providers'knowledge of the physical, psychosocial, and educational impact of substanceexposureon infants and toddlers. It is hypothesized that child care providers' attitudes towardworking with substance-exposed families are poorer than toward working with childrenwith chronic illness or Down syndrome; it is also hypothesized that these attitudes arerelated to self-perceived level of knowledge and skills in working with this population,and extent of prior training in issues surrounding children with such exposure. ANTICIPATED PRODUCTS: Examining care providers' attitudes toward families with ahistory of substance-abuse will be useful in assessing training needs, and in estimatingthe effectiveness of such training as a form of intervention, and a change agent inadjusting providers' attitudes. Project results will be disseminated to other practitionersand researchers through publication of articles in scientific journals and throughpresentations at national, state, and local conferences. PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Swisher, Linda University of Arizona Department of Speech and Hearing Sciences Tucson, AZ 85721 520-620-0420 Specific Language Impairment: Language and Generalization GRANT NUMBER: H023C40118 BEGINNING DATE: 10/01/94 ENDING DATE: 9/30/97 ABSTRACT PURPOSE: This project will attempt to gain a better understanding the poorbound-morpheme acquisition (BMA) of children with specific language impairment (SLI)in preschool students through a variety of bound-morpheme learning tasks. METHOD: A variety of bound-morpheme learning tasks will be administered to childrenwith SLI (N=120) and children with normal language development (N=120), 40 each perproject year. The task variations will be designed to explore the three components ofthe BMA process: vocabulary learning, bound-morpheme learning, andbound-morpheme generalization. In Project Year 1, the effects of vocabulary learningon bound-morpheme learning and generalization will be assessed. In Project Year 2,the effects of phonological versus semantic enhancements on bound-morphemelearning and generalization will be examined. In Project Year 3, the effects ongeneralization of reducing vocabulary load as well as emphasizing the affix versusemphasizing the contrast between affixed and unaffixed forms will be investigated. Ineach of the three project years, a set of associated tasks that assess skills likely to bepertinent to children's BMA performance will also be administered. These tasksinvestigate sentence memory, nonverbal rule induction, utilization of knownbound-morphemes and phonological and semantic similarity effects. Statisticaltechniques, such as multiple regression analyses, will be used to examine the results ofthe bound-morpheme learning task, as well as their relationship to those of theassociated tasks. ANTICIPATED PRODUCTS: The combined results of these studies will clarify whethertheories of storage/access deficits or rule-induction deficits better predict subject-groupdifferences. In addition, the results will determine which components of the BMAprocess (vocabulary learning, bound-morpheme learning, and/or bound-morphemegeneralization) should be the focus of clinical intervention. PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Trenk, Norman S. University of Memphis Department of Instruction & Curriculum Leadership Memphis, TN 38152 901-678-2533 Strategies for Promoting Social Relationships BetweenYoung Children with andwithout Disabilities GRANT NUMBER: H023N50009 BEGINNING DATE: 8/21/95 ENDING DATE: 8/20/98 ABSTRACT PURPOSE: This project will extend the line of research on attitudes towardpreschoolers with mild to severe disabilities, and will develop naturalistic andeconomical strategies for effectively promoting social relationships among preschoolchildren with and without disabilities. METHOD: Over a three year period, 17 kindergarten teachers and 15 specialeducators, 250 kindergarteners, and 124 preschoolers with mild to severe multipledisabilities from Memphis City Schools will participate. Study One will use arandomized group design to examine the effects on social contact, children's books,andguided discussions on the attitudes of kindergarten children toward children withdisabilities. In Study Two, a component analysis will be used to examine theeffectiveness of individual components of the intervention package. Study Three willexamine the feasibility and effectiveness of the intervention package as a class-wideprogram for promoting acceptance of individuals with disabilities. ANTICIPATED PRODUCTS: Products will include a new, validated approach topromoting social relationships among nondisabled, kindergarten-age children andyoungchildren with disabilities, including a set of procedures within a training manual forteachers and support staff to use the methods developed and researched through thisgrant activity. PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Trivette, Carol Orlena Hawks Pucket Institute, Inc. 116 South Sterling Street Suite 205 P.O. Box 2277 Morganton, NC 28680 704-433-2661 Second Generation Research in Early Intervention: Long-Term Outcomes inChildren and Their Families GRANT NUMBER: H023C50171 BEGINNING DATE: 10/01/95 ENDING DATE: 9/30/00 ABSTRACT PURPOSE: The project will conduct a second generation research study to examinethe long-term effects of early intervention on children and their families. METHOD: This study will involve the long-term follow-up of 300+ children and their families whoparticipated in the Family, Infant, and Preschool Program (a family-centered model)between 1981 and 1985. Data on participating children, now between 14 and 16 yearsof age, has already been collected. Multiple regression analyses by sets will be theprincipal means of assessing long-term outcomes, and a regression analysis by setswillbe used to relate several sets of independent variables to the dependent variable ofinterest. Independent variables will include: parent and family characteristics; childcharacteristics; social support factors; child diagnosis/development; and interventionfeatures. Long term outcomes variables will include: child's social adaptive level;independent behavior; school achievement; intelligence quotient; school placement;mainstreaming outcomes; parent well-being, family well-being; level of social support;parental sense of control over services; and parental satisfaction with services. ANTICIPATED PRODUCTS: This investigation will yield the first long-term follow-updata on family-centered intervention practices. A nontechnical report will bedisseminated to state and federal legislators, State Education Agency (SEA) staff in all50 states, the administrators of local public school systems and other agenciesresponsible for early intervention services. Findings will also be published innewsletters serving primarily administrative and policy-making audiences. In addition,research findings will be submitted to a variety of journals and conferences serving bothresearchers and educators. PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Wagner, Mary SRI International 333 Ravenswood Avenue Menlo Park, CA 94025 415-859-3571 Longitudinal Study of the Impact of Early Intervention Services on Infants andToddlers withDisabilities GRANT NUMBER: H159E50001 BEGINNING DATE: 9/30/95 ENDING DATE: 9/30/00 ABSTRACT PURPOSE: The project will examine the extent to which Part H is being implementedatthe local level and examine the relationships between the extent of implementation andthe child and family outcomes achieved. METHOD: This study will document the developmental trajectories of 1,800 children inthe first five years of life and examine the relationships between the growth experiencedby children with different disabling conditions and the early intervention services theyreceive. Subjects will represent urban, suburban, and rural communities, includingcommunities with high proportions of minority group families, in 18 communities locatedin 12 states. Multiple areas of child and family functioning will be measured. Child andfamily outcomes will be assessed when the child enters early intervention and at each1-year anniversary thereafter until the child reaches 36 months of age. All children willbe assessed and family outcome data collected at 36 months and again at 60 months. Data gathered will address the provider, nature, quantity, quality, and cost of earlyintervention services received by each child and family. The study will also collectinformation about the nature of Part H implementation at both community and statelevels. Information on behavior and services in preschool special education andkindergarten will be collected as children age and enter new educational settings. Hierarchical linear modeling will be used to examine the growth trajectories of childrenwith different disabilities and to determine the relationship between child growth andPart H services. ANTICIPATED PRODUCTS: Project findings will be disseminated to potentialaudiences, including policymakers, federal, state, and local administrators, researchers,practitioners, parents of children with disabilities, advocates, and professionalorganizations. Findings will be disseminated in several formats, including: annualcomprehensive reports at the end of Years 3, 4, and 5; brief reports in each of theseyears; short summaries of key findings; articles submitted for publication in professionaljournals; and conference presentations and briefings. PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Wolery, Mark Allegheny-Singer Research Institute 320 East North Avenue Pittsburgh, PA 15212 412-359-1523 Using Instructive Feedback to Promote Future Learning GRANT NUMBER: H023A50013 BEGINNING DATE: 10/01/95 ENDING DATE: 9/30/96 ABSTRACT PURPOSE: The project will evaluate the use of expansion instructive feedback in smallgroup and low-structure activities and to assess its effects on the efficiency of futureinstruction. METHOD: Two studies will be conducted using expansion instructive feedback withbetween 12 and 20 children with disabilities ages 4 to 8 years. A parallel treatmentsdesign will be used. Study 1 will be based in small group instructional contexts, whileStudy 2 will focus on low-structure, child-directed activities. These low-structureactivities may include free play, art, and snack time. Behaviors to be taught will beindividualized for each child, but will focus mostly on discrete responses from functionalacademic and communicative domains. Two behavior sets will be taught in alternatingdaily sessions, one set with and one set without instructive feedback. In instructionalconditions of both studies, a constant time delay procedure will be used involvingensuring the child's attention, presenting a stimulus and task direction, using a controlprompt immediately, presenting a short response interval, providing consequences andinstructional feedback, and presenting an inter-trial interval. Student behavior will beobserved and assessed, and the role of instructional feedback in improving futureinstruction will be evaluated. ANTICIPATED PRODUCTS: Project staff will submit three manuscripts for publicationin professional literature. An instructional manual will be developed, evaluated, anddisseminated for preparing teachers to use instructive feedback, and findings will besubmitted to two national conferences. A fact sheet describing instructive feedbackresearch will be mailed to a large mailing list of interested practitioners. Noticesregarding the manual and fact sheet will also be posted on electronic bulletinboards. PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Wolery, Mark Werts, Margaret G. Allegheny-Singer Research Institute 320 East North Avenue Pittsburgh, PA 15212 412-359-1523 Evaluation of Transition-Based Teaching and Embedded Instruction On Learning byPreschoolers with Disabilities GRANT NUMBER: H023A50004 BEGINNING DATE: 10/01/95 ENDING DATE: 9/30/96 ABSTRACT PURPOSE: This project will compare the effects of combining transition- basedteaching and embedding instruction within activities to each technique as employedseparately. METHOD: Two studies will be conducted comparing transition-based teaching andembedding instruction within activities on children's learning of individualized goals. The studies will involve 10-16 children, between 3 and 6 years of age, with disabilities. Researchers will employ a parallel treat-ments design. Students will be taughtbehaviors from their individualized education plans (IEPs), and both the rate of theirlearning and the extent of their learning will be compared to those of students receivingonly one or the other of the teaching methods being examined. ANTICIPATEDPRODUCTS: Project findings will be disseminated to teachers, teacher trainers,investigators, and families. Staff will submit three manuscripts for publication inprofessional journals; develop and disseminate an instructional manual for teachersinterested in using these strategies; submit the results of the studies to two nationalconferences; mail a fact sheet on these strategies to families of preschoolers withdisabilities; and place notices concerning the manual and fact sheet on electronicbulletin boards. PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Wolery, Ruth A. University of Pittsburgh Department of Instruction and Learning 4K31 Forbes Quadrangle Pittsburgh, PA 15260 The Effects of a Writing Intervention on the Development of Phonological Skills inPrimary Grade Children with Learning and Reading Disabilities GRANT NUMBER: H023B50024 BEGINNING DATE: 1/01/95 ENDING DATE: 10/31/96 ABSTRACT PURPOSE: The project will provide and evaluate results of instruction emphasizingboth phonological and sound-to-letter skills while students are engaged at a meaningfultask rather than a skill and drill practice task. METHOD: Students with learning disabilities in first through third grades (N=16-20) willbe given opportunities to use the writing process as a means of developing bothphonology and letter-sound skills. Students will write daily in their own journals and willbe encouraged to attend to the phonology of the language system by using inventedspellings for words they cannot spell correctly. It is expected that students will makegains in phonological awareness, spelling, and reading skills. A multiple-probe,single-subject research design will be employed, and curriculum-based measures inphonological awareness, spelling, and reading will be taken weekly. Multiple probemeasures will be graphed to monitor ongoing progress, and will be shared withstudents' teachers. In addition, special education teachers will be interviewed threetimes to examine their perceptions about using the writing process as a literacyintervention. ANTICIPATED PRODUCTS: An information packet will be developed for disseminationto special education teachers and teacher trainers. The packet will provide usefulinformation about the reading process and will suggest ways to use writing activities tofacilitate development of reading skills. Samples from study participants' journalwritings and teacher interviews will be featured in the packet. PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Yoder, Paul J. Vanderbilt University Peabody College Box 328 Nashville, TN 37203 615-322-8464 Generalized, Transitional, and Longitudinal Effects of Prelinguistic CommunicationIntervention GRANT NUMBER: H023C20152 BEGINNING DATE: 1/01/93 ENDING DATE: 12/31/97 ABSTRACT PURPOSE: This project will investigate effects of prelinguistic communicationintervention on: (1) children's generalized prelinguistic communication skills; (2) parents'use of behaviors that facilitate children's language development; and (3) children'slanguage development and linguistic communication. METHOD: Sixty children with communication delays who are at risk for relateddisabilities will be seen five times over a 2-year period. Half of the subjects will serveasa contrast group, while the other half receives staff-implemented intervention. Treatment group subjects will remain in intervention for 6 months or until they meet fivemastery criteria. Treatment goals include: action and vocal imitation of familiar andunfamiliar models, participation in social routines, requesting, commenting, andcomprehension and expression of vocabulary that encodes the key word for what thechild was communicating nonverbally. Intervention techniques will include contingentimitation, scaffolded modeling, environmental arrangement, and violations of routines. ANTICIPATED PRODUCTS: If parents in the experimental group use more behaviorsfacilitating language development, such findings will support the important bidirectionalassumption of the family-systems approach to intervention and the transactional theoryof development, two theoretical models undergirding Public Law 99-457, Part H. Afterdetermining the effectiveness of intervention, results and validated interventionprocedures will be disseminated to practitioners and researchers. PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Younghee, Kim University of Oregon College of Education Early Intervention Program Eugene, OR 97403 503-346-0807 Activity-Based Assessment: A Functional Approach to Determining Eligibility ofYoung Children with Disabilities GRANT NUMBER: H023B50028 BEGINNING DATE: 8/01/95 ENDING DATE: 7/31/96 ABSTRACT PURPOSE: The project will investigate the effectiveness and utility of Activity-BasedAssessment for determining eligibility of young children with disabilities for earlyintervention services. METHOD: The research consists of two studies, each using a mixed factorial design. In Study 1, 20 parents of children who are referred to state agencies for evaluation ofeligibility for early childhood special education programs will be selected as subjects. This study will examine (1) the functionality of test items as measured by parents usingthe Functional Skills Checklist (FSC), and (2) parental satisfaction with their role andinvolvement in the assessment process as measured by a Parental SatisfactionQuestionnaire. Study 2 will select 20 early interventionists as subjects, and willexamine(1) the functionality of test items as measured by early interventionists using the FSCand (2) the degree of linkage between eligibility assessment information of the ActivityBased Assessment and intervention programming versus a traditional assessmentmeasure using the Intervention Linkage Checklist. This study will be designed forreplication to further define effects of the alternative eligibility assessment procedurewith different subjects, locations, and test comparisons. ANTICIPATED PRODUCTS: The project plans to complete the following disseminationactivities: presentations at professional conferences and university seminars, journalpublications, monographs and administration manuals, and inservice technicalassistance and consultation. Top of Page Back to ERIC Menu Back to CEC Home Page copyright © 1996 ERIC Clearinghouse on Disabilities and Gifted Education Last updated: October29, 1996 Send updates to: ericec@cec.sped.org URL: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm WT02-B20-145IA001-000011-B033-332http://www.cec.sped.org:80/osep/9instruc.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101080446 text/html 37986HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 08:04:47 GMTLast-modified: Tuesday, 29-Oct-96 19:15:00 GMTContent-length: 37793Content-type: text/html OSEP Special Education Research Projects 4. INSTRUCTIONAL EFFECTIVENESS, MODELS, ANDLEARNING PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Ashmead, Dan Vanderbilt University Peabody College Department of Special Education Box 328 Nashville, TN 37203 615-322-8160 Auditory Training for Spatial Orientation in Children with Visual Impairment GRANT NUMBER: H023C40107 BEGINNING DATE: 9/01/94 ENDING DATE: 8/31/97 ABSTRACT PURPOSE: The project will study how children with visual impairments can use naturallyoccurring auditory information to maintain their spatial orientation while moving about. METHOD: For the first project area, staff will conduct a functional assessment of soundlocalization. A practical, standardized test for the precision of sound localization will bedeveloped for use by mobility instructors. This test will be assessed for its ability to predictproblems with travel skills. For the second component, staff will study the guidance oflocomotion via sound fields. A training procedure will be developed to enhance sensitivity toreflected sound and "sound shadows" in a safe environment allowing repeated practice. Theprocedure will be standardized and made available to mobility instructors using inexpensivematerials. For the third component, staff will focus on spatial orientation from dynamiclistening. A procedure will be developed for training children about room layout by listening to movingsound sources. The procedure draws on recent advances in audio recording forthree-dimensionalplayback. The sample will be children with visual impairments (N=200) and children withoutvisual impairments (N=16) aged 6 to 12 years. For the assessment, the 16 children withoutvisualimpairments will participate. The classroom-based procedure will use portable equipmentdesigned to be easily moved, and will produce computer-generated speech noise. The testingprocedure will require children to judge the position of a sound relative to a reference positionthat is straight ahead at ear level. Staff will later use results of these studies to explore aprocedure for making an audio tape recording that will portray the spatial layout of the trainingroom when played back over earphones. ANTICIPATED PRODUCTS: This project will produce two standardized assessment andintervention procedures to contribute to the orientation and mobility training of children withvisual impairments. Results will be published in professional journals, workshops, andmanuals. PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Englert, Carol Michigan State University CEPSE 334 Erickson Hall East Lansing, MI 48824-1034 517-355-1835 The Development and Evaluation of an Early Intervention Program for Nonreaders andNonwriters GRANT NUMBER: H023C50089 BEGINNING DATE: 8/16/95 ENDING DATE: 8/15/99 ABSTRACT PURPOSE: This project will collaborate with teachers on the development, implementation, andevaluation of an integrated curricular approach designed to teach the self-regulated use ofcomprehension and composition skills and strategies to primary grade students with milddisabilities. The project will focus specifically on those who are nonconventional readers andwriters in grades 1-4. METHOD: In the first study, comparative and normative data will be collected onprimary-gradestudents with mild disabilities in order to provide baseline information for measuring effects oftheexperimental curriculum. Over the course of three years, 13 teachers and their 130 students withmild disabilities will participate. Analyses will focus on the short-term and multi-year effects ofthe curricular approach on teacher's instructional practices, and their special education students'reading and writing achievement, and metacognitive and strategy knowledge. Staff will alsostudywhether gaps between students in the experimental group and their nondisabled peers diminishover time. In the second study, the experimental curricular approach will be embedded inlanguage arts and content area subjects to evaluate the effectiveness of the curriculum when it ispresented as part of the regular education curriculum. Four regular education teachers in theprimary grades, their 16 mainstreamed students with mild disabilities, and all associated regulareducation students will participate in this study. The performance of mainstreamed students willbe contrasted with that of students who continue to receive the curricular approach in specialeducation settings. Pretest and posttest data will be analyzed to determine the effects of theexperimental curriculum on the achievement of students with learning disabilities, metacognitiveand strategy knowledge, and self-perceived competence. Specific consideration will be given todata providing information on the extent to which cognitive strategies in the experimentalcurriculum can be incorporated as part of the "regular" curriculum, and the relative effectivenessof the curriculum employed in regular education versus special education settings. ANTICIPATED PRODUCTS: At the conclusion of this research project, a disseminablecurricular approach will be available to advance teachers' knowledge and practice related to theimprovement of literacy instruction and the learning of young students with mild disabilities. Annual reports will be prepared and disseminated to academicians and teaching professionals. Anongoing series of executive summaries will be distributed to administrators and other keypersonnel of schools in the local service area. Project staff will be present findings throughconference presentations and journal articles. They will also be available for consultation withlocal school districts. PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Fuchs, Lynn S. Vanderbilt University Peabody College Department of Special Education Box 328 Nashville, TN 37203 615-343-4782 PROMISE: Practitioners and Researchers Orchestrating Model Innovations to StrengthenEducation GRANT NUMBER: H023G50005 BEGINNING DATE: 9/01/95 ENDING DATE: 8/31/99 ABSTRACT PURPOSE: This project will develop, validate, and disseminate a model forpractitioner-researcher collaboration and staff development, resulting in cutting-edge, successfulpractices that are implemented and sustained in schools. METHOD: Research will conduct two "generations" of research activity aimed at developinginstructional procedures that help teachers accommodate students with disabilities duringmainstream reading activity. In Years 1 and 2, staff will implement the PROMISE collaborativeresearch model with one school and a traditional "expert" model with a second school. Bothqualitative and quantitative methods will be used to examine the effects of these two contrastingresearch models on teacher beliefs and values, school culture, teacher practice, fidelity oftreatment implementation, and student outcomes. In Years 3 and 4, staff will study the effects ofthe research model in participating schools in terms of whether (and if so, how long) theseinnovations are sustained. In addition, staff will replicate the process initiated in Years 1 and 2and contrast collaborative versus expert models in two additional schools. Again, the projectwillgenerate information about the efficacy of further refined reading instruction. In replication ofYear 1 and 2 research, teachers in the first generation of schools will be responsible for staffdevelopment in the second generation of schools. ANTICIPATED PRODUCTS: PROMISE is expected to have national impact through thedevelopment of otherwise unavailable products and knowledge including: (1) the creation of amodel for school-university research collaboration that bridges between practice andresearch;(2) a manual and videotape designed to disseminate this model; (3) validated methods forincluding students with disabilities in general education for reading instruction; (4) a trainingmanual and videotape explicating and illustrating the reading methods; (5) research reports ontherelative effects of collaborative versus expert research models, on reading treatment components,and on specifying a model for school-university research partnerships. PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Gallup, Susan McNair Kameenui, Edward J. Springfield School District #19 Administration Office 525 Mill Street Springfield, OR 97477 541-726-3249 Project BRIDGE: Bridging Research and Instruction through Dynamic and GroundExchange GRANT NUMBER: H023G50021 BEGINNING DATE: 9/01/95 ENDING DATE: 8/31/99 ABSTRACT PURPOSE: The project will develop, field-test, and evaluate a model of elementary literacyeducation that is: (1) considerate of and sensitive to the regularities, routines, and resources ofindividual schools; (2) grounded in the dynamic and equitable exchange between professionalspractitioners and researchers; (3) sufficiently defined to generalize to other schools and producereplicable findings; and (4) sustainable by faculty most proximal and responsible for bringingabout change. METHOD: Research will be conducted over a four-year period. Forty general educationteachers, 8-10 special education teachers, and four school principals will participate along withfour university faculty. All students with identified reading disabilities, two children identifiedasat risk for reading failure, and two average-achieving peers will participate from each classroomfor a projected total of 280-300 children over the four year funding period. Each school willestablish two teams per school that will be responsible for developing specific mechanisms andstrategies of the BRIDGE model for their respective sites. One of these teams will represent K-2classes, the other grades 3-5. A modified multiple-case replication design will be used toevaluatethe effects and sustainability of the model. School culture, climate, and student literacyachievement, engagement,and attitudes will be assessed through a framework of measures to be determined at the localschool level. In addition to technical adequacy criteria, these measures will be proximal toschoolculture and climate and will provide a cadre of common assessment instruments acrossschools. ANTICIPATED PRODUCTS: Research reports from the first two project years will examinethereading literacy growth of students with disabilities within the context of several bridgingmechanisms and options at the school-building level. Curricular materials and reports fromYears3 and 4 will provide the theoretical base and practical implications for designing andimplementinga model for bridging research and practice that benefits students with disabilities and those at riskfor reading and academic failure. PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Logan, Kent R. Gwinnett County Public Schools P.O. Box 343 Lawrenceville, GA 30246 404-822-6525 PROJECT RILT GRANT NUMBER: H023G50033 BEGINNING DATE: 10/01/95 ENDING DATE: 9/30/99 ABSTRACT PURPOSE: This project will develop, implement, and evaluate the Research Instructional LeadTeacher (RILT) system, a model for bridging the gap between research and practice in theeducation of children with disabilities in general education classrooms. METHOD: The RILT model will address implementing effective, research-based instructionalstrategies for teaching students with learning disabilities, mild behavior disorders, and studentswith mild, moderate, severe, and profound disabilities in regular education elementaryclassrooms. Using an AB design, three time series experiments will be conducted to assess: (1) proceduralreliability of implementation of the RILT model, (2) procedural reliability of teacherimplementation of selected strategies, (3) learning of students with disabilities duringimplementation of the RILT process, (4) learning of students without disabilities who receiveremedial educational programs, and (5) teacher instructional and student responding(ecobehavioral) variables during implementation. Three ethnographic case studies will beconducted from the emic perspective to identify influential belief systems impacting selectionanduse of instructional strategies. Five studies using single subject experimental designs will beconducted to study the effectiveness of RILT. Resultsof a school climate survey will be examined to determine differences (if any) on variablesmeasured in schools after participation in RILT. The RILT model will then be replicated inanother school using local resources and action research data collection procedures. ANTICIPATED PRODUCTS: The project will develop: (1) an RILT model implementationmodule describing module components, roles of key research teachers, procedures forimplementation and training, and results of implementation in various settings; (2)"teacher-friendly" intervention modules describing research-based interventions, step-by-stepprocedures for implementing interventions in general education classrooms, adaptations made indifferent classrooms, and manageable data collection procedures. The project will also developdisseminable materials for professional journals and conferences. These reports and moduleswillbe made available to a variety of professional institutes, clearinghouses, and technical assistanceorganizations. PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Mather, Susan Gallaudet University 800 Florida Avenue Washington, DC 20002 202-651-5401 Visual Involvement in Literacy: Reading and Discussing Books with 3- to 8-Year OldStudents Who are Deaf and Hard-of Hearing GRANT NUMBER: H023N40040 BEGINNING DATE: 8/01/94 ENDING DATE: 7/31/97 ABSTRACT PURPOSE: The purpose of this project is to perform a sociolinguistic study of successfulinvolvement strategies in a visual modality that are used by teachers of varying backgrounds andstyles. The subject of the study will be equally divided between both hearing and deaf users ofManually Coded English (MCE) and American Sign Language (ASL). METHOD: The project initially involves transcription and analysis of 10 videotaped readingactivities by teachers and 10 videotaped discussion activities by teachers and students. First, fiveteachers (three hearing and two deaf) will be asked to read with their class one of two picturebooks, "Too Much Noise," which uses many words connected with sounds. Second, they shallbeasked to involve their students in discussing the first book after hearing the story. The same fiveteachers will then read a second book, "Five Chinese Brothers," which uses many wordsconnected with vision, again followed by adiscussion of the story with the class. The total number of students will be 52, and students shallbe videotaped as well. ANTICIPATED PRODUCTS: This project will provide an empirical basis for the transcriptionand analysis of successful involvement strategies; the transcription and analysis of teachers' andstudents' interaction in discussion; and an understanding of how the involvement strategies areimpacted by the teacher's target language and audiological background. The result will be aresearch-based model for developing inservice training for teachers, parents, and others whowishto read and discuss with students, to develop or enhance techniques for creating interpersonalinvolvement as well as more involvement in discussion in a visual modality. PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Mathes, Patricia Vanderbilt University Peabody College Department of Special Education Box 328 Nashville, TN 37203 615-322-2631 Is Learning Disabilities Nothing More than an Oversophistication of Low Achievement? AQuantitative and A Qualitative Synthesis GRANT NUMBER: H023E50004 BEGINNING DATE: 9/01/95 ENDING DATE: 8/31/97 ABSTRACT PURPOSE: The project will develop a definitive statement of whether, and to what extent,students with learning disabilities differ from peers who are low-achieving and who do not havelearning disabilities. METHOD: A meta-analysis will be conducted, addressing the following questions: (1) In termsof standard deviations, how does performance by low-achievers compare to that of students withlearning disabilities? (2) What magnitude of difference separates the two groups in terms ofsocialacceptance and classroom behavior? and (3) Are student grade levels, race, and socioeconomicfactors relevant to intergroup differences? A comprehensive review of published andunpublishedliterature will be conducted. These studies will then be coded along various methodological anddemographic dimensions and critiqued for technical quality. The staff will then calculateindividualeffect sizes for comparisons between the two groups of students (learning disabled/lowachieving)and analyze individual effect sizes along dimensions such as academic performance,achievement/performance discrepancies, social acceptance, and school behavior. In addition to themeta-analysis, staff will analyze a subset of studies meeting the highest standards of scientificrigoras part of a qualitative, best-evidence synthesis approach. Finally, findings will be submitted to apanel of experts for formative feedback, followed by further analyses based on theirfeedback. ANTICIPATED PRODUCTS: Project findings will be made available as quickly as possiblethrough submission of prepublication reports to the Educational Resource Information Center(ERIC). Results will also be published in relevant journals, including a possible special issue onthe subject to include both the meta-analysis and the best evidence synthesis. The final reportwillbe published as a monograph, and presentations will be made to scholarly audiences at nationalgatherings. PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Mathes, Patricia Vanderbilt University Peabody College Department of Special Education Box 328 Nashville, TN 37203 615-322-2631 Accommodating Student Diversity in General Education Classrooms: A DownwardExtension ofClass-wide Peer Tutoring GRANT NUMBER: H023N30003 BEGINNING DATE: 9/01/93 ENDING DATE: 8/31/96 ABSTRACT PURPOSE: This project will reorganize 1st- through 3rd-grade reading instruction to enhanceregular educators' abilities to accommodate a wider range of academic diversity in themainstream. METHOD: In Year 1, staff will develop and pilot Class-wide Peer Tutoring (CWPT) strategiesfor beginning readers in six 1st grade classrooms in two schools. Procedures will make use ofstrategies and principles of effective reading instruction. The impact of these procedures will becarefully monitored by means of curriculum-based measurement. In Year 2, staff will examineexperimentally the effectiveness and feasibility of the downward extension of the strategies withdifferent types of students in mainstream 1st-grade classrooms. Participants will include 201st-grade teachers and 120 children, half of whom will be either at risk for or already involved inspecial education services. In Year 3, the downward extension of the program will be used topermit teachers to tailor CWPT experiences to student's individual needs. Decisions aboutCWPTplacement will be aided by computer-managed curriculum-based assessment, which will beimplemented class-wide. ANTICIPATED PRODUCTS: Concrete products of the program will include a new, validatedtutoring system in reading suited to needs of various levels of readers and a manual for trainingteachers and support staff to use the methods developed through the program. PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Nelson, Ron Eastern Washington University MS-10 526 5th Street Cheney, WA 99004-2431 509-359-2815 Investigation of Sequence of Reciprocal Interactions within Behavioral Episodes of ProblemBehavior GRANT NUMBER: H023N50004 BEGINNING DATE: 9/01/95 ENDING DATE: 8/31/98 ABSTRACT PURPOSE: The project will develop and validate a conceptual model of the sequence ofreciprocal interactions within behavioral episodes (explosive escalating sequence of behaviors)ofproblem behavior. METHOD: Project staff anticipate gathering data on 500 to 600 behavioral episodes of problembehavior exhibited by a stratified sample of 100 to 110 elementary-aged students diagnosed asseriously behaviorally disabled, learning disabled, and/or developmentally disabled. Prior todirectobservations of behavioral episodes, a scatterplot analysis will be completed by educators oneachstudent to identify those times in which there is a high probability that behavioral episodes willoccur. Data will be summarized descriptively for the entire sample through simple univariatestatistics. Logistic regression techniques will be conducted to explicate the sequence ofreciprocalinteractions within behavioral episodes of problem behavior. These techniques will also be usedto explore the conditional probabilities among the behaviors associated with each interaction. ANTICIPATED PRODUCTS: The project expects to develop products such as: presentations atnational, state and regional conferences; professional articles, book chapters, and manuscripts;anddissemination through electronic networks to reach parent and practitioner networks. PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Padden, Carol Ramsey, Claire University of California at San Diego Department of Communication 9500 Gilman Drive Mail Stop 0503 La Jolla, CA 92093-0934 619-534-8795 Deaf Students as Readers and Writers: A Mixed-Mode Research Approach GRANT NUMBER: H023T30006 BEGINNING DATE: 10/01/93 ENDING DATE: 9/30/96 ABSTRACT PURPOSE: This project will examine the acquisition of reading and writing skills in deaf andhard-of-hearing children based on a quantitative study of child characteristics and a qualitativestudy of the classrooms they attend. METHOD: The quantitative study of student outcomes will include measures of studentlanguage, reading and writing skills, in two age-matched groups of deaf and hard-of-hearingstudents in two schooling settings. This study will also include institutional variables of thesettings where they receive their schooling, and analyses of associations between the students'performances and these institutional variables. The qualitative study of instructional practiceswillexamine two distinct settings which exemplify different modes of communication during readingand writing instruction. This study will be coupled with analysis of deaf and hard-of-hearingstudents' responses to instructional language as documented in their interaction and engagementwith instruction, in their reading and writing practices, and in their written products. ANTICIPATED PRODUCTS: Key research personnel will include activities to disseminateproject findings through their writing and publishing. PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Swanson, H. Lee University of California - Riverside School of Education Office of Research Affairs Riverside, CA 92521-0217 909-787-5228 Synthesis of Intervention Research GRANT NUMBER: H023E40014 BEGINNING DATE: 10/10/94 ENDING DATE: 9/30/96 ABSTRACT PURPOSE: The purpose of this project is twofold: (1) to analyze through a meta-analysis and asynthesis of single-subject research, as well as a narrative, instructional programs that haveproduced data on populations with learning disabilities; and (2) to integrate research findingsacross a diverse study of instructional interventions for students with learning disabilities. METHOD: For the first phase of the project during Year 1, a search of the relevant literaturewillinclude at least four on-line databases including: (1) the Educational Research InformationCenter(ERIC); (2) Psych Lit, a review of psychological journals; (3) Med-line, a review of all medicalliterature; and (4) Comprehensive Dissertation Abstracts. Search descriptors will includelearningdisabilities, reading disabilities, and dyslexia. In the second phase of Year 1 all group designintervention studies will be analyzed via a meta-analytical procedure. Analysis will primarilyconsist of individual study units and careful selection of studies for inclusion on methodologicaland conceptual criteria. Analysis will include: (1) the collection of published studies; (2) codingof study characteristics; (3) calculation of effect size as common measures of study outcomes;and(4) search for relations between study characteristics and study outcomes. Studies used in theintervention synthesis will include students with learning disabilities in the sample who receiveintervention over a minimum period of time; will be retrievable from university libraries, ERIC,orfrom University Microfilms International; will measure treatment outcomes quantitatively; andwill show no severe methodological flaws. For the group design studies, meta-analysis will beconducted through five methods: (1) outcomes will be transformed to a common metric; (2) thestudy will be used as a unit of analysis and dependent measures will be analyzed separately; (3) ameta-analysis will be performed using a probability method; (4) all studies will be pulledtogetherto test for homogeneity; and (5) studies will be pulled to look for sampling errors. The finalphaseof Year 2 will focus on hypothesis testing, data analysis, writing and presenting the outcomes ofthe quantitative analysis. ANTICIPATED PRODUCTS: This project will provide a comprehensive analysis of allpublished intervention research with students with learning disabilities and will clarify andintegrate relevant research findings across diverse study characteristics. The analysis developedfrom this project will be incorporated in textbook chapters, disseminated in articles, andpresentedto state departments and professional conferences. PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Taylor, Linda S. Boston University School of Education 605 Commonwealth Avenue Boston, MA 02215 617-353-3318 The Development and Use of Cheremic, Graphemic, and Phonological Coding in Deaf HighSchool-Aged Readers GRANT NUMBER: H023B50050 BEGINNING DATE: 9/01/95 ENDING DATE: 8/31/96 ABSTRACT PURPOSE: The project will determine the short-term memory (STM) strategies used by deafindividuals in contrived and real-world reading situations, and to explore the correlation of thesestrategies with (1) individual factors such as reading level, level of hearing loss, and age of onset,and (2) with educational and family characteristics, including communication mode andlanguage,parent adaptation, involvement, permissiveness and expectations, and early reading, sign, andspeech experiences. METHOD: Subjects will include 20 high school students who are severely or profoundlyprelingually deaf high school students, half of whom will be poor readers. Half of each readinggroup's subjects will have hearing parents, the other half having deaf parents. Deaf subjects willbe compared to 20 hearing students who have scored below-average on STM and readingcomprehension tasks. Subjects will complete two measures of STM, designed to elicit confusionamong like stimuli and to thus reveal preferred coding strategies. Semi-structured interviewswithdeaf subjects and their deaf or hard of hearing parents will be videotaped. Student interviewswillinclude role-play, reporting of everyday strategies, review of test results and examinerobservations, and discussion of word-play materials. Parent interviews will focus on parentattitudes, expectations, and the child's early communication and education experiences. Analysiswill determine if there are significant differences between coding strategies used by the differentgroups of subjects on readers on STM tests. Correlations will also be explored between deafreaders' primary coding strategies and their scores on three informal speech-related measures, ageof onset, and levels of hearing loss. Finally, staff will correlate coding strategy and readinggroupto the interview data from subject and parent interviews. ANTICIPATED PRODUCTS: The information to be gained from this research will havesignificant impact on both programming decisions and philosophies as well as on strategies forteaching reading. Project staff will disseminate findings in writing and through presentations atconferences and workshops. Journal articles are planned for submission to several journalsrelated to reading and special education. PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Turnbull, Ann University of Kansas 1052 Dole Lawrence, KS 66045 913-864-7608 Synthesizing and Communicating a Professional Knowledge Base on Positive BehavioralSupport GRANT NUMBER: H023E50001 BEGINNING DATE: 10/01/95 ENDING DATE: 9/30/97 ABSTRACT PURPOSE: The purpose of this project is to synthesize and broadly disseminate current researchon positive behavioral support for students whose behaviors include self-injury, aggression,tantrums, property destruction, and self-stimulatory behavior. METHOD: Based on a literature review resulting in an anticipated sample of 100-150 papers,staff will prepare a monograph which will include: (1) a list of articles composing the finalreviewsample; (2) dimensions of functional analysis and assessment reported; (3) proactive nature ofintervention; (4) aspects of change in social systems; (5) ecological validity of intervention agentand setting; (6) types of interventions employed and degree of skill improvement; (7) outcomeeffectiveness with respect to initial reduction in problem behavior; and (8) dimensions of socialvalidity. This monograph will also address trends across time, factors related to interventioneffectiveness, and gaps in the literature base. The research synthesis monograph will betranslatedinto four monographs summarizing "what works". The four monographs, as well, will be writtenwith the following audiences in mind: (1) federal, state and local policy makers and general andspecial education administrators; (2) teachers, families, and related service provides; (3) studentswith problem behavior; and (4) friends, peers, and community citizens. ANTICIPATED PRODUCTS: Following the development of the monograph and manuals, aforum on Positive Behavioral Support will be convened, with members of all stakeholder groupsinvited to attend. PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Vaughn, Sharon University of Miami School of Education P.O. Box 248065 Coral Gables, FL 33124-2040 305-284-6611 Integrative Synthesis of Instructional Grouping Practices for Reading Instruction forStudentswith Disabilities GRANT NUMBER: H023E50005 BEGINNING DATE: 8/15/95 ENDING DATE: 8/14/97 ABSTRACT PURPOSE: The project will examine the types of within-class grouping patterns that generalandspecial education teachers use for reading instruction for students with disabilities and the socialand academic outcomes associated with these grouping practices. METHOD: The project will implement a systematic, objective, integrative review incorporatingbest practices for integrative reviews and meta-analysis procedures. Research from a broadspectrum of grouping practices will be synthesized, and studies of instructional practicesimbedded in specific in-class grouping patterns (such as peer tutoring and cooperative learning)will also be incorporated into this review. Research in both general and special educationsettingswill be examined, as will both academic and social outcomes of grouping patterns. ANTICIPATED PRODUCTS: The project will develop disseminable products including: (1)papers and monographs to inform the research community of the state of current knowledge onthis topic; (2) brochures for parents; and (3) professional development materials for inservice andpreservice special and general education teachers providing instructional guidelines forproceduresand activities for within-class grouping practices for students with disabilities. PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Vaughn, Sharon University of Miami School of Education P.O. Box 248065 Coral Gables, FL 33124-2040 305-284-6611 Research on Grouping Practices for Mainstreamed Special Education Students GRANT NUMBER: H023C30013 BEGINNING DATE: 8/15/93 ENDING DATE: 8/14/96 ABSTRACT PURPOSE: This project will conduct an investigation of academic, social, and instructionaloutcomes as they relate to literacy instruction for students with learning disabilitiesmainstreamedin regular education classrooms organized either homogeneously or heterogeneously. METHOD: The first study year will include a comprehensive survey of teachers', parents, andstudents' perceptions of grouping practices. Subjects will include 300 elementary teachers ingrades 3 through 5, as well as one student with learning disabilities, one low achieving, oneaverage achieving, and one high achieving student for each teachers' classrooms, as well as oneofthe parents of each of these students. Years 2 and 3 of the study will consist of longitudinalstudies to follow third-graders from each of the four student groups. In addition to quantitativeanalysis of data, individual students and teachers will be identified for more in depth case studiesusing qualitative methodology. ANTICIPATED PRODUCTS: This study will result in the following benefits: (1) a morecomprehensive understanding of grouping practices as they relate to academic and socialfunctioning of mainstreamed students; (2) a better understanding of teachers' beliefs andknowledge relating to the literacy instruction of students with disabilities; (3) a more completepicture of parent and student attitudes toward grouping practices; and (4) a better understandingof grouping practices that effectively meet the needs of all students without inhibiting theprogressof other students. PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Williams, Joanna Columbia University Teachers College Box 238 25 West 120th Street New York, NY 10027 212-678-3832 Interpretation of Narrative Theme and Students with Learning Disabilities GRANT NUMBER: H023C30126 BEGINNING DATE: 9/01/93 ENDING DATE: 10/31/96 ABSTRACT PURPOSE: This project will investigate the ways in which students with learning disabilities,compared with peers who are not disabled, comprehend complex text that focuses on a contentdomain of fundamental importance, namely, human social interactions. The project will alsodetermine what types of instruction are effective in promoting comprehension and generalizationof comprehension. METHOD: The general methodology to be followed will be modeled on the general strategy ofclinical interviews, using sets of 20 students with learning disabilities and equal numbers ofage-matched and reading-ability-matched students who are not disabled. Initial questions will beopen-ended and students will be encouraged to talk freely. Detailed probe questions will beemployed to extract further information. A coding scheme will be developed for the analysis ofthe resulting protocols. Statistical analysis will use primarily analysis of variance andcovariance. ANTICIPATED PRODUCTS: The project expects to generate the following products: selectedand evaluated reading materials that focus on a small set of issues that are interesting, important,and useful for students with learning disabilities; guidelines for effective instructional strategies;aninstructional program developed on the basis of these guidelines; and an evaluation of theinstructional program. Top of Page Back to ERIC Menu Back to CEC Home Page copyright © 1996 ERIC Clearinghouse on Disabilities and Gifted Education Last updated: October 29, 1996 Send updates to: ericec@cec.sped.org URL: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm WT02-B20-146IA001-000011-B033-344http://www.cec.sped.org:80/osep/10policy.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101080504 text/html 34521HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 08:05:03 GMTLast-modified: Tuesday, 29-Oct-96 19:04:00 GMTContent-length: 34328Content-type: text/html OSEP Special Education Research Projects 5. POLICY AND PROGRAM EVALUATION PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Brannan, Steve Institute for Career and LeisureDevelopment4110 Sunburst Court Alexandria, VA 22303 703-922-7045 A National Evaluation of Residential Camp Programs Serving Persons withDisabilities GRANT NUMBER: H023C30002 BEGINNING DATE: 7/01/93 ENDING DATE: 6/30/96 ABSTRACT PURPOSE: The project will conduct a national evaluation of residential camp programs servingpersons with disabilities. METHOD: The investigation will include 14 residential school and/or summer camp programsserving children with disabilities, to include a total of roughly 1,500-2,000 total casesnationwide. A pre-post measurement will be employed to determine campers' affective growth resulting fromtheir exposure to residential camp programming. These measurements will be conducted byparents and caregivers to better measure program generalization and impact beyond the campexperience. A second test will be administered to determine effects of particular components ofoutdoor programming on skill acquisition of campers. A case study approach will also beemployed using interviews and observations of a representative sample of campers from eachregional site. ANTICIPATED PRODUCTS: The study will contribute significantly to the understanding ofthevalue of planned outdoor programming for children with disabilities, address the benefits ofresidential camping experiences for persons with varying levels of disability, and provideprofessionals with validated and comprehensive procedures for evaluating residential campprograms serving children with disabilities. PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Brauen, Marsha Ratnofsky, Alexander C. WESTAT 1650 Research Boulevard Rockville, MD 20850-3129 301-251-1500 Technical Assistance in Data Analysis, Evaluation, and Report Preparation GRANT NUMBER: HS92035001 BEGINNING DATE: 9/30/92 ENDING DATE: 10/01/96 ABSTRACT PURPOSE: This project will create a Center for Data Analysis, Evaluation and ReportPreparation to support Office of Special Education Programs (OSEP) in meeting itsresponsibilities for the collection, synthesis, and dissemination of information for programmanagement, administration, delivery, and effectiveness. METHOD: The Center will assist OSEP in developing the capacity to collect and analyze valid,reliable, and comparable data for reporting, program planning, and evaluation. Studies will beconducted to analyze significant and emerging issues in special education, and the Center willassist OSEP in providing guidance to state and local educators regarding educational reformissues. Assistance will also be provided to states working to build the capacity to collect validand reliable data and to perform under the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA). The Center will facilitate information exchanges among federal, state, and local special educatorsto discuss common concerns and goals. Information from multiple sources will be obtained,organized, and analyzed for reporting on the status of IDEA implementation, and the impact andeffectiveness of IDEA implementation. ANTICIPATED PRODUCTS: The Center will provide information dissemination, technicalassistance, and liaison functions, and demonstrate a commitment to stakeholder involvement. Instruments of the technical assistance component will include individual technical assistanceactivities, semi-annual forums, information packets, reference materials, and a researchinstruments database. PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Chambers, Jay American Institute for Research Palo Alto Office 3333 K Street, N.W. Washington, DC 20007 202-342-5031 Center for Special Education Finance GRANT NUMBER: H159G20002 BEGINNING DATE: 10/01/92 ENDING DATE: 9/30/97 ABSTRACT PURPOSE: The Center for Special Education Finance will provide policymakers andadministrators at the federal, state and local levels, data, analyses, expertise, and opportunities forinformation sharing regarding complex and critical special education finance issues. METHOD: The Center will compile special education expenditure statistics with a data systemthat will produce nationally representative data tying fiscal analysis to program descriptions. Thissystem will be replicable and will include the construction of a core database that will serve asthebasis for the fiscal research to be conducted by the Center. Special education finance policystudies will be conducted through collaborative arrangements with many of the country's leadingresearchers in special education school finance. Information on state special education financesystems will be aggregated and updated as well. ANTICIPATED PRODUCTS: The Center will provide much-needed information on how muchis being spent on special education services and will assess patterns of resource allocation. Dissemination products will include a descriptive brochure, an annotated list of Center reports,policy briefs, data summaries, the core database along with documentation, summaries of Centertechnical reports, and press releases. PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: DiPaola, Thomas Rhode Island Department of Education 22 Hayes Street Providence, RI 02908 401-277-3505 The Rhode Island School Support System GRANT NUMBER: H159F50004 BEGINNING DATE: 7/01/95 ENDING DATE: 6/30/96 ABSTRACT PURPOSE: This project will determine the feasibility of implementing a School Support Systemapproach to monitoring that continues to examine compliance with regulatory requirements,evaluates the effectiveness ofspecial education programs and services, and identifies and provides technical assistance andsupport. METHOD: Following a thorough review of the literature (including other state practices and asurvey of service providers), staff will review local education agency (LEA) statements ofassurances to comply with regulatory requirements. The LEA application process will also bereviewed to minimize repetition in describing how regulatory requirements are to be met. SchoolSupport System data gathering instruments will be examined and a database will be createdcontaining information to be gathered using these instruments. School Support Team memberswill be surveyed concerning the effectiveness of compliance data gathering instruments. Theavailable literature on the attainment of IEP goals as indicators of effectiveness will then beexamined, and a review will be conducted of other states' activities in determining indicators ofprogram and service effectiveness. Five regional focus groups will be established in the state,andgroup reviews and discussions of potential indicators of effectiveness will be conducted. Asample of effectiveness indicators will thus be developed, and effectiveness data collectioninstruments will be prepared and implemented. The data collected through these instrumentswillbe compiled and analyzed, and findings will be reviewed with members of School SupportTeams. ANTICIPATED PRODUCTS: The School Support System will provide for continued LEAcompliance with regulatory requirements while incorporating an evaluation of serviceeffectiveness with a focus on benefits to students. A mechanism to identify needs and providetechnical assistance and supports to the LEA with a focus on systemic change will also beincluded. PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Dorn, Sherman Vanderbilt University Peabody College Department of Special Education Box 328 Nashville, TN 37203 615-343-4782 A History of Special Education: Nashville, Tennessee, 1940-1990 GRANT NUMBER: H023N50013 BEGINNING DATE: 9/01/95 ENDING DATE: 8/31/98 ABSTRACT PURPOSE: The project will conduct research and publish a history of special education policyand practice in Nashville, Tennessee since 1940. METHOD: Data collection will employ both archival sources and oral history. Archival sourceswill include: published articles and reports by local researchers; articles in local newspapers;records of the Nashville Board of Education; records of legal cases involving special education inNashville; records of hearings, bills, and legislative history; and records of the executive branchinTennessee regarding the history of public policy concerning special education and mentalretardation. Materials held by current and former employees of Nashville public schools,materials held by parents and former students, and materials held by the special education officesof city public schools will all be included in the study as well. Archival and oral historyevidencewill be evaluated for authenticity and credibility, and a database of catalog links will be createdtostore and organize findings. ANTICIPATED PRODUCTS: Products will include the following: a manuscript and a researchreport describing the history of special education in Nashville, analyzing the practical influenceofresearch and advocacy on the education of individuals with disabilities in Nashville; a hypertextversion of this report including additional material from oral history interviews; a manuscriptplacing the local history of special education in Nashville within a national context; and a set oforal history tapes and transcripts available for the use of other researchers. PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Dumas, Dale Capital Consulting Corporation 8626 Lee Highway Suite 2135 Fairfax, VA 22031-2135 703-876-0400 Information Transfer GRANT NUMBER: HS94017001 BEGINNING DATE: 10/01/94 ENDING DATE: 9/30/97 ABSTRACT PURPOSE: The project will assist the Office of Special Education Programs in the transfer ofinformation and data from major studies, currently reported at the federal level in technicalreportsinto consumable, commercially disseminated products. METHOD: The contractors shall review available literature on information transfer as the termisused in the context of social marketing and the field of education. The five-step approach tomarketing the contractors have used in the past will be applied to this project, with major stepsbeing as follows: defining a clear purpose for each dissemination product; identifying,qualifying,and quantifying target audiences; designing content and format; determining most appropriatemedia; and establishing a means of evaluating results. Following market research, contractorswilldevelop a database of publishers and producers who will be contacted regarding disseminationneeds. Final publishers of selected products will be selected from this list. ANTICIPATED PRODUCTS: Deliverables shall include: a list of OSEP reports on majorstudiesfor which a potential market is believed to exist; a synthesis of literature based on the literaturereview; market research plans in various drafts; the prioritized list of dissemination materials;andmonthly administrative reports. PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Feuer, Michael National Academy of Sciences 2101 Constitution Avenue, N.W. Washington, DC 20418 Goals 2000 and the Inclusion of Students with Disabilities GRANT NUMBER: H023U40001 BEGINNING DATE: ENDING DATE: ABSTRACT PURPOSE: As requested under Section 1015 of the Goals 2000: Educate America Act, thisproject is intended to conduct a "comprehensive study of the inclusion of children withdisabilitiesin school reform activities assisted under the [Act]." METHOD: The National Academy of Sciences (NAS) will establish a Study Committee of up to15 experts which will design and carry out a set of activities, including conducting site visits,holding a workshop, and commissioning scholarly papers. Components will include: (1) Anevaluation of the National Education Goals and objectives, curriculum reforms, standards, andother programs intended to achieve the goals. The intent will be to ask how less emphasis can beplaced on process requirements and more on program quality, while maintaining adequatesafeguards. (2) A review of assessments and measures, and other methods to collect data oneducational progress of students with disabilities. Issues may include whether separatestandards,thresholds, outcomes, or assessments should be developed for some students with disabilities; thecomparability of modified and unmodified assessments, "flagging" of modified assements;adapting performance-based assessments. (3) An examination of what incentives or assistancemight be provided to states to develop improvement plans that adequately address the needs ofchildren with disabilities. Issues will include incentives to classify children as disabled andvariousinstructional and organizational approaches. 4) The relation of Goals 2000 to other federal laws. Issues will include comparisons of Goals 2000 and IDEA and how they can be brought intogreater harmony. (5) Such other items as NAS considers appropriate. ANTICIPATED PRODUCTS: As required by the Act, The National Academy of Sciences willsubmit an interim report of its findings and recommendations to the President and Congress notlater than 12 months from the beginning of the project, and the final report not later than 24months from the date. PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Harris, Lowell North Carolina Department of Public Instruction 301 North Wilmington Street Raleigh, NC 27601-2825 919-715-1565 A Study to Determine the Current Levels of Outcome Attainment of Students with SpecificLearning Disabilities (SLD) and Students with Severe Disabilities GRANT NUMBER: H159A40007 BEGINNING DATE: 9/01/94 ENDING DATE: 8/31/96 ABSTRACT PURPOSE: The purpose of this project is to establish a baseline data pool with which todemonstrate the current level of outcomes attained by North Carolina students served under theIndividuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA). METHOD: The first year of the study will focus on two groups of students with disabilities(students with learning disabilities and students with severe impairments). The second projectyear will expand the study to include all students receiving services under IDEA. Data will becollected across the following domains: (1) participation outcomes; (2) enabling outcomes; (3)academic outcomes; and (4) post-school outcomes. A previously conducted feasibility study hasindicated that these data can be collected with reliability using the AUEN system. Six NorthCarolina school systems have been invited to participate in the project, three of whichparticipatedin the previous feasibility study. ANTICIPATED PRODUCTS: The long-range goal of the project is to establish a state-wideevaluation system to be used by all public schools in North Carolina. With this system, thepublicschools of North Carolina will be able to make judgements about the effectiveness of theirprograms for special needs students and make decisions for improving ineffective programs. PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Hasazi, Susan University of Vermont Department of Special Education Room 448 Waterman Building Burlington, VT 05405-0160 802-656-2936 State and Local Education Efforts to Implement the Transition Requirements in theIndividualswith Disabilities Education Act GRANT NUMBER: H159D50001 BEGINNING DATE: 3/01/95 ENDING DATE: 2/28/98 ABSTRACT PURPOSE: The project will establish and implement a research agenda designed to investigatestate and local education efforts to implement the transition requirements in the Individuals withDisabilities Education Act (IDEA). METHOD: The University of Vermont Center for Transition and Employment, the UniversityofIllinois Center for Instructional Research and Curriculum Evaluation, the University ofMinnesotaNational Transition Network, and the National Association of State Directors of SpecialEducation (NASDSE) are collaborating in this three-year effort to establish and implement aresearch agenda designed to investigate state and local education efforts to implement thetransition requirements in the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA). The overallproject will consist of five separate substudies. Substudy 1 will employ a survey of 58 state andterritorial directors of special education and 500 local directors of special education to acquireinformation on the range and variation in state and local policies related to the definitionalcomponents of transition services. Substudy 2 will use a longitudinal follow-up of 200 randomlyselected students in their last year of schooling to document the nature and extent of theirparticipation in transition planning and explore the relationship between their participation andtheresulting post-school outcomes approximately one year after leaving school. Substudy 3 will useexpert review and case studies to identify context and salient characteristics (e.g. policy,organizational structures, funding, staffing, professional development, evaluation, interagencycollaboration, leadership, advocacy, instruction and curriculum) that define exemplaryimplementation of transition services and promote positive outcomes for youth with disabilities. Substudy 4 will combine the survey in Substudy 1 and the longitudinal data in Substudy 2 toexamine interagency involvement at federal, state, and local levels. In addition, an issues forumwill be used to identify impediments to and strategies for improving interagency involvement atstate, federal, and local levels. Substudy 5 will conduct a policy analysis to identify federalprogram services and policies which are relevant to the design and delivery of transition servicesand fulfill the requirements of IDEA. ANTICIPATED PRODUCTS: Products developed as a result of these investigations willinclude: descriptive materials such as brochures and news releases, articles in national, regional,and state level newsletters, project publications including research reports, policy briefs and casestudies, journal articles and book chapters, and workshop and conference presentations. PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Jackson, Patricia Oregon Department of Education 255 Capitol Street, N.E. Salem, OR 97310-0203 503-378-3598 A Full Evaluation Study of the Oregon Supported Education Plan and Its Impact UponStudentOutcomes GRANT NUMBER: H159A40016 BEGINNING DATE: 1/01/94 ENDING DATE: 9/30/96 ABSTRACT PURPOSE: The project will determine the effects of recent Oregon restructuring reforms andtheir impact on the inclusion of all students in regular education settings. METHOD: The Full Evaluation Study will continue to refine an assessment process developedduring the feasibility study and then use the process to measure direct student outcomes. Theprocess will use: (1) the Oregon Portfolio Assessment System; (2) extant student assessmentdata;and (3) school records. Staff will also conduct two multiple-site descriptive case studies (atelementary and secondary levels) using these sources to document the impact of supportededucation on the direct student outcomes of students with and without IEPs. An analysis of therelative impact of supported education "implementation factors" on student outcomes will beconducted, integrating professional staff/parent respondent data with direct student outcome datato create a set of multidimensional dependent variables for analysis. The project will alsopilot-test and provide feedback to the ODE about their development of the Oregon PortfolioAssessment system for use with students with IEPs, thus continuing the important process ofintegrating long-range statewide plans. ANTICIPATED PRODUCTS: A full evaluation report will document each of the following:findings of the study related to the impact of supported education implementation factors onoutcomes for students with and without IEPs; the development of a process to monitor the effectsof supported education on students with and without IEPs; and recommendations regarding theuse of Oregon's Portfolio Assessment Process with students with IEPs. PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Kane, Michael Chesapeake Institute 2030 M Street, N.W. Suite 810 Washington, DC 20036 202-785-9360 Technical Support for the Department of Education's Effort for Translating Research toPracticefor Educating Individuals with Disabilities GRANT NUMBER: HS92017001 BEGINNING DATE: 10/01/92 ENDING DATE: 9/30/97 ABSTRACT PURPOSE: The project will provide technical support for the Department of Education's effortto translate research into practice in the field of educating students with disabilities. METHOD: The project will plan and evaluate programs to support the development of nationalprogram agendas, and identify and confirm focus statements and strategic targets for nationalcommitment. Information will be synthesized from a variety of sources, including literature,programs, individuals and groups, to identify potentially effective practices. In the process ofdeveloping an accessible professional knowledge base, the project will implement and evaluatestrategies for creating linkages between researchers and practitioners, in addition todisseminatingpertinent information and soliciting consumer input. The project will also develop andimplementa performance management system to ensure continuation and generalization of practices foundeffective. ANTICIPATED PRODUCTS: Results of program evaluations will be a series of reportscorresponding to specific project target statements, a final report on implementation procedures,and a final report on national agenda-building processes. PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Oswald, Donald P. Virginia Commonwealth University P.O. Box 980568 Medical College of Virginia Department of Psychiatry Richmond, VA 23298-0568 804-828-9900 PROJECT ALIGN: Supporting Data Based Decision Making to Align the Intent andImplementation of IDEA with the Goals of National Educational Reform GRANT NUMBER: H023A50114 BEGINNING DATE: 10/01/95 ENDING DATE: 9/30/96 ABSTRACT PURPOSE: This project will improve and inform decision making that seeks to better align theintent and implementation of the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA) with thegoals of national education reform for children with disabilities. The project will also providedirection for systemic reform by increasing understanding of significant problems in theidentification, integration, and school completion rates of children with disabilities. METHOD: Staff will conduct a series of national database analyses investigating graduation,integration, and identification rates and the influences of demographic, economic, and othereducational factors at the state level. Interviews will be conducted with staff in states selected fortheir success in aligning IDEA implementation with national goals in order to relate stateperformance to specific policies, resources, and other educational and demographic factors. Individual state databases will be used to conduct policy analyses through examination of locallyreported identification, integration, and school completion indicators as well as interviews withlocal special education directors. A policy study will also be conducted to examine localvariationwithin one state based on district data and interviews. ANTICIPATED PRODUCTS: Research findings will be disseminated through direct mailingstonational professional organizations, parent organizations, and federal agencies. Materials will beprepared for submission to scholarly, peer-reviewed journals, and findings will be prepared forsubmission to a number of national conferences. PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Roach, Virginia National Association of State Boards of Education 1012 Cameron Street Alexandria, VA 22314 703-684-4000 Cooperative Agreement to Establish a Center for Policy Research on the Impact of GeneralandSpecial Education Reform GRANT NUMBER: H023H40002 BEGINNING DATE: 10/01/94 ENDING DATE: 9/30/97 ABSTRACT PURPOSE: This project will establish a Center for Policy Research on the impact of generalandspecial education reform to investigate and analyze critical issues in current general and specialeducation policies, their interactions, and their impact on students with disabilities, with a focuson discerning policy options for stakeholders at the federal, state and local levels. METHOD: Over a 3-year period, the Center will conduct extensive cross-site analysis of diversestate and local sites and across dimensions of policy development, implementation and impact. The Center will use primarily qualitative research methodologies, including systematic policyreview, case study design and action research. The Center will report on: (1) interaction ofspecial and general education reform efforts within sixteen states; (2) four in-depth case studiesofhow state-level special and general education reform policies interact with and impact on localschool districts and on students with disabilities; and (3) four additional in-depth case studies ofschool districts engaging in reform of both general and special education, such as those creating"inclusive" schools, including their interactions with state-level educational policies. ANTICIPATED PRODUCTS: The Center will provide a structured program of training andmentoring to at least four graduate students each year in the fields of public policy and/ordisability policy. They will be offered formal coursework and will participate as fieldresearchersunder the direction of senior researchers. The Center's research findings will be widelydisseminated through channels and vehicles that are readily accessed by a variety of stakeholdersin language that will be jargon-free, appealing to a wide audience. PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Swize, Myron Colorado Department of Education 201 East Colfax Room 300 Denver, CO 80201 303-866-6701 Integrated Compliance and Program Evaluation System GRANT NUMBER: H159F50005 BEGINNING DATE: 6/01/95 ENDING DATE: 5/31/96 ABSTRACT PURPOSE: The project will investigate the feasibility of developing a system for collectingstudent outcome data that can be integrated into the current Colorado state compliancemonitoring process. METHOD: Following a literature review, staff will identify desired long- and short-termoutcomes, which will then be organized into a matrix of possible student outcomes based on theExpanded Curriculum model. Focus groups will be held with special education administrators,service providers, and consumers to identify the most useful student outcomes to measure. A listof appropriate instruments to measure these outcomes will follow. Project staff will then identifycurrently available student outcome data and identify and pilot-test new data collectioninstruments and procedures for needed additional student outcome data. These will includedifficult student tasks, formats for IEP data collection, student participation checklists, andfunctional skills evaluation checklists, all of which will be targeted specifically for students withserious emotional disturbances, learning disabilities, or mental retardation. These instrumentswillthen be compiled and integrated into existing systems of data collection prior to planning of thecollective computer program. This program will finally be pilot-tested and its overall efficacywillbe evaluated. ANTICIPATED PRODUCTS: Anticipated products of this research include: (1) a conceptualframework and instruments for measuring social, student, and functional life competencyoutcomes; (2) a battery of data collection instruments on outcomes common to all students withinvisible disabilities and those unique for students identified with serious emotional disturbances,learning disabilities, and moderate mental retardation; (3) a description of the procedures usedforcollecting the student outcome data; and (4) a plan for the computerized aggregation, analysisstorage, and retrieval of the student outcome data. PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Ysseldyke, James University of Minnesota Department of Educational Psychology School Psychology Program 350 Elliott Hall 750 River Road Minneapolis, MN 55455 612-624-4014 School Choice Options and Positive Outcomes for Students with Disabilities GRANT NUMBER: H023C50050 BEGINNING DATE: 10/01/95 ENDING DATE: 9/30/98 ABSTRACT PURPOSE: The project will examine four school choice options that may be enabling childrenwith disabilities to reach successful outcomes. METHOD: Options to be explored include two established options (second chance programsandpostsecondary options) as well as two emerging options (charter schools and home schooling). Qualitative methodologies will be used to examine the experiences of students with disabilities inall options, and quantitative methodologies will be used in measuring outcomes for students insecond chance and postsecondary options in comparison to those who do not participate. Thestudy will also examine how charter schools and families participating in home schoolingeducatestudents identified as having a disability, as well as the potential impact of these practices onstudents and special education. After separate studies of all four options, a fifth study willintegrate all findings in order to enable policymakers and educators to make informed decisionsabout the possibilities of school choice options and the attainment of outcomes for students withdisabilities. ANTICIPATED PRODUCTS: Products will include the customary research reports and journalarticles. In addition, staff will develop products that present the findings in an user-friendlyformat. These products will include policy briefs, short reports, and fact sheets. Similar productswill be developed to reach parents and other interested parties. PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Ysseldyke, James University of Minnesota Department of Educational Psychology School Psychology Program 350 Elliott Hall 750 River Road Minneapolis, MN 55455 612-624-4014 The Center to Support the Achievement of World Class Outcomes GRANT NUMBER: H159C50004 BEGINNING DATE: 10/01/95 ENDING DATE: 9/30/00 ABSTRACT PURPOSE: This project will establish a Center to support the achievement of world classoutcomes for Students with Disabilities. The Center will assist states in implementing activitiesforstudents with disabilities and document states' efforts in these areas. METHOD: The Center will conduct three interrelated strands of activity: (1) Documentation andAnalysis; (2) Information Exchange and Dissemination; and (3) Technical Assistance (TA). Keyactivities in the Documentation and Analysis strand will include documenting the participation ofstudents with disabilities in state and national assessments, the secondary analysis of outcomedatafor students with disabilities, the documentation of state and national standards-setting activities,and the tracking of the participation of students with disabilities in state Goals 2000 plans. Strand2 activities will include production and dissemination of products, facilitating informationexchange among researchers and developers, infusing the disability perspective into a variety ofmaterials used by general and special educators, networking and linking with parents, advocacygroups and other organizations, and telecommunications networking. The scope of technicalassistance activities will encompass provision of direct TA to states, work with regional resourcecenters, and work with other technical assistance providers. ANTICIPATED PRODUCTS: The Center will contribute to current knowledge and practice,lead to improved services for infants, toddlers, children and youth with disabilities, and providestate and national audiences with information on the impact and effectiveness of programs andservices provided under the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act. Planned products fordissemination will include information reports, update reports, recommendation reports,directories of projects and resources, lists of relevant publications, press releases, andpublicationsin other periodicals. Top of Page Back to ERIC Menu Back to CEC Home Page copyright © 1996 ERIC Clearinghouse on Disabilities and Gifted Education Last updated: October 29, 1996 Send updates to: ericec@cec.sped.org URL: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm WT02-B20-147IA001-000011-B034-16http://www.cec.sped.org:80/osep/11restru.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101080518 text/html 46835HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 08:05:23 GMTLast-modified: Tuesday, 29-Oct-96 19:05:00 GMTContent-length: 46642Content-type: text/html OSEP Special Education Research Projects 6. RESTRUCTURING AND SERVICEDELIVERY ISSUES PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Bagnato, Stephen Children's Hospital of Pittsburgh 3705 Fifth Avenue Pittsburgh, PA 15213-2583 412-692-5560 The CHILD Health Resource Partnership: Collaborative Health Interventions forLearnerswithDisabilities (CHILD) GRANT NUMBER: H023D40013 BEGINNING DATE: 9/01/94 ENDING DATE: 8/31/97: ABSTRACT PURPOSE: This project will develop an integrated, transagency and transdisciplinarymodel toplan, deliver, and research the efficacy of pediatric health care support services tofamilies andyoung children with chronic health care needs and developmental disabilities. METHOD: This three-year clinical research project targets children between 4.5 and 6yearswhoare at high risk for cumulative educational and functional disorders because of dualdevelopmentaldisabilities and chronic health conditions. This project focuses on the late preschool toearlyprimary school period as critical to the success of children who must move from earlyinterventionprograms that emphasize more family-centered and interagency services to lesscollaborative,more professionally-centered school-age services. Targeted CHILD participants willhave avariety of mild to severe neurodevelopmental and neurobehavioral disorders,associated activemedical conditions, and mental health disorders. During the first of two researchphases staffwillobserve, follow, and compare two groups of young children with dual medical anddevelopmentalneeds within the public schools. The control group will consist of a matched sample ofchildren(N=25) who will receive a program plan that they have typically received regarding anarray ofuncoordinated services. The experimental group will also enroll a matched sample ofchildren(N=25) who will receive the CHILD interventions. After a period of 1 year, Phase 2 willcommence, in which the control group will begin to receive the CHILD interventions. Withinandbetween group effect size comparisons will be analyzed as well as the progress andoutcomeindicators from using each child and family as its own control. ANTICIPATED PRODUCTS: This project will result in the development of a system oftransagency care for children and families with developmental disabilities and medicalandmentalhealth needs, a family-centered model of decision making about child needs that reliesonparentalparticipation and co-leadership, and establishment of collaborative transagencystrategies forteamwork that foster agency and policy changes. PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR:: Davis, Thomas Holt Public Schools: 4610 Spahr: Holt, MI 48842 517-694-0401 Children with Disabilities as a Part of the Systemic Efforts to Restructure Schools GRANT NUMBER: H023R20010 BEGINNING DATE: 1/01/93 ENDING DATE: 12/31/96 ABSTRACT PURPOSE: The project will restructure secondary programs at Holt High School inorder toprovide improved student advocacy for students with disabilities and those designatedas "highrisk". METHOD: Interactive relationships will be developed with established schoolprograms, childand adult service agencies, and the Holt community. Parent and student supportgroups will beestablished, and training in postsecondary rights and service delivery systems will beprovidedforstudents and parents. A core transdisciplinary staff will be established with the ability toidentifyneeds and assist with making contacts with identified agencies. Specific servicesprovided tostudents will include mentorship, vocational assessment, career counseling,psychosocialcounseling, training in assertiveness and self-advocacy, and other services as identifiedimperativeto transition into adult life. ANTICIPATED PRODUCTS: An estimated 250 students will be served directly throughtheproject, and an additional 300 will receive indirect services. The ultimate outcome forthestudents will be active participation in achieving personal, educational, and vocationalskillsdevelopment, utilizing school and community support, to result in appropriateemployment,independence, and involvement with the community. A comprehensive evaluation plan,includingformative and summative evaluation methods, will provide and disseminate data on theeffectiveness, and efficiency of project efforts. PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Duchnowski, Al University of South Florida Department of Special Education FMHI 4202 East Fowler Avenue FAO 126 Tampa, FL 33620-7900 813-974-4661 Systemic Restructuring to Include Children with Disabilities: A School-basedMulti-District Demonstration Program GRANT NUMBER: H023R20030 BEGINNING DATE: 10/01/92 ENDING DATE: 9/30/96 ABSTRACT PURPOSE: This project will determine what common systemic changes need to bemade inschools that are restructuring to increase the inclusion of students with disabilities ingeneraleducation and improve outcomes for all students. METHOD: An initial model of necessary systemic changes will be developed that willachievetheabove goals regardless of the sociodemographic characteristics of a school, its stage ofrestructuring, or the innovative practices adopted by the school. This model will bedevelopedthrough determination of common systemic changes specified in strategic plansdeveloped at theend of the first year of the project by all five participating schools. The model will bedemonstrated through implementation of changes selected by participating schools asbeingcritical to implement selected innovative practices. Through case studies theimplementationprocess will be evaluated, and case study results will guide the process of revision andrefinementthroughout the project. ANTICIPATED PRODUCTS: A newsletter will be developed that describes projectfindingsandstatus of the demonstration. Presentations will be made at national, regional, and stateconferences. Project staff will meet with the principal investigators of the other sixfundeddemonstration grants to share findings and shape further dissemination plans. PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Fuchs, Lynn S. Vanderbilt University Peabody College Department of Special Education Box 328 Nashville, TN 37203 615/343-4787 Project SCORE: Systemic Change Organizing Reform Efforts GRANT NUMBER: H023R20016 BEGINNING DATE: 9/01/92 ENDING DATE: 8/31/96 ABSTRACT PURPOSE: This project will employ a systematic perspective in pursuit of an ambitiousagendaof working at the state, district, and school levels to evaluate and revise policies andpracticesandencourage full participation and collaboration among members of the Metro-Nashvillepublicschool system and the community at large. METHOD: Quantitative and qualitative methods will be employed within aquasi-experimentaldesign using two project schools and one comparison school. After spending the firsthalf of thefirst year in planning, School A will conduct small pilots of systematic changes andeffectivepractices, with School B being studied for comparison and control purposes. Implementation atSchool A will gradually increase throughout the second year until at least 70% of theschoolpopulation participates in project activities. Meanwhile School C will commenceplanning andpiloting much as School A did in the previous year. Individual goals within thisframework willrange from detracking and curriculum enrichment to university and hospital linkagesand reformof decision-making and self-determination processes throughout the system. ANTICIPATED PRODUCTS: Following documentation and validation of projectpractices,dissemination to the scholarly audience will focus on ERIC network reports, journalarticles, andpresentations at national, state and regional conferences. Parents and practitioners willbereachedthrough dissemination of a training manual amd other practitioner-oriented documents. Professional leadership training activities and other technical support will be provided tosupportreplication and implementation of identified practices. PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Gordon, Sue Education Development Center, Inc. 55 Chapel Street Newton, MA 02158-1060 617-969-7100 Synthesis and Dissemination of a Knowledge Base Regarding Outcomes from thePlacementofStudents with Disabilities in General Education Classrooms GRANT NUMBER: H023E40005 BEGINNING DATE: 10/01/94 ENDING DATE: 9/30/96 ABSTRACT PURPOSE: The purpose of this project is to provide practitioners with easier access torelevantinformation and to provide answers on how to appropriately educate students withdisabilities inthe least restrictive environment (LRE). The project will synthesize, communicate, andfoster theuse of the knowledge base concerning the placement of students with disabilities in thegeneraleducation classroom, and the outcomes of different general classroom support modelsforstudents with different disabilities. METHOD: Staff will use a grounded theory approach, integrating multiple data sourcesandgenerating themes, patterns, and constructs inductively. The synthesis will focus onthe keyvariables of students' characteristics, program characteristics, setting and context, andintendedand actual outcomes. A series of coding matrices will be developed and combined todescribethedata set and to study the factors affecting student outcomes. Staff will initiate theknowledgebase synthesis by creating an easily accessible database through which practitionersandresearchers can find useful information about the outcomes of the placement ofstudents withspecific disabilities in specific teacher/learning environments. Staff members will thenreviewandindex the usable knowledge of outcomes according to disability, types of outcomes,programcharacteristics, and developmental and grade level. Next, staff will prepare at least twodifferentinformation packets synthesizing portions of the database. Selection of topics will bebased onthenumber of the documents in the database and the perceived needs of those in the field. Thisdatabase will be disseminated and supported through the inclusion of stakeholdersthroughout theprocess, a forum to be held in Washington, DC in cooperation with OSEP, and adisseminationstrategy including the use of electronic networks. Finally, staff will provide an analysisthat willcompare strengths and weaknesses of different inclusion models for different types ofstudents. ANTICIPATED PRODUCTS: Products will include a bibliography; collected knowledgeofoutcomes indexed by disability, types of outcomes, program characteristics, andschool-level; auser-friendly database with a manual that will enable users to access the database andmanipulateit for their own needs; and two information packets synthesizing selected portions of thedatabase. PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Hebbeler, Kathleen SRI International 333 Ravenswood Avenue Menlo Park, CA 94025-3493 415-859-3571 School-Linked Services to Support Better Outcomes for Children with Disabilitiesand TheirFamilies GRANT NUMBER: H023D40015 BEGINNING DATE: 8/01/94 ENDING DATE: 7/31/96 ABSTRACT PURPOSE: The project will conduct research examining school-linked services forchildrenwithdisabilities and their families based on a conceptual framework that views systemissues, serviceissues, and child and family outcomes as important areas for study. METHOD: Project staff will undertake two components of research: a multisite analysisofsystems, services and outcomes, and an in-depth look at the delivery of services in aschool-linkedmodel in one community. The multisite component will examine the services andoutcomes forstudents in special education across 65 Healthy Start school-linked sites in California. Under themultisite component, staff will analyze data collected for a concurrent Healthy Startevaluation tocompare services and outcomes for students in special education with those for otherservicerecipients. To provide a richer look at special education in a school-linked servicesmodel, staffwill study school-linked services for students with disabilities at a single Healthy Startsite. Thedesign for this component includes both qualititative and quantitative techniques. Datacollectiontechniques will include staff interviews, direct observations, document analysis, reviewsof clientand student records, family interviews, and family case studies. Service and outcomedata forstudents with disabilities and their families will be compared with those for others in thesameschool and with students in special and regular education in a comparison school thatserves asimilar population but does not provide school-linked services. ANTICIPATED PRODUCTS: This study will provide a detailed description of aschool-linkedservices model from the policy perspective, service-provider perspective, and familyperspective. Data from the qualitative components will be used to describe how school-linkedservicesmodelsbring about improved child and family outcomes. PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Jorgenson, Cheryl University of New Hampshire Institute on Disability Heidelberg-Harris Building 125 Technology Drive Durham, NH 03824 603-862-4320 Including Students with Disabilities as a Part of Systemic Efforts to RestructureSchools:Souhegan Cooperative School District GRANT NUMBER: H023R20018 BEGINNING DATE: 9/01/92 ENDING DATE: 8/31/96 ABSTRACT PURPOSE: This project will assist New Hampshire schools with the inclusion ofstudents withdisabilities in secondary school restructuring and reform efforts. METHOD: Training and technical assistance will be provided to Souhegan High Schooltoinsurethat the needs of students with disabilities are fully considered in all curricular,governance, andorganizational reform efforts. Training and technical assistance at Souhegan and otherschools inNew Hampshire will also target the objective of full inclusion of all students in themainstreamofeducation. Findings from the Souhegan effort will be replicated at two additional highschools. In collaboration with the University of New Hampshire's teacher education program,inclusionphilosophy and practices will be critically examined and integrated into teacher trainingprograms. In collaboration with the state Department of Education, inclusion-related philosophyandcompetencies will be incorporated into teacher certification revision efforts. Leadershiptrainingwill be provided to regular and special education school administrators relative to bestpracticesininclusion, reform, and restructuring. ANTICIPATED PRODUCTS: A model will be developed for evaluating educationaloutcomesof students with disabilities enrolled in restructured schools and overall project efforts. Dissemination materials will include two books, four refereed journal articles or bookchapters,one monograph, a manual of lesson plans, a project brochure and newsletter, twentyregional andnational conference presentations, and a conference on restructuring and inclusionsponsoredspecifically by the project. General community awareness will be increased throughoutthe stateregarding the rationale behind full inclusion of students with disabilities in schoolimprovementefforts. PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: McKinney, James University of Miami College of Education P.O. Box 248065 Coral Gables, FL 33124-2040 305-284-5388 Evaluating School-linked Services for Children with Disabilities and Their Families GRANT NUMBER: H023D40017 BEGINNING DATE: 7/01/94 ENDING DATE: 6/30/97 ABSTRACT PURPOSE: This project will describe the participation and outcomes of students withdisabilities and their families who receive school-linked services in schools that areimplementingthe full-service school concept, and to study programmatic and policy implicationsassociatedwiththe delivery of school-linked services using a full-service school concept. METHOD: Staff will conduct three interrelated studies to address: (1) theimplementation ofthisconcept of delivery; (2) whether services provided are culturally competent and basedon familyneeds rather than service providers' perspectives; and (3) academic and socialoutcomes ofparticipating students with disabilities. The research will be conducted in twoelementaryschoolsselected by the district because of their substantial need for general health, mentalhealth, andsocial services. Study 1 will conduct case studies with the schools as the unit ofanalysis toprovide an in-depth profile of the full-service concept, describe the participation ofchildren andfamilies, and identify systemic and programmatic features that act as barriers to, orfacilitators ofparticipation. Study 2 will compare the extent of participation and the outcomes ofstudents withdisabilities who attend full-service schools with: (1) students without disabilities in thesameschools; and (2) students with disabilities who receive continual special education andrelatedservices in representative schools in the district. During this study, staff will also assessandanalyze students' outcomes using the National Center for Educational Outcomesmodel. Finally,Study 3 will involve an analysis of 12 individual case studies of students with disabilitiesandtheirfamilies that focuses on the quality of services and whether this quality varies with typeofdisability and race and ethnicity. ANTICIPATED PRODUCTS: This project will result in an in-depth profile of thefull-serviceschool concept, an in-depth description of full-service school concept implementation,ananalysisof the academic and social outcomes for students with disabilities, and data regardingprogrammatic and policy implications of the full-service school concept. PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: McLaughlin, Margaret University of Maryland Institute for the Study of Exceptional Children College Park, MD 20742 301-405-6495 Systemic School Reform for Students with Disabilities in Prince George'sCounty GRANT NUMBER: H023R30016 BEGINNING DATE: 10/01/93 ENDING DATE: 9/30/97 ABSTRACT PURPOSE: This project will assist three separate elementary schools in PrinceGeorge's County,Maryland, to move toward a comprehensive school-wide restructuring process that willaddressthe major aspects of school restructuring including the special education servicedelivery system. METHOD: Within each school, project staff, in cooperation with school staff, will: (1)selectandrefine a framework for restructuring special education service delivery; (2) develop acomprehensive strategic plan that specifies goals in each of the five restructuring areas,identifieskey events that must occur, responsible parties, and specifies timelines; (3) implementand refinethe systemic educational restructuring plan to accommodate ongoing reform initiatives;(4)conduct case studies to document the process of restructuring; (5) develop school sitesintoprofessional development centers providing collaborative training of special and regulareducators; and (6) conduct project evaluation. ANTICIPATED PRODUCTS: The outcome of the project will be three individualapproaches torestructuring the total educational programs within participating schools. Experiencesofparticipants as well as intended and unintended outcomes or products, including effectsonstudents, will be carefully documented through case studies and will be broadlydisseminated. PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Meyers, Joel University at Albany, SUNY 1400 Washington Avenue Albany, NY 12222 518-442-5065 Including Children with Disabilities as a Part of Systemic Efforts to RestructureSchools GRANT NUMBER: H023R30030 BEGINNING DATE: 6/01/93 ENDING DATE: 5/31/97 ABSTRACT PURPOSE: This project will develop, implement and evaluate district-wide policies andprocedures to change the overall educational system in a manner that includesstudents withdisabilities as a major component of this reform. METHOD: The Model Project will be implemented in a school district in Rotterdam,NewYork,which currently serves 2,900 students, including 215 special education students. Theproject willemploy a district steering committee, a model project think tank, six district planningteams,threebuilding reform teams, and four participant/observers as basic structures of operation. Duringtheinitial planning phase, district planning teams will engage in refining major goals,determiningspecific outcomes associated with each goal, and developing measurement techniquesto assesseach specific outcome. Building-level planning will follow, using school-based teams tosetstandards for determining goal attainment at each school, and to formulate reforminterventionplans and professional development activities designed to accomplish these reforms. Buildingreform teams will design strategies and structure implementation activities in their ownschools,and along with the steering committee they will monitor the efficacy ofimplementation. ANTICIPATED PRODUCTS: Project staff will present findings and results of thisproject atstate and local conferences. They will also provide inservice training and developarticles forpublication in relevant research journals. PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Minor, Don Northwest Suburban Special Education Organization (NSSEO) 799 West Kensington Road Mt. Prospect, IL 60056 708-577-7749 Restructuring Education for Work: Examining the Outcomes for Youth withDisabilities GRANT NUMBER: H023R20034 BEGINNING DATE: 1/01/93 ENDING DATE: 12/31/97 ABSTRACT PURPOSE: The primary goals of this project are twofold: (1) to refine and implement amergedrestructuring effort centering on the inclusion of youth with disabilities in Tech Prepprograms,and (2) to rigorously evaluate the processes, effects and impact of this initiative. METHOD: A 15-member Leadership Cadre will guide the development andimplementation ofthe project. The Cadre will be facilitated and supported by an evaluation consultantteam fromthe Center on Education and Work and the Center on Organization and Restructuringof Schools,both located at the University of Wisconsin. The basic project design will incorporateconceptsofreflective practice, teamwork, continuous quality improvement, organizational learning,andaction research teams. These teams will conduct focus groups, surveys, interviews,documentanalyses, and observations as appropriate. Based on a comprehensive data set,specific reformstrategies will be developed, implemented, and evaluated in Years 2 and 3. During thelatter partof Year 3 and throughout Year 4 the validated processes will be replicated in nearbyschooldistricts. ANTICIPATED PRODUCTS: The primary products of this program will be a guidebookdescribing the planning, implementation, and continuous assessment processes usedthroughoutthe study. Throughout the project a series of special reports and journal articlesdocumenting theresolution of critical curriculum and instructional issues will be released. PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Peter, Marshall Lane County Direction Service 3875 Kincaid Street #18 Eugene, OR 97405-4599 503-686-5060 Lane County Direction Service Ombudspersons GRANT NUMBER: H023M20010 BEGINNING DATE: 10/01/92 ENDING DATE: 3/01/96 ABSTRACT PURPOSE: This project will improve the delivery of community services forchildren/youngadults with disabilities and help assure their involvement in appropriate educationalprograms. METHOD: Project goals will be accomplished through the recruitment and training ofombudspersons to assist families, and the development of a multi-agency advisorycommitteecharged with the identification and resolution of systemic and organizational problems. A modelombudsman program is planned within a school district serving over 17,000 students,includingatleast 1,500 students with disabilities. Information on available community resources forfamiliesof children with disabilities will be collected and updated. A consumer satisfactionsurvey willbedesigned and administered to parents, and a qualitative study will examine formal andinformalpatterns of interaction between the school district and other service providers. ANTICIPATED PRODUCTS: Results should involve: (1) creation of a trained cadre ofprofessional ombudspeople; (2) initiation of communication among key agency leadersfor thespecific purpose of improving collaborative relations; (3) improved access to highqualityinformation on community resources for parents and consumers; (4) extensivedocumentation ofsystem improvement needs in the school district; and (5) development and field testingof aninnovative ombudsperson training package. PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Phelan, Dan Lake Washington School District #414 19003 N.E. 53rd Street P.O. Box 2909 Kirkland, WA 98903 206-828-3201 The Thoughtful Structures and Effective Practices Project: Building an InclusiveExemplaryHighSchool Community GRANT NUMBER: H023R30015 BEGINNING DATE: 6/01/93 ENDING DATE: 5/31/97 ABSTRACT PURPOSE: This project will incorporate effective practices for students with disabilitiesinto anew high school that is committed to inclusion. METHOD: Beginning in Year 1 and continuing throughout the project, the project willplay amajor role in developing the high school's mission, student goals, student outcomes,and qualityindicators, to better reflect the diversity of student needs. The project AdvisoryCommittee andschool teams will receive training and assistance needed to participate in the schoolprocess ofdeveloping systems of accountability for its students, actualizing its inclusion goal, andreallocating staff and resources for integrated programming. Project funds will supportstaffdevelopment in best practices for secondary students with disabilities chosen by theschoolteams. Multiple methods will be used to document the process of developing an inclusive highschoolincluding focus group interviews, stakeholder surveys, observation and documentationofmeetings, and collection and analyses of school documents. ANTICIPATED PRODUCTS: Findings and updates on the ongoing project will bedisseminatedthrough newsletters to parents of students with disabilities and their teachers. PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Sailor, Wayne University of Kansas 1052 Dole Lawrence, KS 66045 913-864-4950 Kansas University Affiliated Program at Lawrence's School-Linked ServicesResearchProject GRANT NUMBER: H023D40020 BEGINNING DATE: 8/01/94 ENDING DATE: 7/31/97 ABSTRACT PURPOSE: This project will study school-linked services that are designed to supportbetteroutcomes for children with disabilities and their families through the combined efforts oftheKansas State Board of Education (KSBE) and two local school districts providingschool-linkedservices. METHOD: The sample for this investigation will include all children (N=270) and theirfamilieswho receive school-linked services through one of the two target projects. Thisresearch projectconsists of interactive qualitative and quantitative components designed to augmenteach other. For the qualitative component, staff will conduct naturalistic inquiries regarding policyandimplementation issues related to school-linked services. These naturalistic inquiries willrevealtheperspectives of participants at all levels of the implementation process, includingconsumers,teachers, administrators, related service providers, and other stakeholders. During thefirst projectyear, the inquiry team will identify service integration needs and barriers at each siteand developpotential solutions relative to matters such as logistics of services and staff trainingneeds. Duringthe second project year, policy, planning, and implementation recommendations will beenactedand the inquiry will serve as a formative evaluation of their impact. Using bothconsumer andparticipant perspectives, inquiry teams will examine both accessibility and outcomes oftheseservices. The third project year will involve development and refinement of casestudiesdetailingthe impact of planning and implementation processes carried out during the first twoyears.Quantitative descriptive research techniques will be used primarily to examine theimpact ofschool-linked services integration in terms of accessibility of services and outcomes ofservices.Investigations will be prioritized by relevant stakeholders through Advisory Councilparticipationand naturalistic inquiry information. Areas of study will include length of time betweenproblemidentification and implementation of services, and demographic information. ANTICIPATED PRODUCTS: This project will result in identification of effectiveprocesses forthe initial development and implementation of school-linked services, identification ofbarriers toschool-linked service implementation, and a description of the impact of school-linkedservicesonchildren with disabilities and their families. PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Schulte, Ann University of North Carolina Frank Porter Graham Child Development Center CB# 8180 Chapel Hill, NC 27599 919-966-2622 Including Children with Disabilities in School-Based Change GRANT NUMBER: H023R30014 BEGINNING DATE: 7/01/93 ENDING DATE: 6/30/96 ABSTRACT PURPOSE: The project will implement and evaluate a school-based change processto helpschools take a comprehensive view of special education services and the needs of thechildrenthey serve. METHOD: The model to be employed includes the following components: (1)school-wide selfexamination; (2) parental involvement; (3) a school-based planning team; (4) ongoingand variedforms of technical assistance; (5) time-limited funds to the school for innovation; and (6)plannedexit of the researchers. Within the model, school staff and parents articulate guidingprinciplesforthe design of effective services for children with disabilities, and then participate in afour-dayworkshop to examine school practices in relation to these guiding principles and theschool'sstated goals. Two schools that are engaged in school-based restructuring will serve astest sites. Qualitative case study methodology, quantitative measures, and data produced by thebuilt-inevaluation process will be used to provide evidence of the change model'seffectiveness inproducing meaningful outcomes for special education students. ANTICIPATED PRODUCTS: Research findings and results from this project will bepresentedat annual meetings of professional organizations and published in relevant journals. Specificproject products anticipated will include a practitioner guide on considerations in makingschoolsmore effective for children with disabilities, and a description of special educationserviceswithinsite-managed schools. PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Senne, Ron Technology and Innovations in Education 1925 Plaza Boulevard Rapid City, SD 57502 605-394-1876 The Involvement of Special Education in the Planning and Implementation of theModernizationProject and the Effect of this Involvement on Programs, Personnel, and Students withDisabilitiesand their Families GRANT NUMBER: H159A40013 BEGINNING DATE: 10/01/94 ENDING DATE: 9/30/96 ABSTRACT PURPOSE: The project will examine the impact of school restructuring efforts in SouthDakotaupon students with disabilities. The study will also seek to determine the level ofinvolvement ofspecial education personnel and students with disabilities and their families in schoolmodernization efforts. In addition, the project will assess the impact of schoolmodernizationefforts on the performance of students with disabilities. METHOD: Questions on the impact of restructuring efforts will be answered throughcollectionof data from state agencies and the 20 school districts currently participating in themodernizationproject. Three school districts (one each in the first, second and third years of theproject) willprovide in-depth qualitative data for analysis of local and classroom-level changes thatimpactspecial education programs and students. Quantitative data will be collected fromparticipatingschool districts, calling for information from administrators, support staff and teacherswho usethe Portland Instrument and the About Your District Questionnaire. Students'performanceindicator data will be gathered from schools via the Student Information System anddirectexamination of a stratified random selection of students' IEPs. ANTICIPATED PRODUCTS: At the local district level, findings of the study will bepresentedto all participating school districts, and will be disseminated on request to other SouthDakotaschool districts through the state agency and Modernization Project. At the state level,findingswill be disseminated through presentations at state-wide conferences and through printmediadisseminated through state agencies and organizations. At the national level,disseminationactivities will include reports to the Department of Education, presentations, andpublication ofmonographs through national organizations. PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Sindelar, Paul T. University of Florida 219 Grinter Hall Gainesville, FL 32611 904-392-0701 Project RISES: Restructuring for the Inclusion of Special Education Students GRANT NUMBER: H023R30010 BEGINNING DATE: 8/01/93 ENDING DATE: 9/30/96 ABSTRACT PURPOSE: This project will demonstrate that systemic school reform is possible, thatits effectscan be documented, and that methods used to initiate systemic reform can bedisseminated toother schools. METHOD: Over a two year period, stakeholders and project staff will develop and testa moretangible and transportable version of the basic model of school restructuring inquestion. Projectstaff will assist stakeholders as they develop materials and design training programs forasecond-generation target school to join the project in a third year. Materials will showhow atraditional school can move through shared decision-making on to curricular,instructional andorganizational restructuring. Specific programs to meet the academic, social, anddevelopmentalneeds of at-risk children will be offered. ANTICIPATED PRODUCTS: Dissemination of project findings will be carried outthroughconference presentations, articles for publication, distribution via the ERIC database,and amanual on meeting the needs of hard-to-reach students in restructured schools. PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Tindal, Gerald University of Oregon BRT - 232 Education Eugene, OR 97403-5262 503-346-1640 Project Succeed in Middle Schools: Securing Understanding in Content ThroughConsultationand Explicit Environmental Demands GRANT NUMBER: H023C30064 BEGINNING DATE: 7/01/93 ENDING DATE: 6/30/98 ABSTRACT PURPOSE: This project will develop, field-test, and evaluate a special educationservicedeliverymodel for middle schools, with content teachers as the primary source ofinstruction. METHOD: In Year One, the project will focus on providing content teachers a structurefororganizing their content-teaching. During Year Two, the study will investigate effects ofsystematic databased feedback on teachers' use of this structural framework. In YearThree,attention will shift to examine how teachers manipulate the two dimensions of theframework intheir curriculum and within their interactive instruction to achieve changes in studentperceptionand learning. In the fourth project year, the special educator will be added as caseconsultantwithin this package with a student progress monitoring system. The teacher will also beplacedinthe role of researcher to identify individually effective strategies within a componentanalysis,using individual student monitoring of learning outcomes and explicit consultationsupportsystems. Finally, in Year Five, the manipulation of Organized Knowledge Forms andInteractiveLearning Tasks will be synthesized in a consultation system and evaluated. ANTICIPATED PRODUCTS: Dissemination activities will include the following:presentationatnational conferences during all 5 years of the project; presentations at preconferenceworkshops;publication of a number of research reports, monographs, and training modules; andteachingbothmethodology and findings from research in courses on-campus. PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Tindal, Gerald University of Oregon BRT - 232 Education Eugene, OR 97403-5262 503-346-1640 Project Departure: Designing Educational ProgramsAligned with Reforms inTeaching andUniform Restructuring in Education GRANT NUMBER: H023R30026 BEGINNING DATE: 7/01/93 ENDING DATE: 6/30/97 ABSTRACT PURPOSE: This project will attempt to implement and explain the relationships amonginterdependent systemic processes and resource use strategies within the context ofschoolreform/restructuring to enhance system adaptability and inclusiveness as means forachievingbetter educational outcomes for children with disabilities. METHOD: Three important resource use strategies with extensive empirical supportandwidespread application will be explored; including: team-building from within the contextoforganization development framework; consultation as practiced from a broad behavioralapproach; and curriculum-based assessment. Particular objectives to be sought amongparticipating children will include presence and participation in school programs,independenceand personal responsibility, skilled social behaviors, and improved literacy. ANTICIPATED PRODUCTS: This project will provide systemic design features forassuringthat primary school restructuring initiatives meet the needs of children with disabilities. The useof rigorous case study replications will both guide these efforts and provide valid designprinciplesfor schools initiating primary education reform and restructuring initiatives. PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Vadasy, Patricia Washington Research Institute 180 Nickerson Suite 103 Seattle, WA 98109 206-285-9317 The Quality Management and Practices Project (QMAP) GRANT NUMBER: H023R20019 BEGINNING DATE: 10/01/92 ENDING DATE: 9/30/96 ABSTRACT PURPOSE: The project will develop and implement a process for adapting andinternalizingeffective assessment and instructional practices for students with disabilities that willinform theongoing broader school-based restructuring efforts in the four-school Powerful SchoolsCoalition(PSC). METHOD: An organizational context will be developed to stimulate ongoingimplementation ofschool innovation for students with disabilities. The PSC will develop a plan forsystemicchangeto incorporate effective practices for students with disabilities in PSC restructuringefforts. Effective practices for students with disabilities will be designed, introduced, evaluated,refined,and incorporated in field-test classrooms within participating schools. Validatedpractices willthen be selected for implementation throughout the PSC. Case studies will beconducted on thepolicy, organization, administrative, opera- tional and cultural features that enableschools toimplement systemic changes. ANTICIPATED PRODUCTS: The project will identify the mediating and bridgingconditionsthat link effective teaching and learning practices with structural alterations that sustainpositivestudent and teacher outcomes. The case studies will be a major product of the project,as theywill describe components of the system and the culture of the schools that the schools choose tofocus on as they incorporate these practices into the process of continuousimprovement. PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Vandercook, Terri University of Minnesota 145 Peik Hall Minneapolis, MN 55455 612-6324-5856 Shared Responsibility GRANT NUMBER: H023R30029 BEGINNING DATE: 9/01/93 ENDING DATE: 8/31/97 ABSTRACT PURPOSE: This project plans to initiate and sustain systemic school change thatsupports theinclusion of students with disability labels in general education classrooms and in theircommunities. METHOD: Through the process, members of the Alice Smith School community willcollaboratively gather information about the systemic and organizational features oftheir schooland community, describe goals and visions for both the school and for studentoutcomes, identifycritical features that impact the full adoption of new ideas and best practices, andimplementstrategic action plans to restructure the system so that full inclusion and educationalexcellenceare achieved. Intensive, ongoing evaluation will be used to assess and refine therestructuringmodel to develop a systematic yet flexible model that will be replicated in a secondschool in thethird and fourth years of the project. ANTICIPATED PRODUCTS: This project is expected to significantly contribute toknowledgeabout systemic features of schools that impact adoption of inclusive education bestpractices, andof planned educational restructuring. Dissemination of project results and findings willbeachieved through a combination of conference presentations, journal articles, andreplicationefforts. PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Vaughn, Sharon University of Miami School of Education P.O. Box 248065 Coral Gables, FL 33124-2040 305-284-6611 Restructuring Education for all Learners GRANT NUMBER: H023R20005 BEGINNING DATE: 1/01/93 ENDING DATE: 9/30/96 ABSTRACT PURPOSE: The purpose of this project is to incorporate effective practices forindividuals withdisabilities into broader school-based educational reform and restructuring initiativesoccurringintwo elementary schools in Dade County. METHOD: The program will begin with a community-building and planning phase,followed byan intensive university/school partnership phase focusing on faculty development,strengtheningresources for the school, and implementing innovative service delivery for persons withdisabilities. University support for the restructuring effort will gradually give way tosite-basedimplementation. Tutoring services will be provided with the assistance of the UniversityofMiamiStudent Literacy Corps. School site, teacher, and student case studies will beconducted for bothprocess and outcome evaluation and data analysis. ANTICIPATED PRODUCTS: Findings from this study will be reported through six majorchannels: Strategically Planned Dissemination Networks, journal articles, conferencepresentations, computer networks, curriculum diissemination, and community-baseddiscussion/meeting groups. National restructuring networks will participate in ensuringavailability of findings to all school districts currently involved in school restructuring. Theproject is believed to have the potential to produce collaborative change in therestructuring ofeducation for all learners at local, state and national levels. Top of Page Back to ERIC Menu Back to CEC Home Page copyright © 1996 ERIC Clearinghouse on Disabilities and Gifted Education Last updated: October 29, 1996 Send updates to: ericec@cec.sped.org URL: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm WT02-B20-148IA001-000011-B034-33http://www.cec.sped.org:80/osep/12second.htm 204.168.19.228 19970101080536 text/html 20263HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Communications/1.1Date: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 08:05:37 GMTLast-modified: Tuesday, 29-Oct-96 19:05:00 GMTContent-length: 20070Content-type: text/html OSEP Special Education Research Projects 7. SECONDARY EDUCATION AND POSTSECONDARYOUTCOMES PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Boudah, Daniel Knight, Stephanie Texas A & M University Department of Educational Psychology College Station, TX 77843-4225 409-845-1831 Beyond Bridging the Gap: Creating Learning Communities of Research andPractice GRANT NUMBER: H023G50045 BEGINNING DATE: 9/01/95 ENDING DATE: 8/31/99 ABSTRACT PURPOSE: The project will develop and validate a participatory research and developmentmodel that creates learning communities of research and practice. The ultimate goal of thesecommunities of research and practice is to impact teacher thinking and instructional behavior ininclusive classes, the school systems and cultures in which teachers work, university teachertraining and research programs, and the academic outcomes of students with and withoutdisabilities in inclusive classes. METHOD: The project will develop a working model of participatory research anddevelopment(PR&D). In the first year, the model will be implemented with ten secondary special and generaleducation teachers (expanding to 35 teachers in the first three years) to address authenticinstructional problems in the inclusive classrooms of participating teachers. Descriptive andintervention studies will determine the effects of teacher involvement in participatory researchanddevelopment on their problem-solving/innovation development process, including their planning,instructional behaviors, and attitudes. Intervention studies over the first three years of the projectwill determine the effects of teacher participation in the PR&D process and implementation ofclassroom teaching and learning strategies in experimental classrooms on the academicperformance of students with mild disabilities as well as those without disabilities (N=80studentsin the first and third years, N=40 in the second). In addition, in each year of the project, theacademic performance of students with and without mild disabilities within experimental classeswill be compared to the academic performance of students with and without disabilities inclassrooms where teachers do not participate in PR&D, but do implement the innovations ofPR&D teachers. Descriptive studies will address the effects of teacher, administrator, and staffinvolvement in participatory research and development on the system, culture, and professionalclimate of the schools included in the project. Finally, descriptive studies will determine theeffectsof participation in participatory research and development on the attitudes, future research plans,and teacher preparation programs involving participating university educators. ANTICIPATED PRODUCTS: Project findings will be disseminated through presentations topeers within participating institutions and regional and national conferences. Research findingswill be published in practitioner and research journals. PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Bulgren, Janis Schumaker, Jean Bragg University of Kansas Center for Research 3061 Dole Center Lawrence, KS 66045 913-864-4780 Performance Enhancement Routine for Use in Inclusive Secondary ContentClassrooms GRANT NUMBER: H023C50143 BEGINNING DATE: 8/01/95 ENDING DATE: 7/31/00 ABSTRACT PURPOSE: The project will develop and validate four new routines, called PerformanceEnhancement Routines, which will be aimed at overcoming the barriers associated with methodsused to ensure and evaluate mastery of secondary school content. METHOD: Components of the Performance Enhancement Routines to be developed andvalidated include the following: an Assessment Planning Routine to be used by teachers inanalyzing content they teach and creating assessment tools appropriate to both content andstudent characteristics; a Study Guide Routine to help teachers create study guides matched toassessment tools; a Review Routine to be used as a closure activity through which students canreview important information in cooperative study groups; and a Feedback Routine to providefeedback to whole classes of students on both content and process aspects of learning. Anevaluation of effects of the teacher training program on the implementation of this model will beconducted, as will an evaluation of effects of the instructional model on student performance onboth content measures and motivational factors. The social validity of the instructional modelwillalso be measured by specially designed surveys. Descriptive studies yielding both quantitativedata from teacher surveys and qualitative data from information received from teacher focusgroups will also be collected. ANTICIPATED PRODUCTS: The routines to be developed through this project will be usablein combination with current Content Planning Routines and Content Delivery Routines to helpstudents with disabilities succeed in content-area classes at the secondary level. Numerousreports and professional papers will be prepared for presentation and publication throughjournals,conferences, and agency-sponsored training sessions. These papers will include the original position paper, results of annual studies, and teachertraining procedures. PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: East, Bill Alabama Department of Education Special Education Services P.O. Box 302101 Montgomery, AL 36130-2101 334-242-8114 A Feasibility Study for a Data-based Tracking System for Secondary Students withDisabilities GRANT NUMBER: H159F50001 BEGINNING DATE: 8/01/95 ENDING DATE: 7/31/97 ABSTRACT PURPOSE: This project will evaluate the feasibility of implementing a state-wide studenttracking system for Alabama's secondary students and young adults with disabilities. METHOD: A follow-along project design will be employed to collect data on both in-schoolandpost-school indicators. The sample will consist of students from Jefferson County (urban) andLee County (rural) high schools. All students over 17 years of age in participating schools willbeadministered a questionnaire (approximately 242 students.) For the post-school phase, half of allstudents who exited these two school systems in the 1994-1995 school year will be administeredthe post-school questionnaire via telephone, (approximately 202 post-school participants.) Ultimately, the student tracking system would gather information on the same students at both 17years of age in-school and 9 months post-school. This information will then be used to identifylinks between post-school indicators and specific programs, services, and prior programimprovement activities. A task force will be developed, to consist of individuals from an array ofstate and local agencies representing administrators, educators, and consumers. This group willtranslate project outcomes into a set of recommendations for policy formation, adoption, andimplementation in Alabama. ANTICIPATED PRODUCTS: The final project report will include a description of the pilotedstudent tracking system, the developed in-school instrument and revised post-school instrument,the results of the pilot test in terms of analysis for in-school and post-school indicators, the finalproject evaluation report, and the task force's recommendations for policy formation. PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Eisenmen, Laura Vanderbilt University Peabody College Department of Special Education Box 328 Nashville, TN 37203 615-322-4782 Indicators of Integrated Academic/Occupational Curricula in Secondary Classrooms ServingStudents With and Without Disabilities GRANT NUMBER: H023B50033 BEGINNING DATE: 9/01/95 ENDING DATE: 8/31/96 ABSTRACT PURPOSE: The purpose of this project is to develop valid measures of classroom practice thatare sensitive to the level of integration of academic and vocational curricula in a variety of highschool courses, including those experienced by students with disabilities. METHOD: Using systematic observation methods in a purposive sample of forty academic,vocational, and blended classes offered at a comprehensive high school participating in theSouthern Regional Education Board's "High Schools that Work" initiative, project staff willassessfour domains of curriculum and instruction: (1) content blend; (2) vocational content; (3)instructional strategy; and (4) student activity. Data will consist of pre-coded administrativedescriptions of courses and student types (including numbers of students with disabilities),pre-coded teacher descriptions of courses, daily teacher logs of classroom activity, and observerlogs of classroom activity. Interobserver agreement, correlational analyses, and teachers' andobservers' structured comments will be used to test the validity of the measures. Repeatedmeasures profile analyses will be used to ascertain if there is a profile or set of profiles that aremost likely to occur in high school classes that have been pre-specified as "integratedacademic/occupational courses", such that integrated classes may be differentiated from classesthat do not integrate academic and occupational curriculum. Additional profile analysis will beused to determine if student disability is associated with certain curricular and instructionalfeatures and whether those features are similar to those found in classes that integrate academicand occupational learning. ANTICIPATED PRODUCTS: The project will develop valid classroom indicators of integratedcurricula based on current conceptual models; an analysis of the utility of the conceptual modelfor describing regular and special education classroom activities; measures of reliability ofteacherreports of integrated curricula; and benchmarks of local practice in the participating school. PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Emerson, John Washington Research Institute 180 Nickerson, Suite 103 Seattle, WA 998109 206-285-9317 General Education Development (GED) Success: Effective Instructional Interventions forStudents with Disabilities GRANT NUMBER: H023P30004 BEGINNING DATE: 9/01/93 ENDING DATE: 8/31/97 ABSTRACT PURPOSE: This project will identify and document interventions that provide effectiveindividualized instructional accommodations and supports for students with learning disabilitiesand behavior disorders in secondary GED preparation programs. METHOD: A multi-agency Advisory Task Force will identify the needs and barriers to GEDprograms that students experience, effective preparation programs and instructors, andintervention strategies that will address student needs. Students with disabilities who havedropped out of Seattle schools will be recruited and assigned to one of three regular educationGED programs: a computer-assisted curriculum for pre-GED and GED preparation; a test-basedGED curriculum based on student strengths and test characteristics; or a program of instructionalaccommodation and support based on identification of barriers and successful program features. Budget strategies will be identified to capture the FTEs of all target students so that interventionscan be supported without grant funds after the project ends. Each of these GED interventionswill be evaluated to determine its effectiveness in preparing students to successfully complete theGED subtests. Students who successfully complete these interventions will be compared withstudents who do not complete them, and a control group of nonenrollees on occupational, social,and personal outcomes. ANTICIPATED PRODUCTS: Information on effective GED practices identified in thisprojectwill be disseminated to secondary and postsecondary program sites, professional and advocacyorganizations, and state and federal offices. PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Gliner, Jeffrey A. Colorado State University 211 University Services Center Ft. Collins, CO 80523 303-491-0699 Students' Entrepreneurial Education Research Project GRANT NUMBER: H023C50080 BEGINNING DATE: 5/01/95 ENDING DATE: 4/30/98 ABSTRACT PURPOSE: The project will investigate the relationship between entrepreneurial education andthe development of self-mastery skills for secondary students with emotional disorders duringschool and upon exit or graduation from high school. METHOD: Using a three-level entrepreneurial curriculum, staff will work with 55-75 studentsages 6 through 21 who are participating in three different alternative programs as a result offailure in a mainstreamed secondary education environment. Staff will coordinate projectactivities and facilitate a multi-disciplinary, multi-agency advisory and service team to includestudents, teachers, counselors, entrepreneur mentors, employers, parents, law enforcementrepresentatives, and representatives of social service agencies. A case study approach using aparticipatory action research model will provide the qualitative component of the project'sevaluation, while standardized measurement tools combined with subjective assessments byentrepreneurial coordinators will provide quantitative evaluation. The business community willbedrawn in to help determine specific employability skills they want to see in potential newemployees, and mentors will provide support as each class plans, develops, and implements anentrepreneurial enterprise. ANTICIPATED PRODUCTS: Project findings will be presented at local, state and nationalconferences directed towards teachers, administrators, related services personnel, adult serviceproviders, parents and students with emotional disorders. The Colorado Department ofEducation will disseminate the finished curriculum state-wide, and staff will submit process andresearch articles to relevant professional journals. PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Mellard, Daryl F. University of Kansas 3061 Dole Human Development Center Lawrence, KS 66045 913-864-4780 The Development and Validation of a GED Proficiency Attainment Model for Students withLearning Disabilities and Severe Emotional Disabilities GRANT NUMBER: H023P30008 BEGINNING DATE: 8/01/93 ENDING DATE: 12/31/97 ABSTRACT PURPOSE: This program will identify barriers to GED program participation and completionforstudents with learning disabilities (LD) and severe emotional disturbances (SED) who drop outof high school. The project will also design, implement, and evaluate an intervention model toaccommodate these students' needs related to completion. METHOD: In the first phase of the project, those involved in the GED process will participate ininterviews, focus group meetings, and/or observations. These data sources will provideinformation describing the current needs of students and instructors in GED programs. Incollaboration with those involved, an intervention package will be designed for implementationand evaluation in the second research phase. One product will be an intervention modelgeneralizable to other GED programs. The intervention model will address academic andself-management skills as major areas influencing GED participation and completion. ANTICIPATED PRODUCTS: The instructional model will consist of three packages: (1) aRecruitment Package; (2) a GED Preparation Package (consisting of the Strategies ApplicationComponent, the Strategic Tutoring Component, the Content Enhancement Component, and theSelf-Management Component); and (3) a Test Performance Package. In each area, learning andself-management strategies and related needs of students with LD and SED will be addressed inconjunction with the teaching skills and programmatic influences on participation andcompletion. PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Wehmeyer, Michael The ARC 500 East Border Street Suite 300 Arlington, TX 76010 817-261-6003 Research in Self-Determination of Students with Cognitive Disabilities GRANT NUMBER: H023C40126 BEGINNING DATE: 10/01/94 ENDING DATE: 9/30/99 ABSTRACT PURPOSE: This project will conduct an empirical examination of the causal relationshipbetweenself-determination and positive adult outcomes through a longitudinal follow-along study ofschool graduates with cognitive disabilities, including mental retardation and learningdisabilities. METHOD: This project spans five areas of research that staff members will conduct over aperiod of 5 years. First, through a longitudinal follow-along study, staff members will explorethecausal relationship between self-determination and adult outcomes. Using precollected datarelated to self-determination status and demographic information, project staff will monitorparticipants' progress at 1 and 3 years after graduation, including employment status,postsecondary education status, marital status, and perceived quality of life. Participantsrecruitedfor this component will include students (N=150) with mild to moderate levels of mentalretardation and severe learning disabilities. Self-determination assessments will include fivedomains: (1) autonomy; (2) self-regulation; (3) self-actualization; (4) perceptions ofpsychologicalempowerment; and (5) perceptions of self. In the second, third, and fourth components, staff willdescribe the development of self-determination through various means, including a longitudinalstudy of perceptions of control and attributions of academic achievement. Students ranging inagefrom 8 to 19 years will participate, including those with mental retardation, learning disabilities,and students who are not disabled. During each project year, staff will assess each student onvarious measures studying locus of control, perceptions of helplessness, and other research foci. The final area of research involves the development and field testing of a model of teaching thatdistributes the responsibility for learning among teachers, parents, and students, giving primarycontrol to the student. Participating students will be the primary agents for choices and decisionsat each phase of the model's development. ANTICIPATED PRODUCTS: Project research activities will result in data detailing the causallink between self- determination and adult outcomes and describing the developmental course ofconstituent elements of self- determination. Project demonstration activities will result in thevalidation of a model of teaching that can be used to promote self-determination. Projectmaterials will be distributed to national organizations, journals, and conferences. Top of Page Back to ERIC Menu Back to CEC Home Page copyright © 1996 ERIC Clearinghouse on Disabilities and Gifted Education Last updated: October 29, 1996 Send updates to: ericec@cec.sped.org URL: http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm