WT02-B22-1IA060-000333-B020-151http://www.survey.net:80/pol3r.html 204.107.221.240 19970115053914 text/html 10313HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 15 Jan 1997 05:32:50 GMTServer: Apache-SSL-US/1.0.3+1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 10130Last-modified: Mon, 25 Nov 1996 20:26:45 GMT SURVEY.NET Poll Results Your source for information, opinions & demographics from the Net Community! 1996 US Political Poll #3 - Results Survey started: February 6, 1996 Total Respondents: 13032 Your political affiliation: [ 3876]  29.7% - Libertarian[ 3801]  29.2% - Republican[ 2026]  15.5% - Democrat[ 1866]  14.3% - Independant[  560]   4.3% - No Answer[  264]   2.0% - Other[  205]   1.6% - Not registered to vote[  202]   1.6% - Not a US citizen[  155]   1.2% - Green Party[   70]   0.5% - United We Stand Even though all these candidates are not running, who would you vote for? [ 5286]  40.6% - Harry Browne[ 2206]  16.9% - Bill Clinton[ 2020]  15.5% - Bob Dole[  722]   5.5% - Pat Buchanan[  579]   4.4% - Gen. Colin Powell[  394]   3.0% - Other[  353]   2.7% - Alan Keyes[  340]   2.6% - Steve Forbes[  225]   1.7% - Ross Perot[  184]   1.4% - Newt Gingrich[  168]   1.3% - No Answer[  147]   1.1% - Lamar Alexander[  100]   0.8% - Jesse Jackson[   97]   0.7% - Phil Gramm[   56]   0.4% - Rick Tompkins[   40]   0.3% - Richard Lugar[   30]   0.2% - Pete Wilson[   26]   0.2% - Arlen Spector[   24]   0.2% - Bob Dornan[   17]   0.1% - David Duke[   11]   0.1% - Pat Robertson Of the following two candidates, who would you vote for? [ 5355]  41.1% - Bob Dole[ 4077]  31.3% - No Answer[ 3592]  27.6% - Bill Clinton Of the following three candidates, who would you vote for? [ 3674]  28.2% - Steve Forbes[ 3397]  26.1% - Bob Dole[ 3172]  24.3% - Bill Clinton[ 2779]  21.3% - No Answer Of the following six candidates, who would you vote for? [ 5453]  41.8% - Harry Browne[ 2767]  21.2% - Bill Clinton[ 2310]  17.7% - Bob Dole[  967]   7.4% - Pat Buchanan[  774]   5.9% - Steve Forbes[  440]   3.4% - No Answer[  311]   2.4% - Phil Gramm What is your sex? [10313]  79.1% - Male[ 2062]  15.8% - Female[  649]   5.0% - No Answer What is your approximate race? [11061]  84.9% - White[  554]   4.3% - No Answer[  445]   3.4% - Other[  252]   1.9% - Latino/Spanish[  243]   1.9% - Black[  221]   1.7% - Native American[  195]   1.5% - Asian/Oriental[   54]   0.4% - Indian/Eastern What is your family income level? [ 2809]  21.6% - $41k-$60k[ 2564]  19.7% - $61k-$100k[ 2420]  18.6% - $25k-$40k[ 1890]  14.5% - No Answer[ 1170]   9.0% - $15k-$25k[ 1029]   7.9% - $100k-$200k[  856]   6.6% - Under $15k[  284]   2.2% - $200k+ Of the programs listed, which do you watch most frequently? [ 2300]  17.6% - CNN[ 2125]  16.3% - CNN-Headline News[ 1666]  12.8% - C-Span[ 1209]   9.3% - Other[ 1201]   9.2% - No Answer[  864]   6.6% - NBC News[  863]   6.6% - McNeil-Lehrer[  827]   6.3% - Rush Limbaugh[  790]   6.1% - ABC News[  443]   3.4% - CBS News[  402]   3.1% - 60 Minutes[  188]   1.4% - Fox News[   79]   0.6% - 700 Club[   66]   0.5% - Larry King Live Do you consider yourself... [ 5183]  39.8% - Libertarian (socially liberal, economically conservative)[ 2006]  15.4% - Somewhat Conservative[ 1749]  13.4% - Very Conservative[ 1719]  13.2% - Moderate[ 1062]   8.1% - Somewhat Liberal[  704]   5.4% - Very Liberal[  602]   4.6% - No Answer What political concepts do you agree with? [10158]  77.9% - We need less government regulation in general[10011]  76.8% - The government should NOT mandate moral standards[ 8228]  63.1% - States should have more responsibility than the Federal Gov.[ 4405]  33.8% - We need more responsible government regulation[ 3302]  25.3% - I will only vote for a Pro-Choice candidate[ 1627]  12.5% - I will only vote for a Pro-Life candidate[ 1134]   8.7% - The government SHOULD mandate moral standards What is the worst problem with our society? [ 4477]  34.4% - Government intrusion[ 1354]  10.4% - The national debt[ 1117]   8.6% - Political/government corruption[  962]   7.4% - Crime[  751]   5.8% - Education[  701]   5.4% - Other[  587]   4.5% - Not enough religious influence[  563]   4.3% - Big business influence[  482]   3.7% - Too much religious influence[  375]   2.9% - The media[  349]   2.7% - Welfare[  258]   2.0% - Drugs[  240]   1.8% - Environmental damage[  227]   1.7% - Abortion[  225]   1.7% - Rising healthcare costs[  220]   1.7% - No Answer[  138]   1.1% - Illegal immigration What qualities are important in a president? [ 7747]  59.4% - open-minded[ 3992]  30.6% - experience in national government[ 3483]  26.7% - uncompromising[ 2742]  21.0% - pro-choice[ 2532]  19.4% - other professional business leader[ 2453]  18.8% - military experience[ 2445]  18.8% - experience in local government[ 2337]  17.9% - Christian[ 2314]  17.8% - preferably no government experience[ 2293]  17.6% - academic[ 1944]  14.9% - made mistakes in his past[ 1859]  14.3% - pro-life[ 1264]   9.7% - non-religious[  907]   7.0% - never touched drugs at all[  785]   6.0% - experimented with drugs in youth[  743]   5.7% - blue-collar/working man[  493]   3.8% - independently wealthy[  294]   2.3% - has a 'perfect' record[  280]   2.1% - Peace Corps experience[  230]   1.8% - laywer[  226]   1.7% - female[  174]   1.3% - attractive[  146]   1.1% - minority[   85]   0.7% - tv/radio/movie personality[   68]   0.5% - religious leader How do you feel about the "Whitewater scandal?" [ 4123]  31.6% - It is a disgrace on the White House[ 2410]  18.5% - Vince Foster was murdered and the Clintons are directly involved[ 1373]  10.5% - It is no worse than some of the things other candidates are involved in[ 1310]  10.1% - No Answer[ 1086]   8.3% - It is an empty scandal manufactured by the republicans for their political gain[  985]   7.6% - It is a scandal in which the Clintons had only peripheral involvement and did not perpetrate[  976]   7.5% - "Where's the beef?"[  751]   5.8% - The media has completely blown this out of preportion How do you feel about a "Flat tax?" [ 4319]  33.1% - If executed properly, it would be a more fair system of taxation[ 2342]  18.0% - It is a great idea[ 2199]  16.9% - I need more information to make a decision[ 1413]  10.8% - It's another attempt to reduce taxes on the rich[ 1314]  10.1% - No Answer[ 1031]   7.9% - In theory it sounds good, but I do not believe it is feasible[  404]   3.1% - It discriminates against the middle class There are also User Specified Comments on this survey available Questions, comments, spelling corrections? Contact webmaster@survey.net. Return to theHome Page. Copyright ©1996, /InterCommerceCorporation, All rights reserved worldwide Send comments to Webmaster@Survey.net WT02-B22-2IA060-000333-B025-88http://www.survey.net:80/oj3c3.html 204.107.221.240 19970115055654 text/html 63490HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 15 Jan 1997 05:50:24 GMTServer: Apache-SSL-US/1.0.3+1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 63307Last-modified: Mon, 25 Nov 1996 20:26:44 GMT SURVEY.NET - OJ Survey #3 - User Comments (ARCHIVE III) Your source for information, opinions & demographics from the NetCommunity! ANNOUNCING: The Internet's finest interactive, totally-automated,immediate survey system. We can take any form and instantly create adynamic demographic database and show you the results as soon as youcomplete the survey! OJ Survey #3 User Comments [ARCHIVE III] boring,boring,boring WHY DOES EVERYTHING IN THIS CASE HAVE TO COME DOWN TO THE ISSUE OF RACE?? AS FAR AS I'M CONCERNED, THE SCIENTIFIC EVIDENCE WAS OVERWHELMING....IT'S EASY TO VIEW THE CASE WITH HINDSIGHT AND SAY THAT THE POLICE WERE SLOPPY, BUT REMEMBER, WHEN THEY ARRIVE ON A MURDER SCENE, THEY DON'T KNOW WHAT THEY HAVE IN FRONT OF THEM, AND THEY DO THE BEST THAT THEY CAN!! IT'S OBVIOUS, THE MORE OFTEN OJ OPENS HIS MOUTH PUBLICLY THESE DAYS THAT HIS STORY OR STORIES ARE CONTRADICTING ONE ANOTHER. HE IS ARROGANT AND VEY OBVIOUSLY A LIAR. HE SHOULD CONSIDER HIMSELF VERY VERY LUCKY TO BE FREE AND JUST KEEP HIS MOUTH SHUT. ENOUGH ALREADY!! He was aquitted for the murders and the case should be closed. In my opinion, if aquitted of a crime there should be no grounds for a civil damage case. It was a fix from day one! I think justice was served. I think there was reasonable doubt. And I know the prosecution was too emotional and partial, they would have seen that they really had no case, except speculatons. The prosecution won the press battle and the general public were biased from day 1, whites, that is. This trial was a sad commentary on the Justice system. With all due respct to the Browns and Goldmans, I am so tired of hearing about this issue. OJ only speaks because he has an audience. I feel he did it or knows vey much who did. Since we are getting no where with all he has to say now, why doesn't he just "shut up" already. He had a chance to speak, in court where it counts. In court he would have had to tell the truth. There have been so many lies and story changes I can't even keep track any more. OJ may have been great but he might as well cange his name to MUD. Thank You for Your Time. What A Joke I guess you can buy freedom its a shame blacks had to get revenge for past racial injustices through the killing of 2 innocent people. I expected this to be a not guilty verdict, I mean, did you really think that the jurors would risk another riot? We now know where Blacks in the U.S. are coming from. OJ got off with murder but he did not get away. God sees all As I pointed out above, the defense was just doing it's job which was to get OJ acquitted. They felt playing the race issue was the way to go and it worked to perfection. What made me the sickest was the fact that black leaders around the country applaude I hope he has to pay through the nose for the civil suit - He's GUILTY The whole thing was a media circus. Ordinarilly plain sleazy lawyers suddenly became famous media stars. I hope we NEVER see another obstruction of justice like this! O.J DIDN'T DO IT I'am very happy that OJ Simpson won!! He was found innocense. And its about time that there is some justice for the african american who live in this white racist world, where for a long time blacks were being abused and killed just for being black. God is with us!!! The jury has my support for "finding" their verdict! Travesty, moral outrage. Best use of $100,000,000 I've ever seen. it was a joke O.J. Simpson is NOT GUILTY! OJ is NOT GUILTY!!!! It is truly a sad day when media coverage can dictate the feelings and sentiments!!! When OJ steps before the "Almighty" is he going to be so cocky then? Will he be so concerned with "image"? I think not. GOD will serve justice--that is enough for me. Oj is guilty and him getting off for murder is sick money is why he was let off The prosecution obviously was not prepared to go to trial and I feel that Garcetti should not have set the trial in downtown LA. The prosecution lost the case themselves. Justice was not served; however, that could change in the civil case. It seems to The trial as lost when Garcetti agreed to move the trial to S. LA. Simpssons "peers" are the rich whites of Brentwood, not the blaccks that were chosen to sit on the jury. a sad day for criminal justice a waste of tax payers money!what a joke!!!!!! If OJ had been white or poor or his victims black, he would have been quickly found guilty. OJ GOT AWAY WITH MURDER SIMPLY BECAUSE HE IS OJ SIMPSON None. There is no real justice when it turn racial! he would be guilty in Canada. Look out O.J., someone's gonna get you the jury voted the only way they could. I would have voted not guiltty too.I'm white,upper class,educated. I know it looks a lot like OJ did it, but it looks just as much or more like he couldn't have done it. I think it would show on him more now,if he'd done it,no matter how much denial he may or may not be in. He doesn't have the manner of a guilty person. If he were guilty, it would come out him some way. He has a right to be angry about what society is doing to him. IT Hope the Browns and Goldmans get every penny! He's SO guilty! The jury did the right thing! There was to much reasonable I think any moron fresh from law school could have convicted The Canadian justice system is mor in tune with the fact that there must be an acquittal when the prosecution has not proved the guilt of the accused beyond a reasonable doubt. One must not forget that the jurors did not get to see everything the viewers did, nor did they hear all the arguments I believe some of the jurors had a verdict in mind when they were seated, a few of them developed a "school girl" crush on Johnnie, and the rest were just too cowardly to vote guilty... black defendant, black lawyer, black jury. We should have known he wouldn't be convicted. The race card turned out to be a joker. O.J. will get his sooner or later. what a joke! The reason the citizens of this country are morally outraged is that we were the thirteenth jurors and saw the evidence. Simpson is guilty. Uneducated jurors with an agenda might as well have said, "We find the murderer not guilty." White people shuold get over it What is with the LA Prosecutors ... why wasn't the Bronco "fleeing" with cash, disguise and weapon not introduced? Why did Judge Ito allow the media to make a "circus" out of the whole trial. The whole things sickens me. A miscarriage of justice. Race was not the factor in this case, because the jurors saw so many holes in this case. I would not have put any criminal away if there is that much doubt. We donot know if this man really committed this crime. None of us were there that night. So al It's over and it's time to move on. The verdict was to excuse what has been done to black people since 300 years and because the justice feared a riot similar to the one we've seen in the Rodney King's case. THAT SCUMBAG,MURDERING, PRICK O.J. SHOULD'NT BE ON THE STREETS NONE Glad it's over--What a travesty!! I feel that the defense team made a circus of the judicial system. They could have accomplished the same means without making a sham of the trial. It seems as though there were too many holes in the prosecution's case. The whole thing was rediculous and was pesented too much like entertainment and not enough like the trial of a man who killed someone Fame had a lot to do with the trial, no one wants to see a hero go down no celeb balck can every be convicted again Ya I know you didn't do it. yout not that kind of person O J is guilty as hell prospective jurors should be requited to pass a critical thinking test with at least some minimun score how very silly. it's nice to be canadian. This trial was not about race, it was about gender. Nicole was murdered by Simpson because she was female and he saw hher as his property - if he couldn't have her, no one else would. Ron Goldman got in the way og Simpson taking control of "his woman." It is so unfortunate that all women on the jury could not see through the race card that was played. Nicole was murdered because she was female, not because she was white or because Simpson is black. This was a clear cut case of a man feeling his ha the right to control the women in his life, through threats, humiliation, beatings, and when these tactics do not work, through murder - the ultimate control. I feel some evidence was overlooked. the lives of two were totally disregarded!!!!!!!! Too many weird things by the prosecution to try and prove the case--plus I think there was more than one killer and the timeline was later. Andy Rooney still hasn't had to pay up his $1M.... It just goes to show how much things have changed regarding I hope O.J. doesn't get a bunch of money from his video tape Sherlock Holmes, Detective Poirot -- where are you when we need you? If the scene was left undisturbed, a real "professional" detective would have found that "shred of evidence." Oj did do it. Why do you think the first attorney he consulted withdrew from the case within three days? OJ probably confessed to him. He did a good job of covering, and lazy scumbag Furman knew it. So, he "framed" OJ (pathetically) for an open and shut case. Sloppy detective work, prosecution not doing their homework egarding witnesses -- once again a murderer is set free on technicalities. There was endless reasonable doubt because of the lameness and sloppiness. The defense zeroed in on reasonable doubt. Easy. The jury acquit, why won't people leave it alone. I'm tired of hearing about it. Since he was acquitted people should let it go and let O.J. Simpson get on with his life and his children's life. it blows chunks! It should have been kept off the air waves and left in the courtroom where it belongs! O.J.Simpson is 100% not guilty of these charges people with money get off Pretty obvious. Blame Garcetti, he should have moved this trial to Santa Barbara, were OJ's true peers are. How can we expect jurors to evaluate the DNA evidence when they lack through no fault of their own the education or training to do so. Juries always ignore THAT which they do not understand. Also, DNA can only negate a match. If a sample is contaminated, it CANNOT match somebody elses, it can only eliminate. Therefore, all the positive OJ matches were his blood. The cops found those samples at the scene 2 dys before OJ's blood was ever drawn, meaning NO planting of blood. Explain that OJ. If OJ did not committ these murders, then ice is right now forming in hell. Only in America! OJ is guilty. Done deal. OJ is lying. Tune in to The OJ Trial Part 2. Leave the man alone now that it is over. JUSTICE WAS NOT SERVED, DON'T EVER FIND YOURSELF ON THE WRONG SIDE OF THE LAW THESE DAYS. IT would be hard to vote for the same side as a LIER OJ is guilty, guilty, guilty ( using the evidence alone.) Those jurors were and are complete assholes. It was a complete joke, if Simpsons not guilty, I'm GOD. What a joke! If the jury had been almost all white, hell would have been raised. As it was almost all black, everyone just sat back and accepted it. As usual. OJ is only concerned with preserving his image, he is a liar and a truly sick individual. It was used a conservative - divisive measure to promote "their" agenda Since no one of us really knows, I think everyone is being unfair to oj. The outcome of the trial showed how far divided this country is in terms of race relations. Had Nichole Simpson and Ronald Goldman been Black, no one, especially White people, would not have given a damn about the outcome of the trial. Also, anyone who followed the trial with an open mind could see how flawed the case of the prosecution was. Until a logical explanation can be presented as to why blood taken from Mr. Simpson was taken to the crime scene and to his home, there's reasonable doubt. Furhermore, if Mr. Simpson did commit the crime, although I doubt he did, he could not commit those barbaric acts alone. Consequently, the prosecution should have done a better job of investigating the murders. Another point was the testimony Sydney gave to police. She recounted hearing her mother crying while talking to her "friend." Newsflash: children can recognize the voice of a parent. Sydney did not hear her father, she heard someone else. O.J. Simpsom was acquitted because the prosecution could nt prove that he was guilty. Look at all of the evidence and testimony and stop listening to Geraldo! A quote I heard: "The LAPD framed a guilty man." In order for our judicial system to be effective, there must be honest law enforcement. It hurts to know two people were brutally murdered, but it also hurts to know there is law enforcement like Mark Furhman around. It makes it rather difficult to discern the truth when law enforcement is as crooked as the criminal! Television coverage was absurd... Marcia Clark is a bitch, and Ron Shapiro should SHUT UP and not critize Jhonny Cochran about the "RACE CARD" goes to show you,a black man can't get a fair trial! If race was an issue then 3 non-blacks aquitted OJ. It was unanimous A travesty of Justice. Intelligent people get out of jury duty, thus we're left with generally low IQ jury members. We should all put in our jury duty time if we expect to have sophisticated, well-thought-out rulings, instead of decisions based on emotion. I wonder what Shakespeare would have said about the media? The Orange is GUILTY. He got off because his lawyers are a bunch of low-life sleazebuckets intent on making a fortune and a good name for themselves while not actually giving a shit about the law. IT'S THE SPIRIT OF THE LAW THAT COUNTS, NOT YOUR FUCKING I disagree with the verdict but still have faith in the legal system. therefore I support it. If he did it, a day is coming when he will have to deal with it. I hope he knows Jesus, and that Jesus knows him. Fun to watch. It sucked It was obvious from the beginning that the jury had already formed an opinion. Presenting DNA evidence was a waste of time because the jury had long since made their decision. too much todo over a white woman. I hated the outcome...NOT!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!! I think Goldman should hire a hit man to rub out O.J. Get jurors with higher IQs; they eliminated those who read! The juice is loose!!!! WAY TO GO OJ:) When's the movie coming out ? The jury made me sick, deathly sick for days. I was infuriated by the verdict. It shows that anyone with money can buy anything, including their freedom after brutally murdering two people. Also, I was very upset that this trial was made into an issue of race, when it was actually an issue of domestic violence, where the perpertrator of the crime committed the ultimate act of domestic violence. This was not about race -- it was about human beings! If O.J. Simpson was a poor man tried in Texas, he would be on death row now. Nice justice system you have there. Great trial!!! I wish the media was still in an uproar about it. that trial is a pile of shit The prosecution I think is out just to convict someone, even if they are innocent, just to close the case and look good. I think OJ's friend that was in the car chase was responsible for the murder of nicole and rod. And there must be a reason for his interferenceon this whole thing. And I think that OJ was forced to drive the car by his friend with a gun on his head that was probly,also forced OJ to tell the cops he was suicidel about this and shoot him self and about the evidence I think it was plaanteed by the racist son of a motherless goat, whats his name? the cop that was accused for being racist. And I was alwas OJs' favorite fan ,but thats no reason that I'm sticking up to him. Its because he I have great instinct about him and another thing Nicoles friend is bluffing people do anything for money like Lisa and Micheal they faked their wedding just like that kiss I saw on TV. And anoyther thing kepp an I on micheal because I have a felling he might commit siucide this year. SAD SAD DAY FOR THE VICTIMS, VICTIM'S FAMILIES AND THE U.S. JUSTICE SYSTEM. The bastard is guilty!!!!! It's sad that the only thing that interrupted the O.J. Simpson trial was the Okalhoma bombing. It made me understand how our system works. I think that was the only benefit to everyone Nastradamous said "A sports hero, will be tarnished by a bloody glove. 95 will set him free. 18 months later, the truth will follow." DISSAPPOINTMENT ALL AROUND...THIS TIME THOUGH... I'm a non-US citizen and I think this whole case has given the US legal system a bad image abroad..... (Norwegian student) OJ had his day (er, year) in court, and he was found not guilty. Maybe the decision was right, and maybe it was wrong. Either way though, I feel it should be respected. As a black man, I know OJ did it..... O.J. did it. The children are the ones who are suffering which is sad. Keep Lookin' you ain't going to find him OJ It is a sad proof of a very bad jusdis system, that can�t handel a case with famus people Sad Case.. I blame Nicole Browns mom and dad for most of it "Blacks" have a different set of moral standards than whites Guiltyguiltyguiltyguiltyguiltyguiltyguiltyguiltyojdiditguiltyguilty This Trial was the biggest scam of the American Judicial system that I have expierenced in the 45 yrs. that I've been alive. There is no question that O.J. killed Nicole and Ron but Cochran played the race issue to its fullest. May he ROT IN HELL! Signed, Carlton A. Hare think he's guilty, but got off due to his celebrity. what an embarassment;a complete waste of time and money!! NOT GUILTY DOES NOT EQUEAL INNOCENT what goes around, comes around... The system is set up to protect us from unlawful arrest. The LAPD's actions were VERY abnornal. Even if OJ did not, the police can not be free to manufacture evidence. The jury HAD to acquit. Racist disgrace. It just added to the US laughingstock factor abroad. IT'S SAD THAT AMIDST THE CIRCUS ATMOSPHERE, PEOPLE FORGOT THAT TWO PEOPLE WERE MURDERED AND THE SENSITIVITY OF THE VICTIMS' FAMILIES I think O.J. is a complete liar!!!! And a murderer An absolute circus, a shame he was not found guilty. A murderer was set free because he was black Dammit, who cares anymore? The savvy among us already knew the Justice system was screwed. He should stop talking to the media. He is digging himself into his own grave! I feel that race plays a part in everything, first of all! Although some people hate to admit it. I feel that OJ received a wake up call, and should wake up to reality with the white people in his community, in his business, and the police department. I am from LA and am totally aware as to how that city is broken up by race. I always have figured that OJ was innocent, The whole case does not make sense to me if you followed it carefully, and it amazes me how quickly OJ was decided as being a "Killr", but then again it does'nt because African American men have been stereotyped always, it is sad. You have famous white people, politicians,etc that have gotten away with murder, rape, etc for so long, judges, congressman, some people that were once Presidents of this country, but we sweep all of that under the rug. Let's bottom line it, this country is always going to be about race. Corporate, entertainment, etc. So I really wish that we would stop pretending that it is about one thing when it is realy about another. None of us were there that night, everyone did not follow this case 100%, and the LAPD messed up. They have messed up so many times, start doing some real deep research with the LAPD, you would be amazed of what you find. Talk with some NAACP repesentatives, and you will find out about some very interesting cases. We all must wake up and get educated to different institutions in this country, understand what is really going on, not just what the media wants you to know. I will never et someone on television make up my mind for me, especially someone I do not know, and someone that is only doing their job, repeating information that they obviously had to get from someone else in order to report it.....you got to have a story, whether it is the truth or not, writers, reporters, and journalist, they have to have a story, and the bottom line is not black or white, it's green................................ hopefully he'll get whats coming to him soon If you have money you can do anything you want to. I hope it does not discourage futre TV coverage the media blew the thing out of the water Race relations just went back 30 years. I thought that was a crummy jury also. They weren't educated enough to handle the facts Couldn't we have spent the money elsewhere for some laughs The jury thought they got back at the white society, but what they did was destroy the justice system which blacks need most!! His reputation and adulation is gone so justice may be served truth is dead OJ IS GUILTY AS SIN!!! IF HE DIDN'T DO IT, WHO THE HELL DID!!?? Race was not a factor. $$$RICHES$$$ were what decided it. if there was a vidoe tape of o.j. killing ron and nicole the jury would still find him not guilty Judge Ito lost sight of the ball and what jury of my peers? OJ is a depraved sociopath OJ IS GUILTY!!!!!!! PROVES OUR LEGAL SYSTEM IS A JOKE Too much of a media event, Thank God justice survived In prison he would have been a hero to his peers; out in the world he is a slimebag. Perhaps justice was served afterall. He is in some kind of hell. The biggest jail cell in the world. It was the wrong verdict. RT;HKLJQW4[P65OIJY-72N09872M , O.J. Simpson is free, stop bothering him O.J. DIDNT DO IT!!!!!!!!!!! I am convinced he is guilty & jury acted in self-defense LA Prosecutors got on the wagon to quickly deciding no one else but OJ was the murderer based on 3 cops that by far gave a straight answer. This case had no merrit from the start when 3 cops jump over a wall and claim they were concerned with OJ safety that did it for me and prosecutors should of came up with a better excuse for the trial of the century as it is called, those cops had made their minds up when they drove there and forgot the corpes at the scene. Notifying of the crime gets done via phoe. I question these cops and they should be should not be allowed to wear a badge . Race Problems is America. This is just another piece of proof that the problems aren't going away anytime soon. No Comment A Travesty of Justice...a Killer walks free. I was totally disgusted that a man that was so obviously guilty could walk away a free man. The trial proved to me that if you have money, you can get away with "Murder". racism should not have been played, they found reasonable doubt somewhere and that is the law, so they did their job. I hope O.J. three putts the rest of his life. The case is over and everyone must live with the jury's decision. More than anything else, it made me sad to think that race is still able to divde the way we see reality. Hang the bastard! O.J GOES AROUND TELLING US TO LEAVE HIM ALONE BUT THEN HE IS THE ONE WHO COMES OUT WITH MOVIES AND INTERVIEWS. WHO CARES! I GUESS IT SHOWES WHAT MONEY CAN BUY-GUILTY OR NOT-GUILTY The Media hung a man before he was able to defend himself, our country is in a sorry state. agh!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!! This just shows that, if you have money, you can get away with murder in this country. Justice is blind. Waste of time and money. Jurors should pass a IQ test prior to being seated. I am sick and tired of this government....Damn it they should throw O.J. away forever OJ is a menace to society and an outcast he told me he did it Justice will be done eventually Its ultimate outcome will be the diminuation of what's necessary to obtain convictions in criminal proceedings. I'm glad it was on TV. Now everyone knows what a mockery of justice our legal system is. This is a very sad time for America. Justice has once again been bought by the rich there is a difference between rich and poor mnas justice I boycotted the news so I wouldn't have to hear about it. Thank god it's over, but they should have fried him If you have enough money, you can get away with murder. The biggest waste of time and money that I have ever seen! The jury did not consider the evidence and judged on race alone. The constant media pervasiveness made me ill. Many jurors said that the marital abuse issue doesn't belong in a murder trial, and I strongly disagree. When the wife is dead and there's a history of abuse, how can the abuse not be an issue? Jail the jurors! Prosecution should have pursued crucial issues, such as the Bronco chase; they should not have under-estimated the race factor, starting with the selection of the jury; and they should have insisted on trying the case in the original magistrate district. It was a waste of the public's time Guilty Guilty Guilty The prosecution botched the case from the day simpson was arrested. They should have spent more time building the case before taking him to trial. They should have presented only the most compelling evidence in a terse, coherent manner and let the defense go for the detail. The prosecution lost their case by using all of the "mountain of evidence." The DA and Assistant (Deputy) DA Marsha Clark should be fired and forced to wash cars in North Dakota. I AM A SURVIVER OF DOMESTIC VIOLENCE, AND I TRULY BELIVE THAT THE PRIOR EVIDENCE AGAINST OJ SIMPSON CONCERNING HIS VIOLENCE AGAINST HIS EXWIFE SHOULD HAVE PLAYED A BIGGER ROLE IN THE TRIAL. THIS IS A HORRIBLE CRIME AND HIS PAST SHOULD HAVE PLAYED A BIGGER PART. I FEAR FOR ALL OF THE WOMEN WHO ARE BEING BATTERED BY THEIR PARTNERS WHO MAY NOW THINK "OH WELL, OJ GOT OFF, AND SO CAN I". THIS WHOLE THING WAS A SHAME, AND I FEEL THAT HIS CHILDREN SHOULD REMAIN WITH NICOLE'S FAMILY. I REALLY HOPE THAT THECIVIL SUITS AGAINST OJ DRAIN HIM DRY. STRENGTH TO RON GOLDMAN'S FATHER. WHAT GOES AROUND COMES AROUND, AND IN THE END, SOMEONE WILL GET OJ. PROBABLY THE FATHER OR BROTHER OF A WOMAN WHO HAS BEEN BATTERED. I CAN'T WAIT TO READ HIS OBITUARY. It seems that the jury discounted all the evidence gathered because of their feelings about Furhman and VanAdder(sp). Obviously they felt it was all planted but there was such a body of evidence pointing to Simpson that could not be explained away by that theory. I certainly hope that if in the civil suit when Simpson has to fully explain his whereabouts, etc. (and he wasn't chipping golf balls) that those people on the jury pause to reflect of what their actions brought about. In my opinion (and thusands more), they let a murderer go free. o.j. is completely innocent, i say that Kato Kalin did it OJ is a bad motherfucker!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!! O.J. should go back where he come from. Simpson wasfound not guilty....he was not found innocent!! DNA evidence is as solid as anything Money can buy anything!!!!! IT SUCKS I personally thought the entire trial was a waste of vauble commercial airtime, the moment they showed the inside of the courtroom they should have cancelled it; or better yet made it a pay-per-view show like the 1992 olympics. Then just as many people w I hope the loses the civil suit and has to pay forever! White America needs to overcometheir racisum Major setback for African-Americans, expect significant backlash from other ethnic groups - especially WASPs a travesty IT WAS PATHETIC AND FURTHERMORE HE SHOULD BE IN JAIL FOR A LONG TIME AND THEN HE SHOULD DIE VIOLENTLY.ENTLY. i didn't watch it! it was a big joke with the aquital THE JURY DID NOT FOLLOW THEIR OATH money talks! Go OJ! just showed how ignorant people can be swayed he was found not guilty so he should be left alone! never would have happened in Canada. ONLY IN AMERICA! The State simply did NOT prove its case! it toke a lond time the effects of this are just beginning Defense must have to prove their claims with the same quidelines the prosecution must use. The current system is a double standard. Defence can LIE about anything and get away with it. That's purjury plain and simple! What it says to the masses is it's "OK to LIE to protect yourself from the consequences of your crimes. What a poor excuse for a justice system to 'encourage lying'! It's sick! The criminal is protected while the victims bleed in physical and emotional paim!!! The American public is no longer compitent (sic.) to serve on juries. Too influenced by emotional appeals and unlikely possibilities. Guilty as Hell! This trail really demonstrated what a complete and total shcam our justice system truly is & I am of the strong opinion that the LAPD screwed up royally in regards to the vial of blood. IT WAS KIND OF BORING BECAUSE IT SHOWED TO MUCH COVERAGE!! well for one thing i think o.j. did it!! what a circus oj, schmo-j Remember,this survey supplied answers.Not enough room to say everything to expand on selected answers. But they best/and or closest reprsent my opinions. Oj is quilty Where is the KKK when you really need THEM??? :( I think the trial was very fair in concern to the verdict. Its over let the verdict prevail, life must go on don't rehash the verdict and wonder about. the prosecution did such poor job with the evidence the outcome was inevitable. There was no "mountain of evidence" only circumstantial evidence with very little blood except at the crime scene.. I have seen several of the jurors on the talk shows. What a bunch of losers. No wonder they were all over at Johnnie's office party at Christmas time. I suggest that a college degree be made a prerequisite for jury service! A sad example of justice in this country! Everybody keeps talking about what his statement will be at the civil trial, will it be the same as he gave the police. To this point I have not heard a tape statement on what he was doing that night and untill I do how can what he says at the civil trail contradict what he supposedly has told the police. If they did not tape his statement how can you trust what the LAPD say that OJ told them. America needs to wake up racisim still exist Mr. Cochran convinced the jury that the L.A.P.D. was on tiral, not O.J., Marcia Calrk needs to take law 1-1 from Vimce Bugiosi It was a bunch of BS! oj is living proof that if you have enough money you can get away with murder Justice was bought with his millions I believed OJ was involved in the murder. I don't believe the LAPD coverup theory. It's too massive, intricute and complete. A FRAME_UP like that would highly intelligent people weeks to plan. But,a scared,desperate and confused (first time murderer)could leave a trial of evidence like that and not enough realize it.Mark Furhman is a racist. True fact! Mark being at the wrong place at the wrong time got OJ off. NUTSHELL If he wasn't a football player, no one would have cared about it. I think there will be something that comes out of the civil trial, that will shock the country. This new information will force the country to revamp the justice system. O.J. got off because he was rich and black. Justice and truth were forfeited for greed/money. No integrity. I think the public's view/opinion of the trial/verdict was severely distorted by commentaries. I think people should just accept the verdict and leave the man alone. Whether innocent or guilty, his life is ruined. Therefore, if he is guilty he has in a sense been given a life sentence. However, if innocent he is paying dearly for something he didn't do. A complete and resounding travesty of our judicial system What a waste of time! The Juice is loose! Justice was done. O.J. got off not becuase he's black, but because he's a wealthy, resourceful, and manipulative man. He bought his talented defense team who, even if O.J. was white, would have pulled similar defense stunts that would have persauded the same illogical jury. the trial sucked Bottom Line - Prosecution didn't prove guilt. Ergo, Not Guilty verdict. If it was a conspiracy, it was the fastest, most organized conspiracy in history.... I don't think it was possible. Too many of the detectives didn't even know each other, too much could have gone wrong, and there jus was'nt enough knowledge of OJ Simpson I can't believe he got away with it I think a guilty man went free because of the prosecutors crappy job, and a biased (and yes, probably tired) jury. OJ was guilty as sin! I can't believe they found him not gui OJ SUCKS!! ...and you wonder why we hate niggers! this trial was a great eye opener for the american people on the way things relly are in usa in 1995. race, money, class, political savy all pay the piper, but even with all these accolades this nation is still based on race the color of ones skin - not A JOKE. If we would have had that trial down in 'Bama, things would be different!!! The prosecution lost the case because they wasted so much time trying to anticipate the defense's every move instead of presenting the facts as they were and leaning on the "true" evidence. They bored everyone with too much detail. OJ did it. Those 'Dateline' jurors: They said Darden was a 'token' but that ''race wasn't a factor'' in their verdict. Okaaaaaaaay......... OJ is a fucking nigger. End of story. He may have been acquitted, but he's still guilty it sucked the fact is, OJ got screwed by both the prosecution and the defense The verdict proved for justice has a price; with enough money, you can buy whatever justice you want. If O.J. wasn't a celebrity, there wouldn't have been as much coverage of the event!!!!!!! Proved what we in LA knew -- LAPD is racist & crooked. See what happens when you have a system which allows total uneducated dip-shits to serve as jurors. We need to adopt a system such as the one in Japan. (Use a panel of judges) This case speaks volumes for race relations in the USA Truth and justice were put on trial, found quilty and the murderer, Barabas was set free!! fuhrman was a racist pig, but i think that OJ was guilty as sin. Hello!!!!! too frequently, men who beat their wives end up killing them!! i think this sets the struggle to end domestic violence back a loooonnnggg way. the jurors were probably afraid of appearing racist so they said not guilty. sighhh.... I'm not worried cause there is still one more judge for him to face. Even if O.J. was guilty, the LAPD planted evidence. TWO ARE DEAD FIND THE REAL KILLERS This was the worst excuse for a police investigation I have seen in a long time! The Defense Attourneys ought to be shot alongside the jury. They took this case for two reasons: THE MONEY and the publicity. They have absolutely no moral character within their bodies. O.J. should be tortured to death. I feel the prosecution didn't prove it--just like nearly all LA cases This is a prime example of why Californians are migrating to other states. To many materialistic sports and movie stars have fucked up the state. They feel the only way to enjoy life is through money and immage. Now all the californians are swarming to your home town to fuck it up. How high on the hill can I build my new house said the cali-yuppie to the developer. OJ proved this theory in buying his way out of conviction. The typical middle class male would have been doing time by now. OJ repreents all Californians in their attitude that money paves the way. The only thing that will save the "normal" western states especially Colorado, is California falling off into the sea or a nice big distructive earthquake centered in LA. In reality, all we can do is boycott O.J. and hope he goes broke. In reality, all we can do is avoid and ignore anything that has to do with California. I think that the LAPD's sloppy handling ruined the prosecution's case and created a reasonable doubt. RACISM IN REVERSE a disgrace. the prosecution didn't do a good job. Got enough money and a big enough ego, you can get away with anything "Badges!?! We don't need stinking badges!" LA Police Money can buy ANYTHING in this country The trial showed that black racism is as prevalent, or more prevalent than white. Question 12 and 16 should include an "other" category so that no answer would not have to be chosen. I have an answer: I think their main motivation to vote not guilty was based on confusion of what "possible" means realistically. That is, some people would say that it is possible that the sun won't rise tomorrow. With NO evidence to the contrary, that is an arbitrary statement, not a possibility. The attorneys encouraged substituting arbitrary for possible. In the case of the children, THEY shoud choose with whom they wish to live. This was the saddest excuse for entertainment I have ever (not) seen!! sad day in america that such a verdict was reached it was terrible They let a murderer go I watched coverage every day - he was guilty! The bastard got away with murder Cochran is a disgrace to the legal profession - total sleaze To answer Johnnie's two killer theroy: O.J. and his Bronco driver, Al The absolute worst thing about this case was the fact that no one will ever be arrested for the murder of two innocent victims. What if a white man with a history of spouse abuse and married to a minority would have been tried? Enuf said!! The verdict made me sick to my stomach. And I am in no way predjudice. I may not know how to spell, but I love all races. I think OJ guilty as sin the stereotypes are correct a shame to put an innocent man through all this and the aftermath is a disgrace. sign of the times There was a time I disliked racial slurs and people who made them. I am white and I believed that all people should have the same rights and be looked upon as equal. OJ did it or had a hand in it. our system really sucks. I will never have faith in the justice system again. And thanks to the verdict, I can now joing in with those who make racial slurs. The jury was also a farce. You know, if just half of the jury had been white and educated, I would think that justice had been served even if I did not gree. Orenthal James is the smartest man alive, to hire the best lawyer, but the sleasiest in the world, Semour Butts and bendover This shows how sad are race relations in America today. There is no justice. The black population will claim racism for anything, without any kind of objectivity. We must also change the court system, the way lawyers are paid, In France for example, lawyers are paid on an hourly basis, contingencies are illegal. Ithink the justice system there is much more fair. Racism should not be tolerated in any form. Criminals much be dealt with as harshly as possible no matter what the race or background is. OJ is so guilty! There was plenty of reasonable doubt. none Go play football, Simpson OJ is abolutely, 100% guilty of murder It was a joke The prosecution did the best they could with the admissable evidence they had (but there was plenty left out). The defense did a great job in influencing the small-minded jury. If the case was in Santa Monica instead, the jury would have been a completely different make-up. Whatever happened, when all is said and done, O.J. remains guilty as sin and will soon become the greatest liar in history when his tape or pay-per-view thing comes out with "his side of the story". I THINK IT TOTALLY SUCKED BIG FAT DICK MARK FURHMAN SUCKS DICK!!!SO DOES JUDGE I-TO There would have probably been a riot if OJ was found guilty; similar to the Rodney King incident. O.J. SIMPSON - NOT GUILTY - That was what our system said - and it did so even with the odds against him - especially in LA and the corruption that has been present in the police department for years. The police in LA are referred to as LA MOB - they have more than earned that title. There are good policemen in America, but they are getting fewer each year. The honest ones cannot stay on the force and watch the criminals work from within the police department. This is happening in all of the U.S. -Our justice system needs repair, but it still is the best in the world. The case was not decided on the facts. I think the defense is the worst excuse for people I have ever seen. They should all be shot for allowing the case to become a race issue instead of the real issue which was a murder. I am discusted with that whole bunch of people. The larger question is, if OJ were to walk into a room while you were there, would you walk out. Answer: without delay On the bright side, it may lead to the dissolution of government! The outcome was a total absolute joke rendered by people who obviously could not think their way out of a paper bag! I now know why I do not trust the Distric Attorneys The murderer's video is now available. What a truly grotesque individual he is. the trial would have been shorter if there werent any live coverage on t.v. An Innocent Man Needs Only ONE Alibi. I think most of you people are SUCH a waste of sperm. I'm bored with whiny-ass white people. I'm mixed (Mexican and white), but guess what? I'm CONTRIBUTING to this society. Think I'm not intelligent? My IQ's 160 and I'm graduating from USC this spring with a BA in Communications, a 4.0 GPA. Half of you rednecks are living on daddy's money, fucking around with whores (read: sorority girls) and drinking your life away. Look, if you've got nothing more intellectually stimulating to discuss than this racst garbage, you should move to West Virginia or some other butt-fuck state and have sex with your sister. Fucking Kentuckians! I bet it really irks you to know that I'm not white, I'm in college, you're not, and it has NOTHING to do with race!!!! (I marked "CAUCASIAN" on all of my applications!) You fucking wastes! I think the funniest thing about this trial is that people let it affect their own lives so much. Sure, it's everyone's right to have an opinion on the case, but do you really know OJ did it? How can people get so angry when they don't even know for sure? If the LAPD or someone else set OJ up, it would not be a first. Anyone else smell bacon? The whole thing was just disgusting! I hope he loses the civil suite and the public gets justice served! American justice!! The best mony can buy!!! I think we as a society shouln't moch the judicial system by the way we judge race, cultures, statis, by the media. In questions 13 and 14 you called Hank Goldberg a DEFENSE Attorney, he's Prosecution. And Barry's name is SCHECK, not Schef! We get what we deserve. PC at its extreme. it was a stupid waste of a good television hour. fuck that nigger You suck, the trial sucked. It should have been less shown on t.v. I WILL BOYCOTT EVERYTHING SIMPSON DOES-EVEN 20 YRS FROM NOW I did not believe the LAPD showed proper respect for the fourth amendment. I believe that OJ Simpson is guilty, and do not understand why the chase footage was omitted from the prosecution's case. On the basis of the evidence presented within the courtroom, however, I would have felt compelled to vote to acquit. Barbeque OJ Simpson! The prosecution did not prove OJ did this crime, the defense proved why we should doubt the prosecutor and the evidence they and the police presented to us. I tought the DNA evidence should have convicted him What a repellent verdict! I'm sending the Goldmans money for their lawyers. O.J. Simpson is an atrocity. The whole thing was the biggest freaking joke of the century!! what about Kato? He was a triple threat. He is black, famous and very wealthy. TOO WEALTHY!!!!!!!!!!! Baba Booie $ MEANS YOU CAN GET AWAY WITH MURDER It was an overblown performance by the TV networks. jury did not know half of the crap that we learn, ie mark furmin It was a disgrace to the whole country; an embarrassment!! Regardless of what I think, he was aquitted and therefore is innocent in the eyes of the law and MUST be given back his rights. Sad excuse for entertainment N/A Only in the US....thank goodness, never in the UK The legal system of California should be disbanded lynch the lawyers, it was a sick game not justice I think this entire episode was a joke. I seriously cannot believe that the white community refused to believe that a police officer would plant evidence.. sometimes I feel as if I am the last white person alive who believes OJ is not guilty and that cops are corrupt and out of control. MURDER WON Money talks and the rich walk!!!!!!! Prosecution was hampered by lack of money The whole thing was insipid and a media circus. O.J. may have done it, but there was plenty of reasonable doubt. The media gave a skewered picture of what went on. The jury did a good job -- no other verdict was possible. The most disgusting circus ever to grace television. IT WAS THE SLEAZYEST THING I'VE EVER SEEN, AND THE PEOPLE WHO GOT THEIR KICKS FROM WATCHING IT ARE DISGUSTING very american - full of crap Racist Jury. The evidence only as good as the people behind it. There was victim DNA in the Bronco, how did it get there. The police did an extremely sloppy job collecting evidence and the case hinged on it. Marcia Clark should have known about Furman? How can someone say the word Nigger so boldly on tape and not be known as a racist,hmmmm? Furman knew the LAPD would look the other way. How can this be? Look at the Rodney King tape how many cops looked the other way and did do a thing to help? Let's get real. I rest my case. Horrifying. OJ is a MONSTER. How can those ''jurors'' sleep at night The children needs both sides oh "the family" most people of my race wouldn't recognize a self admitted, evidence planting, totally racist cop, if he got on the stand and took the FIFTH in front of them!!!!! The defence proved planting of evidence!ting The verdict really shook me up. I cried like a baby upon hearing the verdict, and I just felt so ashamed to be an American. And I felt incredible rage, aimed at O.J. and at the morons who cheered the verdict. It Stinks Too bad OJ wasn't assassinated. I heard a collective gasp in my corner of the world. I was shocked and disheartened to see a guilty man set free. Don't those jurors understand anything about DNA?!! from the very beginning I felt he was innocent and was used for political gain by the LA DA Wonderful trial ! a lot of europeans thought this was really really funny !! I don' tink dat ol' OJ be gittin 'way wif murder wen' he go to da Cival Trail. De bastard will haf ta git on de stan' an' ansa a foo questions dat he be mad day askin' him. Regardless of Simpson's guilt or innocence, the jury was correct in finding him not guilty of the charges. The way in which the evidence was mishandled and the stench of a rotten cop would have made this white girl say "not guilty" too. it was a travesty of justice and wholly race motivated I can't believe we watch this stuff. It was just a show!!!! the whole thing was dumb get a clue o.j. the televisions made this very serious issue like a daytime soap. I hope he can live with himself..................I couldn't. It shows clearly that the issue of race far outweighs the issues of violence against women in the US I certainly hope there is a God, and that O.J. meets him. Thanks to Johnny Cochran, he all by himself, is responsible for setting race relations back 100 years in this country. All blacks, thank your good brother Johnny for this! As for #3, Of Course, Because Everyone in this Goddamn Country Is a Racist, And If He Was White, There wouldn't be any of the daily reports on Extra! and A Current Affair...; #5, I'D Like To Hang The Jury; #6, Justice?!? What Justice?!?; #7, KATO DID IT.; The triel was a farce. It only should have lasted for a few weeks, but bacause the judge let the media into the courtroom, everybody extended their 15 minutes of fame into 15 weeks. saved by the brothers It was a circus race relations will NEVER be the same in the USA! the defense team has done one hell of a job. johnnie cochran was outstanding and should go down in history as one the best For once, the defendant had the resources to counter the state. Simpson is clearly innocent under the law, but I still have 'reasonable doubt' as to his culpability. Evidence was too fucked up to get a guilty verdict. Desire a jury reflecting communities' composition... OJ IS OLD NEWS!!!!! IF I WERE YOU I WOULD LOOSE THIS PAGE!!!!!! and i thought that america was a free country I think it was dumb to arrest OJ Simpson. I think drug dealers killed Nicole Simpson. the rich get away with murder I do believe there was evidence tampering/perjury how much or how little is actually irrelevant. What matters is that if there was tampering, under the law he got the verdict he deserved. Hope he gets run over by a truck the day after he loses the civil suit, all his money and he's been snubbed by every last person/organization he turns to for acceptance. The trial forgot the real issues and became a media circus This trial was a mockery of the American judicial system, proving money can buy freedom, even if you murder the mother of your children. am I ever glad I don't live in the United States; what an embarrassment can we trail aliens for the murder? Practically nobody knows that OJ took the 5th amendment in order not to testify. IT bewilders me that anyone cares about a coke head who beats his wife the fact of the matter is, Johnny Cock-ring has set back race relations 250 years by bringing the non-essential race issue into play. NO ONE wanted O.J. convicted simply because he is black! The proof was there and a diversion was needed...Cochran decided to use the almighty "N-word" as fodder for the I.Q.-challenged masses to mull over. O.J. should be waiting for the gas chamber because he brutally murdered his ex-wife and Ron Goldman, not because of his melanin level. Who could possibly want to send ordberg from "Naked Gun" up the river unless they had to? It shows that a majority of people have a low IQ and are racists!! to highly publicized,the verdict based on race not murder JOHNNY COCHRAN DID MORE TO DIVIDE THIS COUNTRY ALONG RACIAL LINES THAN ANY OTHER PERSON IN 50 YEARS THEN THE JURY TIPPED THEIR HATS. IT'S ABOUT TIME THAT THE WORLD HAS SEEN THAT THE BLACK IN AMERICA IS THE REAL RACIAL PROBLEM ! Prosecution didn't do a good job. Too many holes. Media played a major role in releasing "possible evidence" which biased America. Alot of that was false or never made it to trial. I hope OJ loses the civil case against the Browns it sucked! Toooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooo long. Wrong verdict MONEY TALKS O.J IS INOCENT, whatdo you think? i hope he gets his in the civil trial he's guilty as hell, the jury is a testimony to the mediocrity flagrant in our society, which of course should be no surprise to us, since we place absolutely no value on intellectualism or critical thought in our society! Justice wasn't served. murderer!! murderer!!!!! murderer!!!!! DEATH TO O.J. The jurors were racist sleaze, but the system MUST allow jurors to find any verdict regardless of the evidence presented. Jury nullification is the last chance for citizens to keep government in line. He's Guilty!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!! he's guilty!!!!! justice was not served The whole trial and verdict was based on race. It is a sad ending for Nicole Brown and Ronald Goldman that no one was found guilty, but the saddest part to me is that their body were left half a day to flies and dogs by the LAPD. Also, OJ is well knowned, wouldn't a smart killer try to frame him? Better, where is the hole in the glove where OJ got cut? I guess it's the one that slipped at the crime scene. Funny it wasn't part of the prosecution case...Funny, no one noticed a 15 minutes old gapping wound that left a trail...This must be good news toall actors and politicians thinking about killing their wives. Finally, Marylin Monroe, Nathalie Wood, Ted Kennedy's mistress DID NOT get a trial for their murderers. Hey, OJ, if you are the killer, you should have known better because you cannot be senator now. #7: Al Cowlings did killing. prob. was figure seen by driver I think it was just a crule joke and i think the media is playing up the race thing, everyone I know who was black said he was guilty as sin and my white friends said innocent, there just playing it up to make waves for everyone, like the whole race issue is.. OJ, you are my hero!!! I love you man! The news should have been covering something more important Very shocked at the outcome! I polled my college class--almost entirely Black women--asking them: (1) do you think OJ did it? and (2) do you think the prosecution met its burden in proving he did it? Their answers, unanimously and without hesitation, were: (1) yes, and (2) no. The entire process made a travesty of an already worthless court system. I wouldn't blame Chris Darden from leaving this so-called profession We all wat justice but you've got to have the money to buy it that case fucking sucked big fatty dick and swalloed Too bad justice wasn't done, he killed them both With world hunger, war, and other pressing issues, I found it sad that the trial meant so much to so many people. The man is as guilty as hell! Money Walks! ANYone not so well off would be in jail now. oj is a nice guy if the justice system blah blah blah, yackety smackety A mockery of the justice system I think O,J's case was mis-judged. I think he killed both Nicole and Ron. He was set free because he is rich and famous. In another hand, if some one that's poor and has the same case as O.J. did, they would probably be guilty. I think that the jury was fair because they didn't have evidence that O.J was guilty. THIS TRIAL WAS ABOUT RACE, AND NOTHING MORE! VERY SAD! Around the time the trial started, my father retired from his job. He became addicted to the trial. I believe it was the only thing that got him through the adjustment.This past spring my father was found to have cancer. Through his illness the trial entertained him. On the day the verdict came in we burried my father. If nothing else, the trial and his fasination with it made the last year of my father's life enjoyable. For that reason alone it worth having it on TV It was a joke-If he wasn't a star he would be in jail after about a three day trial if he didn't get the death penalty-The race card was a desperation shot by the defense and it swayed the jury who were more than ready to go home-I wouldn't watch or go to anything that OJ is in because he should not profit from murdering and being able to buy his way out of it. I am simply discusted. The verdict was bsed on fear of racism, nothing more. A abstruction of Justie. A celebretey gets off but if ordianary convicted. Bullshit!!! Yes. You should learn to spell Barry Scheck. Also, anyone who thinks Simpson is innocent is a paranoid, a moron or a racist. Only in America can a person get off because they have money. HE DID IT..AND HE SHOULD BE ROTTING IN JAIL FOR THE REST OF HIS PATHETIC EXSISTENCE.. Perhaps in future the Lapd will follow the law and not create a case where there is no evidece. Crock o shit The best thing to come out of this trial was the truth about racism in the LAPD; those of us who have been hassled by the LAPD because our skin color happens to be other than white are glad that the government is finally investigating the situation. Too bad the FEDS didn't get to try him It was a big waste of time and money for many people. If this would have happened to regular people The USA is making progress, of sorts. Now, a rich person of color can get away with a crime that only rich white men could get away with in the past. It was unfair. If OJ didn't do it then who did? Why is it necessary to judge someone's hair and clothing, when you are trying to solve something that means alot to all of us... the murder of someone's life. OJ will someday have to answer to the true Judge WHEN THEY KNOW HE'S GUILTY, HOW CAN THEY LET HIM GO FREE? THE TRIAL MADE A JOKE OF THE AMERICAN JUSTICE SYSTEM. IT IS EMBARASSING TO BE AN AMERICAN IN THE FACE OF FOREIGNERS. THE ONLY THING THAT CASE PROVED IS THAT MONEY CAN BUY FREEDOM. lapd was exposed at doing what they are used to getting away with and the da followed suit Trial was devestating to DNA evidence in the future If someone does not see that there was reasonable doubt, I would like to know if they watched the same trial I did. The jury was prejudiced and not very swift. The defense recognized this, the prosecution didn't. I am concerned that the evidence was too technical for the jury to understand. I feel they were so undereducated that they judged personalities without concern for the power of the evidence presented to them. I am concerned that the evidence was too technical for the jury to understand. I feel they were so undereducated that they judged personalities without concern for the power of the evidence presented to them. Nothing was proven. Blood could have been there before. I think everyone should just leave the man alone. He was found not guilty so there shouldn't be any civil suits. All those battered women's protestors who were ready to raise cain about his NBC interview should just take a pill. Camping outside his house is not going to get them anywhere. They should take the media attention and put pressure on the state and federal law makers to make some changes. I honestly don't know if he is really guilty or not but he was found not guilty and should be able t live his own life. If people don't want to give him a break, they should at least think of the children. Well, I'm white, but I think (and have seen) that racism is alive and well in the U.S. and that the cops and "justice" system are incredibly corrupt. I think that O.J. is no more or less guilty than 99% of the LAPD and cops / judges everywhere. It's too bad he got off, but what is far more unfortunate is the number of people black / white (mostly poor) that have been screwed by Rich White Justice over the centuries. History needs a major rewrite. oj should rot in hell. I'd be happy to donate money to the Brown family if they have to fight for custody of the kids I think that OJ maybe payed someone to do it.... OK, I'LL MAKE RACE AN ISSUE IN MY DECISIONS FROM NOW ON, I'M INTERVIEWING A BLACK WOMAN THIS AFTERNOON, I'VE DECIDED NOT TO HIRE BEFORE I'VE TALKED TO HER. JOHNNY COCHRAN, YOU'VE SET YOUR RACE BACK 100 YEARS ! It't about time justice prevails over racism and egos I hope the jurors in the Civil Suits against OJ will have a few more brain cells working than the demented jurors in the Criminal Case (who all should've starred in "Dumb and Dumber). I hope the public continues to boycott that scumbag OJ. I heard that he wanted Zaks to keep the store open late for him so he could do some Christmas shopping--they said "forget it". Hahaha. I hope the bastard rots in hell. I am APPALLED by the jury's verdict even though I predicted it. Questions, comments, suggestions? Contact us. Return to theHome Page. Copyright ©1996, /InterCommerceCorporation, All rights reserved worldwide Send comments to Webmaster@Survey.net WT02-B22-3IA060-000333-B020-43http://www.survey.net:80/pol4c.html 204.107.221.240 19970115053806 text/html 10871HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 15 Jan 1997 05:31:44 GMTServer: Apache-SSL-US/1.0.3+1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 10688Last-modified: Sat, 11 Jan 1997 02:47:45 GMT SURVEY.NET - 1996 Presidential Poll #3 - User comments (latest) Your source for information, opinions & demographics from the NetCommunity! ANNOUNCING: The Internet's finest interactive, totally-automated,immediate survey system. We can take any form and instantly create adynamic demographic database and show you the results as soon as youcomplete the survey! Political Survey #4 User comments Previous comments:Part 1, Part 2 Who will be president in 1996 and why? of the possible candidates, Bob Dole. He has intergrity and is basically an honest, hard working man. Bill Clinton: His version of international relations is more palatable to other nations. Bob Dole because he didn't avoid the serving our country like Bill Clinton did Bill CLINTON because he seems to be the only capable person to reduce the deficit,improve education and respect racial and ethnic minorities. I wanted to see Bob Dole win, but unfortunatelythis was not the case. Hi - I realize this is a little late, but it is my personal feelings. The Government is medling in our lives far to much and it MUST stop. Maybe with a revolution and kick the liberal commies OUT !!! If there was a militia in this area, I would become a active participate. Edward Cookingham Kingston, NY He should not have people under the age of 18 pay income taxes and then not have the right to vote. Bill Clinton cares about this country & especially cares about the youth of thiscountry. Someone who would follow our constitution. Who is that person? Bill Clinton 'cause he is just what your country deserves. Anyone willing to do what is right for the American middle-class. This can be best done by returning to the Constitution and limiting "Judicial Legislation". Bob Dole, because I feel he will be better for the economy and reduce the power of the federal goverment Colin Powell. Clinton Bob Dole, simply stated-any one is better than Clinton Pat Buchannan- agrees with most social issues that I do. Al Gore Clinton because he's been a very good President so far. Bob Dole, in part because I like Jack Kemp, and because I think he is an honest person. Bill Bennet. Harry Browne. Cut the crap, kids. Grow up and take responsibility for yourself; question the intent of anybody who tries to take that responsibility away from you. Harry Browne. The only candidate dedicated topreserving liberty, freedom and justice. Lyndon Larouche would be my first choice, however I feel that David Duke would be a better,more PC choice. dole-honest I resent the fact that Perot was not entered into the debates. He was not allowed to present his platform until it was too late. He is just what our country could've used- someone to shake things up a bit! I'm running for president next time. Vote for Juan Valdez Clinton. Dole-because he is not a pathological liar, like Clinton. Clinton are dump! Whitewater is not for gotten!I love Bob Dole.The White House belomgsto Bob! He is my HERO and my KING ! BOB DOLE, BECAUSE A REPUBLICAN PRESIDENT IN MY OPINION WILLPROTECT OUR CIVIL RIGHTS BETTER THAN A DEMOCRATIC PRESIDENT. Someone who is more representative of the gen'l population, not someone as old as Dole....they are not as aware of issues today and have too many past ideals. Clinton. Dole's ideas scare me and I think they're bad for the country. Bill Clinton--he is just the better canidate Bob Dole, He is a more moral person.Bill Clinton is morally bankrupt homo-sapien. I am glad Clinton won, things would be a whole lot worse with a religious-right Republican in the White House. I value a woman's right to choose and the environment too much to deviate from my choice of government officials. Dan Qualye, because he has the exspirence to do a great good and is the kind of man we can respect in the White house OJ SIMPSON SHOULD BE PRESIDENT BECAUSE HE KNOWS HOW TO GET FLATCHESTED WHITE WOMEN TO HAVE TIT JOBS,AND THEN KILL THEM. FREE OJ! FRY FUHRMAN! Bob Dole because he's a Republican and he would serve our country well. He has great ideas. Clinton doesn't know what he's doing. All he cares about is ratings and women. I want to see Bill Clinton because I agreewith his stance on social issues. I suppose Clinton, because he has done ok so far. Bill Clinton because he is best fit for the job. I have seen no one resently that would provided the proper tools to be a great American leader Dole because he more fiscally conservative Clinton, he can do the jobj. Dole, we need a change Clinton I feel good! Even though Bubba won, Bob Dole would have been the right man for the job.The reason for this is simple, he is a red white and blue American who wants to see this country get better; on the other hand, Clinton does want to see the country get better,but with him in office, things will be like the way they were the last four years-slow and unchanging. bill clinton ... i'm from arkansa Harry Browne, our last, best hope for victory! I want to see someone who is honest and is not afraid to stand up to the NRA and smoking lobbyist Harry Browne because he pledges to reduce government. (The above request evades the essence of the interrogation.) Someone who can work with the present system and yet remain honest about his/her views. Also someone who is a moderate in the politcal spectrum and is tolerant of other views. Bill Clinton - more in touch with the issues facing the American society today Even though its all over, Clinton should be president because he is willing to make educationless expensive, which will elevate the lower class and reduce crime Rip Scherer, University of Memphis head football coach. If he canbeat Tennessee with his team, he can certainly lead our government. Clinton- he has worked hard to pass his legislation and with an addedfour years, and more public support, i feel he could help to reduce the deficitas well as address other concerns of our country. Former Defense Secretary, Richard (dick) Cheney Kemp, as a moderate he would be able to bring different sides together Ron Faucheux, Publisher & Editor of Campaigns & Elections Magazine. He is politically saavy, in addition to being inovative and directed -- besides, he would take the job seriously. i voted for clinton because he was pro-choice and more tolerant of homosexuals then the others. I would like to see Colin Powell become the next president. I think that his moderately conservative economic positions along with his moderately liberal social positions reflect the principles I most agree with. I also feel that his election would help with race relations. Arnold Schwarzenegger Steve Forbes because he has proven himself in the private sector It doesn't matter anymore... the sleazebag won. President Clinton because of his past record and successes Someone who has intelligence, honor and believes that we are dependant on our planet for life and conducts business accoridingly and the we are all (not just U.S. citizens) of one family and conducts business accordingly i don't really know, it all seems like a big show too me, we all knew clinton was going to win in the beginning, i cant wait till the next presidential election, that will be fun! A reasonable man. Jack Kemp, would have been my choice for president in 1996. I was surprised that Dole got the Republican nomination John Haglin because of transendental meditation, will sove stress, the route cause for everything. Clinton- only because I know Perot can't win, and anything's better than Dole Dole. He'll put those goddam niggers and commies in their place. Harry Browne in 2000!Basically because he is the only candidate who WILL reduce allaspects of government - DRASTICALLY and NOW. I believe that Bill Clinton should be the next president because understands the role of government in the life of the citizens. I beleive also the the economy is going in the direction and Clinton desire some of the credit for the success of our growth. Questions, comments, suggestions? Contact us. Return to theHome Page. Copyright ©1996, /InterCommerceCorporation, All rights reserved worldwide Send comments to Webmaster@Survey.net WT02-B22-4IA060-000333-B024-19http://www.survey.net:80/pol4c0.html 204.107.221.240 19970115055229 text/html 89928HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 15 Jan 1997 05:46:04 GMTServer: Apache-SSL-US/1.0.3+1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 89745Last-modified: Mon, 25 Nov 1996 20:26:45 GMT SURVEY.NET - 1996 Presidential Poll #3 - User comments (ARCHIVE I) Your source for information, opinions & demographics from the NetCommunity! ANNOUNCING: The Internet's finest interactive, totally-automated,immediate survey system. We can take any form and instantly create adynamic demographic database and show you the results as soon as youcomplete the survey! Political Survey #4 User comments [ARCHIVE I] Who will be president in 1996 and why? Bill Clinton all the way. Bill Clinton I believe his philosophy is more socially and economically inclusive than Bob Doles. Dole: to downsize the federal gov't and reduce taxes increasing the domestic revenue so to keep reducing the deficit Clinton should be re-elected.I don't trust Dole's story about tax cuts.I think Dole and Gingrich would destroy Medicare.Dole voted against Medicare in 1968 and re-affirmed his vote 5 months ago.I Despise Newt Gingrich!!! Harry Browne. He espouses my philosophy pretty close and I am sure he means what he says. I doubt that the "big three" are saying anything except campaign rhetoric. Ralph Nader. Although unrealistic to expect his election, I certainly would like to see that because he stands for the same principles I do - purity in democracy, with the citizens at the helm. Harry Browne. Two words: Smaller government! Harry Browne, because he would eliminate the national debt and end the income tax. Dole, because Clinton is a clown and a liar. The media is carrying him. Ross Perot. He has great ideas for major problems. In the debate they just bashed eachother and did not get to answer any hard question that had to deal with the real problems. Bob Dole. He has the right ideas and he is a true leader. Either the Libertarian or Green candidate. Individual freedom, butprotect people and environment from harm by individuals and corporations Bob Dole. He has the right ideas and he is a true leader. Bill Clinton. I think he has done a good job and I think that he would be able to accomplish more he congress would cooperate. Harry Browne - He is the only legitimate candidate that isintent on reducing the size and expense of the government. Harry Browne. The major problem in America is the size, extent and influence of government; Browne is the only candidate who is really, truly dedicated to drastically reducing government. CLINTON--REASONABLE & ATTAINABLE SOLUTIONS. DEMONSTRATES ABILITY TO ARRIVE AT THE BEST PRACTICAL SOLUTION TO PROBLEMS THAT ARE POLITICALLY FEASABLE FOR THE TIME BEING. LAYS LEGISLATIVE GROUND WORK WELL. Bob Dole, to return integrity to the White House and break the back of big government liberalism. Harry Browne. He advocates exactly what I believe in: smaller government, returning federal powers to state control, protection of civil liberties, lower taxes/less government services, etc. Harry Browne. Our government is bloated and intrusive. It is destroying the Bill of Rights and everything that this country once stood for. No comment. But someone who is going to positivly affect our society economically and morally. BOB DOLE YEAH!!! Bill Clinton. I feel better off today than 4 years ago and our economy is strong. Bob Dole comes across negatively and certainly not "presidential" Bill Clinton; Because out of the possible candidates he will be the best for the country Harry BrowneThe only one who understands what this country was founded on Harry Browne. I want the government out of my wallet, bedroom,business, and life. I believe that character is one of the most important issues.How can I believe anything someone says if they do not have character.I will vote for Dole as the best candidate among the potential winners. I would like to see Harry Browne because his party and platform are the only one's consistently based on a single overriding philosophy: unlimited individual freedom with concurrent responsibilities Harry Browne - he is against censorship,wants to end the war on drugs, and repeallaws against victimless crimes. Harry Browne. He understands the Constitution and its limits on the federal government and protection of individual rights. Bob Dole because he understands the proper role of the federal government plus he is a leader that can be respected. Ralph Nader: he is pro-civil liberties and anti-big business. what i used to think of the democrats before i was disillusioned I believe Bob Dole is the best for president because I feel Bill Clinton has lowered the high . standards that have been the bulwark of our nation. Bob Dole is a liberal. I cannot vote for a liberal. In my state Howard Phillips is not on the ballot, therefore I will vote for Harry Browne Bob Dole because he is not a draft dodging, pot smoking, wifecheating, sexual harrasing, stand for nothing worm like the current occupant of the Office I would like to see Bob Dole for president in 1996 because I believe that he will restore the morals of this economy by setting a good example for our children. He will also improve the economy and foreign relations, and his plan for education will greatly improve our schools. My children will be paying off the national debt with very oppressive taxes unless something is done now. Harry Browne offers the only solution. I want Harry Browne because he is the only canidate commited to reducing the federal government to it's Constitutional mandates. Clinton - Dole is an old, out-of-touch dottering senile relic of a time that never was. I would like to see Fred Rogers run for president with Mr.McFeely as his running mate. Because as far as I'm concerned the candidates now are living in the land of make belive anyway. John Engler..Gov of Michigan...good politics and a strong sense of priorities Bob Dole. Bob Dole is good. Bob Dole. Bob Dole. Bob Dole. Vote...Bob Dole. Harry Browne. A Libertarian President to begine with, and then House and Senate members are the only hope this country has. Bob Dole, He will improve the U.S. majorly!!! Dole--Higher moral standards, trustworthiness. Any person other than Dole. He is too old and is a very mean man. Howard Phillips Bob Dole,because I know that he will help decrease the amount ofgovernment in our lives. Bob Dole will also restore the respectand honor to the high office of the president. Bill Clinton isa disgrace to the highest office of our land. By the way, I ama former democrat. Harry Browne. He stands for real freedom and making govt do what it's suposed to. no foriegn aid, bring all the troops home, uncap the oil wells divert tankers to Japan to U.S. Harry Browne, I believe he will and can do what he says. I'd like Harry Browne to president in 1996 because he has a consistent, simple philosophy about government's role. Furthermore, he believe the Constitution should be our guiding light. No other representative holds these views and plans on implementing them if elected. H.Browne - might tell the government that the people are tired are tired of being "lied" to and "stolen" from. Dole, because Clinton is a crook! DOLE- THE CLINTON SCANDAL OF THE WEEK PRESIDENCY IS OVER! WHERE IN HISTORY CAN YOU FIND A LEADER WHO HAS ANYONE HE HAS EVER ASSOCIATED WITH IS 1). A CONVICTED FELON, 2). ENDITED & AWAITING SENTENCING, 3). ALREADY ASSUMED ROOM TEMPERATURE DUE TO SOME FORM OF ARKANSIDE ??? THE AMERICAN PEOPLE ARE NOT NEARLY AS STUPID AS CLINTON & HIS BAND OF MARXISTS BELIEVE. WE HAVE A COUPLE OF FILES,...WELL MAYBE A HUNDRED,..WELL 3 TO 4 HUNDRED, WELL MAYBE 800,.... WELL OVER A THOUSAND....SHAZAM.... I CAN'T FIGURE OUT HOW THESE FBI FILES GOT HERE? WHO HIRED THE WHITE HOUE SECURITY CHIEF CRAIG LIVINGSTONE ? GEE WIZ, I DON'T REMEMBER. HOW DO GARDENERS WITH GREEN CARDS FIND THE RESOURCES TO CONTRIBUTE $40K TO THE RE-ELECYION CAMPAIGN? AS ERIC ENGBERG WOULD SAY " TIME OUT! " Harry Browne is the only candidate who deals with the economicreality of today. He is the only candidate with and economicallyviable plan for allow our country to prosper. To quote him, "Government Doesn't Work". We need more Harry and lessgovernment. Harry Browne. He is the only candidate that truly respects individual liberty. All the others want to make the individual a slave to one agenda or another. Perot-It would definately shake things up in Washington, and possible knock some sense into those people that run things there. Maybe they'dstart to think seriously about people and how they feel. Harry Browne because he is the only candidate who has demonstrated that he is willing and able to return the U.S. government to a point more consonant with the Constitution and the vision of the Founding Fathers. Dole . . He stands for the type of America that made us what we are and are now losing it with the Clintons moral outlook on life. I want to see Bill Clinton for the 1996 president. I want to see him as president because he has done a lot for the people. Bob Dole. The Democrats are steering this country straight into Socialism in conjunction with labor unions, teacher's unions, and lawyers.In time, if they're allowed to continue, they will also break the bank. I have no answer. BIll Clinton, because he is the best candidate for the job and four years is not enought time to work his plan no answer Harry Browne to protetct civil liberties. Return of America to a constitutional republic. I would like to see Bill Clinton win the presdency again, becuase he is a very good president and he has done many good things. I hate Bob Dole!!!!!! Browne or Perot. Browne or Perot could run the government as a business, not a political machine. Favor Browne since he has a political machine in place & operational. Harry Browne- Libertarian. He is the only candidate that supports both individual liberty and personal responsibility. Harry Browne, because he fights for the human right to freedom. Bill Clinton. He sees issues from both the business side of the coin and also the littl guy who is trying to make ends meet. Ralph Nader, because he would protect us from the influences ofbig business. At least, he would try. Bob Dole because I truly believe that I can not trust Clinton. Clinton has made so many promises over the past 4 years that were not kept and now he is making a whole new collection for this years election. clinton because he seems more credible and I believe that ourcountry has improved for the past 4 yrs. Bob Dole. Because Clinton cannot be trusted. We need a man with principles, not a con man/liar--of any party. Bob Dole a man with character and morals. Harry Browne, principle! Jesus Christ, take a wild guess. Dole, ethical, experienced, has moral values, not motivated byego. This survey has limited itself by the same debate which has limited our political process. Bill Clinton because he didn't do that bad for the last four years. I feel that if BOb Dole become president then the social welfare of the American society will be worse off than it was under Clinton. Bob Dole because he is a moral and a man of good character.Bill Clinton does have any morals, and he is the world's greatest liar. Howard Phillips US Taxpayers Party; because he is a Christian,and would be the nearest to our foundation; out of the 55founding fathers, 52 of them were Christian, including our firstfew presidents!!! Harry Browne, Freedom works. Harry Browne is a lifelong enemy of intrusive government, has proven it by the life he's led, and won't change his mind if elected. Harry Browne, because he is the only candidate with a principled stand of protecting our civil liberties.The worst problem with our society is abdication of personal responsibility, which is fueled - at least in part - by big government.Harry Browne, in his call to reduce the size of government, is in effect advocating a return to personal responsibility, which is a necessary ingredient in a free society. Harry Brown, he's the only candidate who adheres to the philosophyand principals of the Constitution and Bill of Rights as it was written by the founding Fathers. Only he has the vision to cutthrough the last 80 years of socialist (13 planks platform)and laws and regulations. Dole...we ca't afford another Clinton scandal... Harry Browne. Platform I agree with. Howard Phillips - sticks to the constitution AND is not a life-long politician.He fits the mold of some of our greater presidents. Harry Browne. He is the only candidate proposing a reduction in the scope of government. someone, anyone who can lead. someone who has vision, a passion for the job, and a global view of issues. Harry Browne - he is the only candidate who truly intends toreduce the government to what it was intended to be. Right now the government absorbs a huge percentage of our GDP for vrituallyno productivity on the dollar relative to privately employedpeople. This needs to change, and the only way to change itis to get rid of the huge and hugely ineffecient beauracracy running our country. [How could an answer to that question be anything *but* partisanand rhetorical?!] Harry Browne would dramatically reduce the size,cost, and intrusiveness of Public Enemy #1, the Federal government. Bob Dole Bill Clinton -The Republican Party is too much in the hands of the Religious Right, and other radical fringe groups. Bob Dole -- to give the Republican Congress the opportunity to reverse 40 years of socialist policies As a united states legal resident, i wold like to see Bill Jefferson Clinton as US's next president because he is no anti emmigrant as dole and the economy under him has been in good shape. Dole because we need someone who has some morals. Bob Dole because I believe Jack Kemp will promote the idea ofBob Dole because I believe that Jack Kemp will be in a position to promote the idea of a major overhaul of the IRS and therefore reduce its impact on American lives. Dole, because I agree with him on many of the issues Bill Clinton because he seems to be the best canditate for the job. Dole so he will implement the voucher system. Harry Browne-He will not accept matching funds (it's welfare for politicians) & he knows that reducing the Federal govt to its constitutional limits will solve the problems in welfare, drugs & crime! Harry Browne because he wants to reduce govt dramatically and abolish IRS and Federal income tax. Harry Browne would be our best bet. His book "Why GovernmentDoesn't Work" is a well thought out plan, with the kind of detailsthat tells me that it isn't just another campaign promise. Bill Clinton, because his policies are already working,and are successful. Harry Brown because he will adhereto the Constitution and Bill fo Rights no answer Bob Dole, because I am strictly from a Republican family and I think that he will be a great president! Bill Clinton because he stands for the American people as a whole and is willing to attack issues head-on. He stands for Americans, not just rich Americans like Dole. Harry Browne is the only political candidate dedicated to reducing the federal bureaucracy. Bob Dole. Clinton, for all his blustering, is a tax & spendliberal (i.e., health care "reform"), who has no moral foundationand cannot keep a promise. Bob Dole: I feel that he is smarter, more experienced, and more qualified to be president. However, I also feel that he is a terrible politician and has great trouble getting accross his message. As a result, I expect an electoral landslide in favor of Clinton. Good standers, intelligence, an understanding of American's, commen sense, family values, a clean record. Bob Dole -- I am tired of Clinton's class warefare, I want a revised Internal Revenue Code with flatter taxes and minimal deductions, I am tired of Clinton discriminating against couples with no children in his tuition tax deduction. Bob Dole is to legislation that Lyndon Johnson was to legislation and I believe we could get alot of good legislation under Bob. There is and has been an odor coming from the White House and it is not getting any better. DOLE-HONESTY AND INTEGRITY WHICH ARE COMPLETELY LACKING IN CLINTON. I want Harry Browne to become President. He will start the needed redirection and reduction of the Government. Clinton. He seems to be willing to compromise without giving in. Bob Dole - America needs a leader who is of high moral fibre and character Harry Browne, because I basically support the Libertarian party. Bill Clinton returned as president, and the congress to go democratic. We can no longer trust the erratic behavior of Newt Ginghrich and the republicans. Since the invasion of privacy and scrutiny of those potential candidates that may do a better, are so all invasive, we are limited to those whose egos are large enough to be able tohandle the scrutiny, I vote for Clinton as a quantity that is known and whose publisized views are most similar to mine. Bob Dole. I believe in his sincerity to bring this country together both morally and economically, and I believe he will turn control back over to the states where it belongs. Howard Phillip for President. The USTP has a platform and has promoted that platform and stayed on course. Bob Dole. Clinton's promises of more government will reduce the work incentivese of the aMERICAN PEOPLE. n/a Bill Clinton for 1996 president.He is in the presidental office and is aware of US situation. Bill Clinton. Because his first term was a productive and memorable one. I feel he did a great job. If given another chance, he can do the same, but better. He is honest and seems to think on the same level as most Americans. I want to have a president that will make sure that our amendment rights are protected. Bob Dole, he is a better man and has better ideas for America.Clinton offers nothing but fear. Lots of work, Bob Dole --- He has the experience and character to move this country forward. Not Bill Clinton...an abyss of moral aptitude. Harry Browne. He is the only intelligent choice among those offered. Harry Browne. To get the Government out of our lives. I only want DOLE because he is lesser an idiot than CLINTON! Jack Kemp is Doles best quality. Bill Clinton. I think that Doll is very honest, but unwilling to accept many modern conceptsand beliefs. I think Clinton is more in touch with plans that will work right now. Harry Browne is the only candidate who will get the monkey of government off our back. He will eliminate income taxes, personal and corporate welfare, and bring prosperity to the country. Harry Browne. The only candidate to offer a constitutional alternative to the current federal bureaucracy. Clinton. He is very bright, and extremely competent. He has been very responsible fiscally Bob Dole, because of his more conservative economic plan todecrease federal government's power and give more freedom andpower to the citizens. Dole because he is the right man for the job dole. we can not stand another of bill clintons tax cut. Hillary Clinton because she's an intelligent woman and a goodfeminist. Harry Browne for President. He's not a politician. He acutallybelieves that he's identified problems and believes in the solutionshe's proposed. No other candidate can say that truthfully. either harry browne or john hagelin, because i agree with both of their principles. Bill Clinton shows that he could responsibly reduce the deficit and manage to protect the environment, the economy and the Americanfamily. Harry Browne, who is the only candidate who promises to restore the federal government to its Constitutional limitations. bob Dole. I think his ideas are better for our country than President Clinton's ralph nader, third party politics, grassroots politics, no big business backing Clinton, because he has a vision of where this country should be headed. He also has a track record. I want to see Bob Dole as president. I think he is trustworthy, and holds himself to reasonably high ethical and character standards. Bill Clinton--I do not agree with everything--especially moral issues. I think he has tried more for the common person Harry Browne or Howard Phillips because these two men value the constitution above political issues of the moment. Bob Dole. He is against abortion, and stands for higher tax breaks in our government. Browne--the only candidate who supports personal responsibility & freedom Clinton. Because he's not in the pocket of the Religious Right. Howard Phillips, because he is the only 100% pro-life candidate. Bob Dole will be the next president because of his genine love of country. Harry BrowneIt is time for a change in the way we have been doing things.Without quoting the 10 Amendment, it is the states who who shouldbe handling the peoples affairs. U. S. Goverment is too large. I hope that Bob Dole is elected president because he, unlike President Clinton, will reduce our taxes and the government. Harry Browne; eliminate the IRS & get the govt back to basics. Harry Browne is the only candidate who understands the critical importance of freedom in a society. The others only give it lip service. I would like to see The President be reelected because I feel he is more in tune with whats we need and what will keep the ecconomy on tract. Thank You Harry Browne. He is a business professional, excellent public speaker, and could be an effefective political leader. He is truthful, and is loaded with common sense. He has not just come out of the woodwork. He has expounded Libertarian principals for many years. He would be a breath of fresh air where now there is only stagnation. Bob Dole - he's honest, truthful and a man of character. He hasserved his country faithfully thru the military and the Senate andhas proven himself a worthy candidate. One who would bring honor back to the presidency and respect back to the country.One more term with Clinton will surely destroy this country. The only candidate standing up for personal liberty and individual responsibility is Harry Browne, Libertarian. I'd love to see him as President, so America can once again be the land of the free -- become one of the brave: vote for Harry Browne! Bob Dole because the President should be a person who has experience and integrity and can be trusted.Additionally, the President should seek to get the Federal government in line with the 10 th Amendment. Harry Browne. He is the only candidate who will reduce the fed gove to its constitutional role and give states their constitutional authority. This will be painful for everyone at first, then ultimately benefit us all. I feel Bill Clinton has better understanding of the issues and problems hat we faces a nation. Harry Browne - Browne is the only candidate concerned with solving our numberone problem- the size of government. Nader - He's the only candidate running who I feel can actually be trusted. Bob Dole. Experiance. I want to see Harry Browne elected so we can get rid of all the non-essential government employees who we don't need.Let 'em get A REAL JOB! Harry Browne. The gov't of the united States of America has noConstitutional authority to regulate education, fund welfare,prosecute Citizens for drug or firearms crimes, regulate healthcare, provide "social security"--a Ponzi scheme, barbecue itsCitizens (innocent or guilty), tax the American people, interferewith or fund political activity of foreign nations with ourconfiscated monies, maintain a standing army on our Land, enter orhonor a treaty that supercedes the Constitution for the unitedStates (UN Treaty), or so many more illegal and immoral activitiesthat this socialist government (which Hillary stated she and Billare trying to achieve) continues to pursue. Mr. Browne will makeAmerica a prosperous and free nation during his first year inoffice. Harry Browne: his libertarian philosophy, less govenment, abolishthe IRS, protect civil liberties, legalize drugs,abolish FDA Harry Browne is my choice for President in 1996 because he is the only candidate of any party that advocates views that closely mirror my own. Nader: agree with his stance against corporate welfare and the way that political campaigns are financed. Bob Dole because of his honesty, integrity and experience! When America called, Bob Dole gave his right arm, Bill Clinton gave his middle finger. Bill Clinton should, and will, be president again because he caresabout helping everyone, not just his friends, family and the rich. Anyone but Clinton. Harry Browne--He's correct. Government doesn't work. The bigger the government, the less it works. No answer Keyes comes closest to elucidating workable answers to the problems we seem to be facing. Ross Perot, I think it's time we had a president who has an expertise in business. If it's working don't fix it. It's got to be Clinton. President Clinton. He brings new solutions to many of the problems we are now facing. Furthermore, he also understands that true democracy cannot stand by itself if we only apply capitalism. Harry Browne best understands the nature and limits of government. colin powell. He seems to be the only sincere person on the spectrum. Ross Perot for the following reasons:1. - Changing electoral vote into a popular vote2. - Run the country as a business3. - Shut down the special interests in our government4. - Downsize goverment A president without a past of drugs,infidelity,pardoning of drugdealers,murder and abuse & misuse of power. honest bob I want to see Clinton I hope he can put into practice some of the things he really wants now that he won"t have to worry about re-electoin. Harry Browne because the solutions of the two major parites do not work. Like Browne's ideas or not, they head in very different directions and these directions need to be investigated to see if they work. Harry Browne would eliminate not only the deficit, but the debt with his economic plan. He would also drastically reduce crime by eliminating its major source: Drug LAWS. I want a Libertarian government that will properly limit the Federal government to the things it is Constitutionally empowerd to be doing, ending the reign of terror of the left- and right-wing socialists of the two major parties. browne-less government and more personal freedom Bob Dole;Rightiousness and virtueness should be the character of the man in the White House and Clinton is not the man to be there. Bill CLinton, because I think he has done a satisfactory job so far and Bob Dole is just too old to represent this country and those who are a part of it. Pat Buchanan; if that could be possible. Harry Browne. The only candidate who I believe genuinely wants to downsize government. Bill Clinton. Bob Dole. He's moral & ethical. He's conservative. He will help scale back an expansive & intrusive gov't. He will cut gov't spending & truly balance the budget. Dole in 96 - Clinton fool me once shame on you, fool me twice shame on me.Clinton can not be trusted to keep any promises and will walk on any one that gets in his way, mostly the little guy. Howard Phillips-Do not want to vote for lesser of two evils, want to return out government to the ideals established in our Bill of Rights and the Constitution. One nation under God. We should not develop man's, God has established His law and on this law our system of govenment should be based. Howard Phillips Bob Dole. I just feel that Bill Clinton is too willing to tax, and spend in a time when the economy is still fairly week and should be nurtured by giving the available funds to the people, and let them use their discretion with them. I believe that the Market does everything better than government, some people just think it socially unacceptable. Libertarian Harry Browne--the only candidate who is serious about cutting government and taxation, as evidenced by his refusal to accept matching funds. I want to see Bob Dole as President in 1996. I do believe honesty and integrity are critical to the Presidency. I believe the Federal Government has far exceeded its realm as defined in the Constitution. Bob Dole, He is really focused on people taking responsibility for themselves and their actions, and bettering our (US Citizens) family values. I believe that he will do a lot to stop illegal immigration as well. The fact that is pretty old,does however throw a strike against him. He is the best candidate in the election this year. HARRY BROWNE. To end income tax , ballance the buget, pay off debt and bring back the CONSTITUTION as the rule of law there is no other choice Mr. Dole. His 15% Tax cut would help the economy, and his subsequent Tax reform program would help everyone in the country. Harry Browne-Libertarian, He is the only candidate whowill not be lying if he took the oath of office. Harry Browne is the only candidate who promises to make huge,drastic cuts in the size and scope of the Federal Government.Scott Swain Dole, he is cool and experienced Bill Clinton, because he is as close to a liberal as we canreasonably hope for given the conservatisim of the times. I believe that Gen. Colin Powell represents the best that the country has to offer America in the way of President. I believe that Bill CLinton's character is flawed at best, and that he should not run this country. Bob Dole- Bill Clinton is sorry! Bob Dole would be a prime candidate, because of his background, and superior choice of a running mate. I would feel safe with Kemp as president if anything were to happen to Dole. I will vote for Harry Browne because he will end the insane war on drugs and because he is the only candidate who will reduce the sixe of government. Clinto wants to increase the size of government 4% per year and Dole want to make it bigger by 3% per year. Harry Browne is the only candidate who wants less government - LESS, not less growth - Less government now! Of the candidates that will be on the ballot I will choose Harry Browne.He states very clearly what he believes and wants to do when elected.He wants to reduce the federal government to its constitutional mandated role.He wants to elimate the many unconsitutional federal agencies such as IRS,Dept. of Education, Federal Reserve, etc. Harry Browne. His goals are clear. His methods have beenexplaned in detail. If he is elected we will know what toexpect. (as opposed to the other canidates that will randomlydamage some freedoms, in order to give us other random "entitlements") Bill Clinton because he had done pretty good during the past few years in office. Plus I have doubts about Dole's proposal. I'd like to see Harry Browne as President as I think the Libertarianplatform is miles in the right direction of reducing federal government and privitizing those services the citizens desire. Harry Browne. We need to get the government out of our business. Once we do this then maybe we can fix some of the problems that plague our country. President Bill (I didn't inhale, but I would if I got a chance) would say anything or do anything to get re-elected. If this country votes for him, they deserve what they get in the next 4 years, he has no more re-elections so he can do what he wants, even by Presidential Order, if necessary. Bob Dole should be elected, because he's a man of integrity and understands our position in the world. As a registered Republican, I feel that we are better off today than we were four yearsago, therefore President Clinton is the only REAL choice. DOLE, BECAUSE CLINTON WILL BE FORCED TO RESIGN IF HE IS RE-ELECTED. HIS MORAL CHARACTER IS SO BAD THAT IT IS AN EMBARRASSMENT TO ME AND THE COUNTRY. Harry Browne. Dole; Self control, Morality, Anti-beaurocratic, Trusts the people, A clear unwavering vision President Clinton has succeeded in passing into law such things as the Brady Bill, assult weapons ban and has signed the Nuclear Test Ban Treaty. He has also worked to protect our environmental laws, reduce the dificit, and create new jobs. The economy is growing at a steady (non-inflationary) pace and I personnaly am much better off than I was 4 years ago. pat buchanan for his stand against any form of abortion. and his views of the morial decay of society due to the absence of god in the family. Browne. Less government. Self resposibility. Self ownership. Someone honest enough to confront problems *responsibly* and working to AVOID politicizing these critical issues. Unfotunately, I doubt that either candidate will really do that... Harry Browne, he seems to be the most reasonable of those I have heard, the only one who doesn't seem to be a politician. Bob Dole he has the ability to get the job done. As a human being, I own myself and no one, especially government, has any business telling me what to think or how I must spend my money. The Declaration of Independence articulated this well and the U.S. Constitution was established to guarantee those rights! Therefore, I support the party founded on the basic prinicple of liberty--I support Harry Browne for president. Bob Dole. Conservatives want to cut taxes, lower spending andmake the government smaller. Dole the least of the two eviles. Brain, he is in touch with the majority of the american public. Ross Perot, because he is the only candidate that has shownany intelligence in the problems of the U. S. A., he is realistic. Dole!!!!! I see Clinton as being elected, mostly because of the successful lies and the obvious bias of mainstream media (i.e. New and even sitcoms) Harry Browne makes no attempt to be all things to all people,slinging around the tired rhetoric of a wishy-washy, indecisivecandidate with amorphous ideals. The time has come for a governmentfirmly grounded in its dedication to preserving civil lib...oh wait, I was about to turn this into a partisian/rhetoricalargument :-) Harry Browne is the only choice for President that has the courage to stop the Congressional and Judicial branches of our government in their vote-pandering, influence-peddling, tax-us-into-financial-disaster tracks. harry browne as he is the only candidate worth a damn. Bob Dole because he will bring honor and integrity back to the office of President.President. bill clinton- i feel that he is the best candidate Howard Phillips, because he agrees with all of my views. I like Libertarrians,But not where they stand on moral issues. Phillips has it right. Bill Clinton because Dole is too old, too conservative, and too much of an old Nixon man A want a president who will protect Civil Liberties and theEnvironment. Bob DoleClinton displays poor leadership at home and around the world. Dole-He is more honest anf presidential with a lot of government experience dole character matters I want to see Ross Perot for president in 1996 because his concerns are mine and because I believe in him. clinton be cause he is doing a good job ROSS PEROT, ONLY ONE SPECIAL INTEREST GROUP, THE PEOPLE. Harry Browne and his libertarian ideas could return us to the limited government that is the only good government. Government has the potential to do extreme damage, so it must be extremely limited. Bill Clinton because i beleve he should stay in office because he works very hard and Dole is way to old to be in office. Bob Dole because of leadership character and experience Harry Browne because he has specific and do-able plans to liberate everyone in the USA and potentially the world. God gave us free will to co-create and manifest our "reality." Let's just do it. Harry Browne -- A strong believer in fiscal responsibility, the reduction of government, and the protection of civil liberties. Bill Clinton,although not my first choice,is the only candidate who has an ideology close to my own and has a realistic chance of winning. Perot, I believe he will address our need to reduce government and make an attempt to reduce the amount of money I give the government every week. Harry Browne all the way. The federal government has gotten WAYtoo large and intrusive; its time to hit the reset button on thefederal government. Howard Phillips, we need to trust in God for our future. God gives us government and it should not be corrupted by money, lusts, and selfish ambition. Clinton=Socialism. This is America. Socialism in any form is notallowed. Pretty simple. Dole is the only viable candidate excludingSocialists...this election should be an easy choice for all voters. Harry Browne. We must take from Federal government powers not specified in the Constitution. Harry Browne - the only real alternative to the big-governmentpolicies of the Democrats and Republicans. HARRY BROWNE - HE IS THE ONLY CANDIDATE WHO WILL LIMIT GOV'T TO THE ABSOLUTE MINIMUM NECESSARY. Bob Dole, his vision outshines that of our current prez. Bill Clinton because he is the best candidate for the job. Dole because I think that Cliten is a liar and only does what is best for him. Howard Phillips because he seems to want to downsize government and he is against abortion. We have become too socialist in our government. Harry Browne because he is the only one who WILL cut spending,ELIMINATE TAXES and reduce the size of government. Dole because Cliten SUCKS Dole Bob Dole because even his critics say that he's a man of his word. Bob Dole is the only candidate with a "Less Government" stand who will be taken half way seriously by any significant portion of the electorate. Dole because he comes across to me as a person I can trust. Clinton would be great as a Used Car Sales Manager. He would get topdollars for this position. Harry Browne because he understands that government is force and force should only be used for defense or retaliation...it's immoral to initiate force (example: taxes) Harry Browne is the only candidate who can fix this mess thatDems and Repubs got us into. Harry Browne, but failing that, Clinton. The republicans need to be taught a lesson that they can't win an election with the same old crap they have always done, picking a candiate merely because it is "his turn" and sabotaging the candidacies of Forbes and Gramm. I want Harry Browne to be the next President because he is the ONLY CANDIDATE who will dramatically reduce the size of the Federal Government to the level that our Founding Fathers and the U.S. Constitution and our Bill Of Rights had originally intended. Harry Browne... Smaller Gov't. It's time for a change.... Though I'm not a big Perot fan, his VP Pat Choate, is the most intelligent and well-spoken of all the candidates. He should be primed as a legitimate candidate for 2000. Then, this nation's economic woes have a chance of ACTUALLY being fixed. As for perot, dole & clinton: I really don't know who I will vote for yet. Dole, otherwise our national debt will skyrocket. Bill Clinton-He has our country moving forward-socially,economically,and morally. Bob Dole because he is atleast trying to reduce the size of government Also, he is pro-life which is extremely important to me. I want to see Bob Dole a president because we need a honest man there not a womanizer,dope smoking liar and I might add draft dodger. Anyone but a Democrat. Harry Browne - he's our best hope to slash government back down to its original, intended size. Gen. Colin Powell. Becuase he is a patriot. He has fought for our country, and he is an outsider to the political arena of kickbacks, and porkbarrell politics. Clinton has worked hard for this country. His basic instincts are correct. Bob Dole. Of the two viable canditates before the American public,his record of service to his country and his honesty and integritymake him the only possible choice. Bill Clinton is nothing morethan a charlatan and snake-oil salesman, who will say whatever ittakes to get a vote. He has disgraced the office of President,and should have been impeached long ago. If the American people do not wake up and see this man for what he really is, then Godsave us all. Browne represents what I want for my courtry and is HONEST. bill clinton because he has restored usa to a world leader andmoral example to other nations. Harry Browne. I've voted Republican for years, but now I can't tolerate the religious overtones. I voted for Clinton as a vote against Bush. We need a totally new agenda, and I now know the Libertarians think the way I do. Bill Clinton..he has proven his worth more than his predecessors Harry Browne, because he is the ONLY candidate this year to offer realistic, workable proposals for making real changes in the things causing most of the country's problems. Thanks for giving us a chance to speak. Dole. Because I think the President is a laughing stock of the whole world. We need a president that can't be indirectly connected to every scandal known to man. We need someone people can look up to. Harry Browne, because he is the ONLY candidate this year to offer realistic, workable proposals for making real changes in the things causing most of the country's problems. Thanks for giving us a chance to speak. bill clinton he is still a new comer to washington and has a better view of the future for everyone Harry Browne. The Dems And Reps are all BS. They have been running this mess forever and still can't get it right. I want to see Harry Browne be elected to the office of President. Mr. Browne has an understanding of the role of government! Someone other than a ruling class weasel like Dole and Clinton Harry Browne, the Libertarian, is for Freedom in all areas.Libertarianism is CONSISTENT; other political philosophies aren't. Bill Clinton, he's a better choice than Dole, although I terribly hate to say so. I would like to see a President that would take a positive handle on the nation and it's economy and also take responsibility for his/her actions as president. Harry Browne, because he is against censorship and wants to endthe war on drugs. Harry Browne should be president because he supports reduction of government intrusion,which happens to be the root cause of nearly all the "worst problems" listed in #2 above.Reduce government intrusion and eliminate "seven in one blow"; what more must one say? Bob Dole - a vote for anyone else is a vote for a pot smoking, womanizing, draft dodging, waste of sperm, Bill Clinton harry browne because he is a hell of a guy Harry Browne because he's the only candidate who will reduce government to its constitutional minimum and will promote civil liberties. Libertarian Harry Browne because he/they are for limited government,lower taxes, and both personal & economic freedom - what this countryshould be about! I want to see Harry Browne as President of the United States. The Government should get out of the American peoples lifes completely. I will vote for Browne because the more votes he gets, the sooner we'll elect Libertarians to Congress and/or force other politicians to reduce government power. For now, I hope Dole wins so that Republicans get throughly disillusioned with their party (even when they control everything, total government spending will not be cut by even one penny.) I will vote for any candidate who is most likely to reduce the governments influence in my life. Bob Dole. A divided partisan representation between executive and legislative branch is of absolute no use. Harry Browne -- not that he'd be able to implement Libertarian ideals but it's be neat to see them brought to the table at last. We finally got someone in Washington who actually used her brain -- J. Elders -- and she was fired for proposing that we should reconsider a thing or two! Hmmm.Thanks - Tony Harry Browne, I believe in his view that govenrment doenst work and that it must be reduced as much as possible. bob dole...why should we suffer another four years of b.s. from a draft dodger, hillbilly, womanizer, follower, liberal. Harry Browne! The U.S. Constitution is the place to start saving our nation. Any person or group that is willing to step outside the bounds set forth in the constitution and telling you that it's really for the best, is lying to you. HARRY BROWNE will bring the Federal Government back to it's constitutional limits and not "allow'', but rather "help" us restore our freedoms and deal with the nations problems as ADULTS, not as children that "higher-ups" in Washington must tell what to do. Bob Dole,I think that of the two major choices, Bob is lessinclined to force more government down my throat. He also opposes further gun control legislation. Howard Phillips simply because he is dedicated to reducing government. Clinton, because the economy has improved in the last four years. Reagan with alzheimer's would make be a better President than either of these two major candidates. That said, Bob Dole has the integrity, common sense, and experience to lead the nation in a better direction than it's headed now. Bob Dole- He seems to have a trustworthyness about him!Bill Clinton on the other hand has had his chance and blew it with lies and deception!!!!! I would like to see Bob Dole as our next President, mainly because I would like to see more integrity in thr white house!!! Harry Browne will reduce the federal government back to its constitutional limits! He will also reduce taxes AND balance the budget at the sametime!!! Ronald Reagan! I believe that Bill Clinton is the better qualified candidate. The Republican Party economic philosophy of "trickle down" economics has been proven not to work. Harry Browne, because government has tried to solve social and economic problems for years and has never succeeded. Harry Browne, he's the only candidate with the will (and the lack of PAC money) to cut the size of government and REVERSE the IMMORAL, DESTRUCTIVE, and UN-CONSTITUTIONAL trends of the past century. The structure of this poll indicates that you support the notion that we cannot reduce taxes and the debt at the same time, therefor, it doesn't matter that I am supporting Harry Browne, because you are so entrenched in Democratic politics that this nation is doomed, anyway. Their goal of making Americans accept serfdom is complete. We've lost. Harry Browne because he has no vested interest in big government. clinton. He has a better grasp of almost the issues and is more open to diverse viewpoints. I want to see Harry Browne for president. Government has grown too big, to intrusive, too expensive and too dangerous to allow it to continue on the path that the old parties have put it on. We face a massive debt, all of our entitlement programs are on the verge of collapse and the young people of today will be left holding the bag for the irresponsible tactics of our parents. Harry Browne. He is the only serious candidate trying to Reduce the size of government. The Reps and Dems have lied too much already. I would like to see Howard Phillips/Herb Titus for Pres and VP because they know their constitutional bounds and duties. Bill Clinton shows the highest of moral standards, can play economic hardball, and doesn't lay down for any reason. Bill Clinton - the Dole supporters I know are incredibly mean-spirited and bitter people. I think hate radio is destroying their brains. Clinton - Christian Conservatives are very scarey and have too much influence on the Republicans Harry Browne - freedom must be put first and none of the othercandidates truly stand for freedom. Harry Browne -- government is a barrier to peace and prosperity. Harry Browne Harry Browne because he wants to dismantle govt to the smallest size. Thiswhich would protect civil liberties, and give the financial powerback to the people so that WE may solve our own problems. Big govt wastesmoney that could be better spent by the private sector. Bill Clinton has 12 years experience as Chief Executive. Life now in general is better than ever. Howard Phillips. The Federal Government is operating illegally outside the limits of the Constitution. Smaller government, with a tough stance on abortion. I believe Bob Dole can balance the buget and lower our taxes, only if the economy is strong. He has a good vision of our future. A leader that can hear and is willing to listen the grass roots from inside the lofty tower, filled with the deaf and the corrupted. Dole-Clinton is a socialist & Hillary has a Woodstock mentality of government which means re-distribute the wealth & individual iniative is irrelevant Clinton, because his ideas seem more sensible than those of dole.On the contrary, if his wife is doing his work she really isn't doing a bad job. My ideal choice for President is Nader, because he is the only candidate who is addressing the basic issue, which is the rapid change of America from a democracy to a corporate/media controlled illusion of democracy. None of the other candidates are willing to admit that our government is now run by and for unelected big business personalities. Harry Browne, because he's the only candidate who stands forindividual liberty in all areas, and a sharply reducedgovernment. Harry Browne for smaller govt, less taxes, increased personal liberty, reduced crime, legalized drugs, abolish laws and agencies that don't work, rethink foreign policy. Harry Brown is the only candidate that can see a clear method of returning this country to the foundation it was formed on. Cut Government back to the Constitutional powers originally granted to it, take away the money and you put the power back where it belongs with the people. Harry Brown is willing to admit the truth - Government doesn't Work ! All the rest are liers and Thieves. Let the people vote with their money. Peaceful withdrawal of funds will allow the peoples voice to be heard. Income Taxeshave always been voluntary - Stop the IRS from coercing money to pay for beliefs that are against the Constitution.Abolish the IRS. Abolish the corrupt FBI and ATF. Stop the government in its tracks every time it trys to moralize and establish a religion. Turn back to the communities to solve the communities problems and get the government out of our wallets!! Bill Clinton because he has done a good job and the Republicans have gone off the deep end Harry Brown is the only candidate that can see a clear method of returning this country to the foundation it was formed on. Cut Government back to the Constitutional powers originally granted to it, take away the money and you put the power back where it belongs with the people. Harry Brown is willing to admit the truth - Government doesn't Work ! All the rest are liers and Thieves. Let the people vote with their money. Peaceful withdrawal of funds will allow the peoples voice to be heard. Income Taxeshave always been voluntary - Stop the IRS from coercing money to pay for beliefs that are against the Constitution.Abolish the IRS. Abolish the corrupt FBI and ATF. Stop the government in its tracks every time it trys to moralize and establish a religion. Turn back to the communities to solve the communities problems and get the government out of our wallets!! Harry Browne-because he is the only cantidate with answers and real dealings with the issues rather than platitudes. new candidate.clinton too crooked,dole too old.perot tooscary. BILL CLINTON, HE IS THE BETTER OF THE TWO THAT IS RUNNING FOR PREIDENT. Bill Clinton because watching Newt "effect" I was frightened by what Repulblicans and supporters(Radical Christian right, big business, corporate polluters,) et al would do. Change ofgoverment to a smaller focused body is critical. The government should provide appropriate support and they must be there to keep watchful against those who destroy our country as a whole, our environment, our social fabricand allow us improve our families, our neighborhoods and our country.make-up (rich getting richer, etc) Harry Browne is the only one telling the truth about gov't.he is the Bill Clinton! The Republicans must be stopped! The lunatics on the Religious Right have to much influence!! Bob dole-Cause Bill Climton is pice of----- theif! Clinton. I agree with his priorities. Harry Browne, less government Bob Dole - B.C. has shown he cannot keep his promises, so Dole needs a chance to keep his Libertarian presidential candidate Harry Browne is extremelyarticulate -- he's a polished candidate and would make a greatleader. He's probably the most honest human being I've ever met! Howard Phillips is my choice. Morality is a trickle down concept, as isimmorality.. our kids learn by example. All things ARE connected. Harry Browne will balance the budget in his first year and clearthe debt within five years. Bob Dole, I think of the two, Trust..... Libertarian Harry Browne is the only candidate with a solid, workable plan to reduce the federal government to its constitutionally mandated size and scope. Harry Browne -- the only candidate whose position makes sense. Harry Browne because he is the only candidate talking about making government smaller and returning responsibility to the individual not other politicians. Bill Clinton because I think he has done a good job for the past 4 years, even though he has had to fight the nay sayers since day one. He has improved the economy and yes we are better off than we were four years ago. Harry Browne is the only candidate that get the gov't out of our daily lives, get us out of the UN immediately, bring our troops home, curtail foreign aid, and strengthen our defense system. Bob Dole because I can trust him unlike Mr clinton who will be looking for the Polls to see what he should do in a crisis situation. Harry Browne. The present Federal Government is the greatest threat to our liberty in our countriy's history. President Clinton may or may not have lived his life the way I would. But I don't vote on a President for his own personal life. I vote based upon what he has done or can do for our country. The president has done a good job and I think he deserves a second term. Browne, the only candidate who wants to lead us *away* from the precipice of national bankruptcy. I want to see dole, a more honest, and honorable person representing our country. There is no excuse to let a liar who want to TAKE CARE of america in the white house. We need to be responcible. Bob Dole, his past record, moral standards, honesty, concern for economic welfare of this country. He'll make the tax reduction work or adjust it. The tax cut is not as important to me as his character. Harry Browne because the Democrats and Republicans are one and the same, Big Government and Lsightly Smaller Government. Harry Browne, because he has a credible and honest plan forrestoring our freedoms by reducing the size and scope of thefederal government. Bob Dole. I do not trust Clinton. He had his chance & screwed up.Now it is time to step aside. Bill Clinton. He has done a good jub so far and is the best man for the job. Harry Browne! End the income tax! Harry Browne. He's the only candidate who wants to shrinkgovernment to constitutional size. Bob Dole. I support tax cuts and less gov. involvment in our dayto day lives, basic conserv. policy.By the way, tax cuts DON'T need to be "payed for". Socialistgiveaways do. Bob Dole has better values I would like to see Harry Browne as President so that he can vetoevery left-wing and right-wing collectivest program to come from the Democrats and Republicans in Congress. Harry Browne...Please read his book "Why Gov't Doesn't Work" and the suggested reading list at the LP WEB Page. That should give you enough info to make "the" decision; Socialism or Freedom BOB DOLE; Honesty,Integrity,Experienced & A strong defense. Neither the Republican nor the Democratic party seems to think the american public is smart enough to control their own destiny. I hope a Harry Browne will change this. Bob Dole, becuase he will bring new un-liberal ideas into the White House. Bob Dole - the Clinton administration is fluff without substance. He cannot marshall support from his own party regulars on the centrist items he is touting. Bill Clinton, simply because he has reduced government and had Ross Perot, he is the only one that is more concerned with America rather thanbeing concerned just about government BOB DOLE, HE CAN BE TRUSTED WITH THE WELL BEING OF THE UNITED STATES, HE'S HONEST AND HAS A BETTER FEEL FOR OUR COUNTRIES FUTURE.HE SUPPORTS A STRONG DEFENCE PROGRAM. I AGREE WITH HIS APPROACH TO STRENGHTEN THE ECONMY. HARRY BROWNE We need to reduce taxes a lot. Bill Clinton. We victims of the Reagan Revolution are just beginning to recover economically.With 4 more years of Clinton and 8 more of Gore we might be back to where we were before that Fascist Republican Bastard came along. Bill Clinton, because he has delivered on most of his promises and none of the republicans had any plans on improving the economyuntil Bill Clinton came up with his plans I will vote for Harry Browne http://www.HarryBrowne96.org/ because he believes the Bill of Rights must be restored and because he will reduce the federal government. Harry Browne. The Libertarian Party is the only party I know of that has a consistent philosophy of self-determination in both personal behavior and finances. John Hagelin is the only intelligent candidate. Harry Browne. Only candidate that seems to actually believe in freedom forpeople. Dole. I think the president needs to be a leader with a long range vision and not a manager/supervisor whose policies are at the mercy of media interpretation and public perception. Let the congress and govenors provide the management and supervison to support the vision of the president - all levels reflecting the voice of the majority. Clinton for pres. because he will hopefully fund education for everyone, keep reducing the deficit, be a peacemaker in the world and at least vocally supports campaign finance reform legislation. Harry Browne, he's the only candidate who seems to recognize the "Bill of Rights" Bob Dole-He is not radical and has the same views as me! Harry Browne...He is the only candidate who seems to besaying anything that is legitimate for our future good. Tired of BS. Looking for someone who says what they mean, and mean what they say. Harry Browne. He's the only candidate who has workable solutions for veering this country away from the abyss of destruction. I believe he is an honest and sincere man. Browne is the only presidential candidate with legitimate viableplans for making America work by returning power to the people. Harry Browne. Government doesn't work. Harry Browne. The only one with a plan to eliminate the deficit and debt, to return to a Constitutionally authorized government. Bill Clinton and Al Gore as then represent me and my generation and my political philosophy and Bob Dole and the republicans are going right religious extreamism. I would like to see the moderates retake the republican party. I have voted for republican moderates. Harry Brown. He'll reduce government, while protecting civil liberties and social freedoms. He'll run our country the way the founding fathers wanted it run. dole - strong state-weak federal james baker, because he has more experience with foreign governments than anyone else. Harry Browne, because he is a true libertarian who wants huge tax cuts NOW,a balanced budget NOW, huge spending cuts NOW. Harry Browne is the only candidate in this race with a genuine committment to reducing the size and scope of government. dole The better man Harry Browne (Libertarian). Mr. Browne is the only candidate who favors large tax cuts and huge reductions in the federal budget and opposes government intrusion into our personal and financial matters. Charles Collens, who is conspicuously absent from your list andmany others. He was the only one that saw the WHOLE picture. Harry Browne. He is the only one who wants to significantly reduce government Harry Browne presents a moderating view that will reduce the size of our overgrown beaurocracy.He will also provide a neutral ground between the politically warring factions of the Demopublicans and the Republicrats.The Libertarian view also will help the morale of the country by eliminating the oppressive elements that have crept into out government. Al Gore Clinton. He has compassion and can relate to the average person. Harry Browne, because he is the only candidate who wants to reduce government intrusion in everyones lives. Browne, the Libertarian Party has the most logical economic personal fredom stance. Harry Browne.His plan is more firm and practical than anyone else's. Ross Perot, a man with a genuine love for his country who will bring dignity back to the Presidency and reform government in the name of Lincoln, Jackson, and Washington. Only Libertarian candidate Harry Browne can be trusted to limit government to its Constitutional (in other words LEGAL) functions. I truly fear the United States government! Bob Dole, because Clinton not much of a respectable person. I do respect him for being the President, but not much more than that. I would love to see Harry Browne win since he is the only candidatewho realizes that government doesn't work. He recognizes the factthat more personal and economic freedoms would greatly increaseU.S. prosperity and security. Harry BrowneWe need to reduce government to constitutional size, thats why our founding fathers wrote it in the first place Bill Clinton harry browne, because he is the only candidate who is addressing the real issues, regardless of the "politcal liablility" it may besow on him. We must reduce govt, and restore personal liberty and responsibility. Harry Browne, the Libertarians. His is the only platform which offers a genuine alternative to the basic premise of the old parties. All other parties believe the arbitrary powers of government exist so they can take your money and spend it to compel you to live in accordance with their social, political - and yes, even their personal - goals. Libertarians, in total contrast, believe that where governments are formed, they must not violate the rights of any individual. Unfortunately, in this election year the difference between Republicans and Democrats is spelling. I do not have a good feeling about either major candidate. They are both politicians first and more concerned about themselves than their country. Harry Browne, because Liberty has primacy over Security, and Libertarianism is the only consistent principle (against tyranny over economic as well as social behavior). He is the only rational alternative in an increasingly irrational world. Bob Dole Honesty, He Will Do More For The People Bob Dole and Jack Kemp are men of character and of their word. What they say, they will do! It doesn't "take a village" to raise a child, it takes A FAMILY! Bob Dole. Although he isn't my ideal candadate (Ronald Reagan is) he will sign important legislation from a republican congress. Also, when Dole announced his economic plan the liberal media smothered him on how the government could finance it. However, when Clinton/Gore announce new spending bills nobody asks how the American citizen will finance it!!!!!! Harry Browne. He is the only candidate that will really worktowards reducing the size of our overgrown goverment. Allothers are just playing lip service to the concerns of the publicover government grown amuck. Harry Browne. He is the only candidate who will decrease government. Who: Harry Browne Why: Libertarian Party platform I am a "radical moderate", and dislike seeing politicians of both major parties fawning over their respective extremists. I'll vote for Harry Browne as a protest vote. bob doleI'm worse off than 4 years ago not better. Harry Browne...Government doesn't work and he is the only one who will do what he says he will do, reduce the size of government. Unlike politicians who have gotten sucked up by the system, he is a free agent. It is time for a change. Of all the candidates whose views I have been able to sample Harry Browne and the Libertarian Party come closest to what I believe is best for the country at this time. Ross perot, because hi is insane Harry Browne - Less Government Harry Browne because he would radically cut government, end the War on (some) Drugs, and cut back the military to the small amount we need to just DEFEND ourselves. Harry Browne (and I pray, enough voter/supporters to help him fix things)My god America, WAKE UP and change things before we go broke(er). I want no government controls of any person place or thing. Howard Phillips should be President because his ideas are mostconsistent with the wording and original intent of the Constitution. Harry Browne, Libertarian. He will reduce governmentintrusion in our lives; eliminate income tax, welfare,the fraudelent social security scheme, overseas foreignpolicy misadventures, the "War on Drugs," and balance the budget. Besides, I refuse to vote for the evil of two lessersany longer. Harry Browne, he has real ideas to solve problems others choose to ignoreeg. social security reform Mary Cal Hollis. She can cut crime, improve education, and fight oppresion. Harry Browne because he is apparantly the only candidate who can read and write English. All of the other candidates feel they need an interpreter to understand the U.S. Constitution (which is not now officially recognized by the current government). Harry Browne. He's serious about reducing the federal government instead of arguing whetherit should increase by 3 percent or 4 percent. Bob Dole, because he wants to see all Americans prosper, not make all Americans poor. Harry Browne. There are many candidates that want governement tointrude on our lives, but only one who wants to leave us alone. ross perot because we need a huge change that will show both political parties that we, the people, are fed up. Browne, because he is my ideal candidate, but since this isunlikely, I would prefer Dole to Clinton, because at least Dolewill not veto the Republican congress' better bills. Harry Browne ; if we donot reverse the big govt. trend ,we will seea total govt. meltdown in about 20 years its simple math!!! Bob Dole--He has integrity. He has a vast amount of knowledge gained from experience. His ideas are sound. I would like to see Harry Browne. It is time to change the waythe government functions, and the Republicans and Democrates arenot interested in change. I want to see Bill CLinton primarily because I trust that he will protect civil rights and, very importantly, the right of women to chose an abortion if she deems neccesary. I do not trust Dole with either of these things. Bob Dole. He more than Clinton can lead us rather than follow. Bob Dole. He does not make lying part of his governing strategy Dole. Why? I can't say without getting into arguement. Harry Browne because he believes in the rights of individuals and freedom from government. Harry Browne - Reduction in government , increase in personal freedom and liberties, placing rsponsibilities back upon the individual Clinton is the only logical choice in an extremely poor field. Harry Browne - The only candidate who believes in the Constitution. make government more efficient,give education priority, protect individual privacy I would like to see our next president start to make policy changes that will induce long term effects in the education of our young, the improvement in our economic practices both in regards to the environment and productivity, and the improvement of the U.S. education system. Without these changes our short term wants could lead to the loss of our long term needs. Harry Browne. Of your options above which don't include my views: No tax theft is acceptable, even a reduced rate; Perot should only be in the debates if it gets Browne in; a village is fine if it's not the government; Dole's tax cut doesn't go nearly far enough;Marrou 92. Harry Browne, the ONLY candidate with a real plan to eliminate theNational Debt, Cut Violent Crime in half and save our children froma life of fiscal slavery at the hands of the government! Harry Browne because he will help make smaller government Harry Browne! He is the only candidate who has a plan to reduce the size of the government. Also he is the only candidate who didn't take matching funds; thereby proving he wants to fix theproblem, not become part of it. Harry Browne, because we need GOOD MORALS, *ETHICS*, and COMMON SENSE in a MUCH SMALLER federal government.None of the other 3 national candidates impress me as having a full deck in ANY of these areas. Harry Browne, because he unwaveringly supports personalfreedom and responsibility on all issues at all times. Heunderstands that government is force, and should thereforbe reduced to the minimum necessary to protect people's freedoms. Dole, he will sign republican passed bills. Harry Browne is the only candidate truly committed to realgoverment reduction -and- preservation of personal liberty. get government out of our lives!!!!!!!!!!! Mary Cal Hollis (Socialist Party USA)- because she is intent on putting an end to corporate welfare and military pork, while keeping in mind that people are more important than profits. Harry Browne, because he is the only candidate proposing a significant reduction in government and realistic methods for doing so without hurting people in the process. Thanks for hosting this forum!!! Harry Browne, so as to not merely increase government spending by 20% over the next 4 years (under the Democrats), or by %14 (under the Republicans), but to actually cut the Federal Spending by 50% (or more) the first year in office! Who else besides the Libertarians talk about actually retiring the entire Federal debt, much less getting a balanced budget? Getting rid of the "Insane War on Drugs" (which is actually a war on children and civil liberties) is another major plus also. When alcohol prohiition was repealed the absolute homicide rate fell for nine(9) years in a row! Imagine that! Harry Browne- The only hope this country has lies with the Libertarian Party. I want to see Harry Browne in the presidency as he seems to represent a fair, logical, and principle-based stand on therole of the federal government. Ross Perot, because he seems to truely understand the problems facing the U.S. and will honestly work to serve all Americans including YOU the reder of this poll !!! Bob Dole. His plans are the most logical and have had proven results in the Reagan administration. Bob Dole. His plans are the most logical and have had proven results in the Reagan administration. Harry Browne is the only candidate with a serious plan to reduce the size and scope of the federal government. I'd like to see Harry Browne as President. I would like someone who loves the American country and defends for her liberty and freedoms of life, liberty,and the pursuit of happiness. Abortion is the opposite of life. It is murder. Dole, simply because of his moral and character leadership abilities. Because Bill Clinton is a lying, cheating, idiot, whose wife really runs this country. Quite frankly, I am a perfectionist, and I wish the imperfect government to leave me alone. Harry Browne in '96 to reduce govt. Ross Perot knows how to fix the deficit! He is the only canidate who has any history of budgeting anything rationally. The democrats and republicans just want to spend, spend, spend and make goverment grow, grow, grow while they slowly erode our civil liberties. Clinton - more aware of today's issues and problems Harry Browne, because he is the only candidate who is against theinsane "War on Drugs". Prohibition didn't work in the 1920s and itis not working now. Drug prohibition provides huge profits to criminalsand fails at its stated goals of reducing drug abuse. Drug abuse is amedical problem and should be treated as such. Drug _use_ is, as theysay, "nobody's business but my own." Harry Browne because he is the only candidate that stands for individual liberty, responsibility, and freedom from government. Howard Phillips. USTP platform. I will vote for Harry Browne and Jo Jorgensen. I like what theystand for. Howard Phillips. He's is the ONLY candidate running on a platform that combines the best of the others, while avoiding the worst. e.g: I'd probably be a Libertarian if they didn't take such a casual attitude toward moral issues (abortion-rights, legalizing drugs, prostitution..etc) Harry Browne. He has the only honest platform. HARRY BROWNE. He'll fight against internet censorship. Harry Browne, he understands what a monetary system is all about. Harry Browne. The Democrats like to pick people's pockets. The GOPwants to have cops hit people over the head. I'll go with Browne. Bob Dole because we need:A) To restore integrity and honor to the Presidency.B) We need consistency and rational in the actions of government.c) We need to take steps to prevent/reduce the impending fiscal& economic crisis that will result from unbridled federal spending. I support Harry Browne, because he has presented concrete, plausible plans to drastically reduce government and its intrusion into both business and people's personal lives. Harry Browne - would repeal unconstitutional federal governmentand repeal the income taxes entirely Harry Browne is the only candidate who has both a compellingmessage about where America should be headed and a plan forgetting us there. I support Harry Browne, because I'm pro-choice, because I supportfree trade, and because I support immigrants' rights. Harry Browne I think a vote of "No Confidence" applies to all candidates. Who I want to see in the White House and who realistically has a chance of getting into the White House are two different people. Bob DoleMorals, Family issues, Veteran, Harry Browne because he wants to DRASTICLY reduce gov. Harry Browne is the only candidate who respects the strict limitations placed on the federal government by the constitution. Harry Browne, he's the only candidate that gives us even half a chance to get back to a Constitutional government. I SAY BRING BACK AuH20! FOR THOSE THAT QUESTION IT THAT IS BARRY GOLDWATER. Harry Browne will reduce goverment. Let the free market handle retirement,medicine, and everything else thats not specified in the Constitution. Dole - I want a man of integrity in my White House and as my leader! Harry Browne. Government intrusion has killed the family and thecommunity -- by REPLACING them. Back to personal responsibility! Harry Browne. While I don't agree with everything he stands for, reducing the federal government and ending the insane "War on Drugs" are vitally important to keeping our civil liberties. Bob Dole because he is of the upmost moral character as opposed to his main competitor. His economic plan is much stronger than Bill Clintons. Harry Browne because his prescription for change offers a clear break from current trends and is a return to the constitutional principles espoused by our founders who rightly feared runaway government. Harry Browne is the only candidate running on principles--The principles stated in the Constitution."Libertarians - Fouding Fathers and Future Leaders"-kc Harry Browne. He is the only candidate who understands Government Doesn't Work and, he would restore the Bill of Rights, particularly Second Amendment. Harry Browne: He is the only candidate that has promised to reduce government to its constitutional limits and has a plan to accomplish the job. Bob Dole because he is of the upmost moral character as opposed to his main competitor. His economic plan is much stronger than Bill Clintons. Bob DoleCharacter, Morals, Ethics, Veteran, He's The Man! Harry Browne understands that to cut taxes, you must cutspending. I prefer Mr. Harry Browne for president because hi is the candidate who stands for what I believe. As a member of the Armed Services, my job is to protect and defend the Constitution of the U.S. This is what Mr. Browne wants to do. Anyone who will cede government power back to the people. I do not want Cliton,but unfortunately there is not a canidate I can agree with. Ross, the two major political parties are loaded with faggits, nazis, and communists. Bob dole because he supports less government, is against gay people, and abortion. Harry Browne has the vision and a plan to reduce many of the ills of society and to return America again to a place where people can live a good life. Harry Browne - I'm Tired of the same big-government answers to personal problems. Dole, who else can you trust Clinton. He supports public education and higher education incentives. Bob Dole has the moral leadership this country needs if we areto survive with dignity into the 21st century. Harry Browne - he is the only candidate that I agree with on importantissues: No military intervention overseas, no government intrusion in ourprivate lives, open immigration, no "war on drugs", no "legislated morality,"and no more "victimless crime" offenders being jailed. Harry Browne - America, freedom was the whole idea! Harry Browne - He promotes the ideas of adhering to the Bill of Rights and personal freedom. Every other candidate advocates more government control to solve our problems. We've seen this fail time and time again. Harry Browne is the only candidate willing to address major problems, i.e., the War on Drugs, the War on Poverty and our incessant foreign wars. He will not tinker with or "reform" the federal government, he will get it back to Constitutional levels. Bob Dole, because he is a man of conviction. Not someone who sways with the wind. Harry Browne because he will limit the intrusion of politics intoeveryday life. I would like to see Harry Browne as president in 1196. I believe that he would restore an American where the individual rather than the mob rules. Harry Browne. His entire platform is dedicated to returning the Federal Government to its constitutional limits. Bill Clinton. Simply, he's doing a great job! Harry Browne. He's the only one promoting minimal federal govt, no federal income tax and keeping the govt out of our lives Ross Perot. Because he and Mr. Choate are experienced in SOLUTIONS, not creating PROBLEMS. It seems that over the years we (the American people) have been asleep. It's time to wake the sleeping giant, and to require Government to be responsible and accountable for their actions and inactions. Harry Browne to cut government by 95%. Harry Browne !!! He has not only listed out the things he would like to accomplish if elected, but exactly how he would accomplish them. Call Ripley's IF Dole or Clinton ever do! Harry Browne should be our president because he has a clear vision of the founding principles of our country, and is the only candidate who seeks to work to restore these principles which have been destoryed by years on neglect and government intervetion.. I am scared of the type of socialism Bill Clinton espouses. Bob Dole is better than Bill Clinton, but HARRY BROWNE is by far the best candidate. Harry Browne. Mr. Browne is the only candidate who speaks to theissues in a clear, consistent manner. He is the only candidatewho truly recognizes that government is at the root of most ofour problems. Harry Browne. The government injustifiably involves itself with every aspect of American life. Ideally, I would have voted for Phil Gramm. The media ignored him because he was Bill Clinton's worst nightmare. Harry Browne, the only candidate with a consistent principled approach to the role of government. Ralph Nader is the only candidate addressing the growing inequality, and corporate domination of America. Harry Browne--because he is the only candidate who has a real and workable plan to eliminate government-created problems. Neither Clinton nor Dole. They have nothing to offer this country except the same old political crap. We need someone who is truly concerned for the needs of the American people, not for the needs of their own or special interest needs. Bill Clinton--I am from kansas. Bob Dole forgot Kansas years ago and started running for pres. Harry Browne--he is the only candidate to present a credible, consistent, persuasive case for smaller government. I prefer Bob Dole. As Ross Perot says, who would you trust with your money. Of course, if you don't care if it's used legally, then I guess you could give it to Clinton. Dole/Kemp....It's the best choice of men to lead our country. Clintonand Gore remind me of those that threw bags of urine and dog crap at me when I got of the plane in Travis airport on my return fromViet Nam. I was drafted and my dad said Canada or the Army?I had to make my choice of living with myself at the time, Ichose the service and a hopeful and safe return. I made it.Clinton and Gore have lied to themselves so much that the art of thelie has permeated into the souls of this country so deep thatI feel in may be irreversable if they are elected. If they arere-elected, this is an indication of our country's soul. And if so,God help us all. Time to hed for the mountains. Bob Dole - he is sincere, honest and has integrity. It's timewe returned some dignity to the Presidency. Clinton REALLY scaresme - another term will unleash him and Hillary. Harry Browne for the 100% tax cut! Harry Browne to eliminate theIRS, cut government in half, Balance the Budget NOW, Tax Cuts Now, Privatize and save Social Security NOW. Get the government offour backs and out of our pockets and out of our bedrooms NOW. Harry Browne to restore the Constitution NOW and eliminate those government programs that exist beyond the scope of the 10th ammendment. Harry Browne to restore Prosperity to the land of the once free and home of the once brave NOW. Harry Browne. Individual rights and responsibilities are supreme. Government is wasteful and corrupt. Eliminate theFederal Reserve Private Banking Monopoly, get us out of theU.N., stop all government licensing, and leave us alone. Harry Browne understands that government is analgous to a giantcancerous tumor on the verge of killing it's host - citizens Bob Dole should be the next president because I trust him to lead our country in the proper direction more so than I trust Clinton. Bob Dole. He is a better role-model for everyone. He is more trustworthy. Bob Dole/Jack Kemp: Smaller government (not NO government, as the press would paint conservatives),and less bureaucratic control of individuals' lives is critical to our nation. DOLE One interesting thing I note is that most of the people I talk towho are against Clinton have an almost irrational hatred of theman almost exclusively based on what they've heard on radio & television. You can't talk to a single anti-Clinton person whodoesn't spew a bunch of unsubstantiated innuendo; the basis oftheir prejudice is not logical. If you look at Clinton's recordof accomplishments, it's quite clear he has worked very hard todeliver on his promises. Anyone who expects too much from politicials(in general) is deluding themselves, but I believe history willshow Clinton to be an excellent president, probably even betterthan Kennedy. He supported a wide variety of very intelligent legislationthat various special interest groups love to demean but when you look at the facts, things like the Brady Bill, Family Leave, FeinsteinAmendment, Don't Ask Don't Tell in the military, are sound andmoderate proposals - they're not liberal - they just make sense.Clinton WILL become re-elected because the American people arestupid, but not quite stupid enough to think the republicans, orany other candidate is being realistic in their promises or sincerein their concern for the country's future. The person who will revamp the goverment before Social Security is gone and before Medicare is gone and before we become tax slaves. Bob Dole because he has honest plans to make America a better place. Bob Dole -- High moral and ethical charactor. His honorable service to America during war time. And his belief in the American people. Bob Dole. We all must take more responsibility for our own lives. We have been giving away too many of our freedoms. I want to see a communist revolution in 1996. Either Ross Perot or Ralph Nader because they would shake things upand boot out the entrenched special interests. ANY OF THE THIRD PARTY CANDIDATES, AS THEY ARE PRESENTING REAL ISSUES UNLIKE THE TWO BOZOS THAT ARE PART OF OUR PROBLEM. Questions, comments, suggestions? Contact us. Return to theHome Page. Copyright ©1996, /InterCommerceCorporation, All rights reserved worldwide Send comments to Webmaster@Survey.net WT02-B22-5IA060-000333-B024-70http://www.survey.net:80/pol4c1.html 204.107.221.240 19970115055302 text/html 123747HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 15 Jan 1997 05:46:28 GMTServer: Apache-SSL-US/1.0.3+1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 123563Last-modified: Mon, 25 Nov 1996 20:26:45 GMT SURVEY.NET - 1996 Presidential Poll #3 - User comments (ARCHIVE I) Your source for information, opinions & demographics from the NetCommunity! ANNOUNCING: The Internet's finest interactive, totally-automated,immediate survey system. We can take any form and instantly create adynamic demographic database and show you the results as soon as youcomplete the survey! Political Survey #4 User comments [ARCHIVE I] Who will be president in 1996 and why? Bob Dole because he is trustworthy and honest and clinton cannot be trusted. Dole, because he never refused to stand up for the land of his birth. Harry Browne - Corruption is our worst problem and corruption could not exist without government having sufficient power to elicit corruption. Harry Browne will eliminate the excessive powers of the federal government. This is the ONLY way corruption can or will go away. P.S. - the founders knew this and wrote the constitution accordingly. A republic not a democracy and severly limit the power of the federal government. Definitely not what we have today!! Ross Perot because he knows the real world problems facing each of useveryday and has solutions that will control our outcome Harry Brown.We need LESS government! Rossm Perot because he looks at facts; theothers are just selling election rhetoric! Bob Dole is the response for a typical Republican. Dole. He is closer to my views on limiting the role of Federal government. Clinton's ethical values distress me. goerge bush Libertarian Harry Browne is the only candidate who offersspecific proposals for reducing size, cost, and intrusivenessof government. Harry Browne. He seems willing to put this country back to whatare forefathers had intended, freedom, liberty, justice. Colon Powell would seem to be an ideal candidate and successful president.Due to his unique situation, a minority who rose to the top of the US Militaryestablishment, a proven leader, a thoughtful and sensitive man who does not appearto be overly zealous to a political view, I think the country needs such a leader. Harry Browne - because he is the only candidate with a reasonable plan for reducing the federal government and eliminating the national debt. Harry Browne Because he has so far shown he has good principles and sticks to them unlike any of the other candidates Pat Schroeder: Is open minded. Willing to defend a difficult political choice. I believe Harry Browne is the best candidate since he is on theballot on all 50 states, and wants to reduce government's problemareas. Bill Clinton, He has done more in four years than the Republianshave done in twelve years I would like to see Harry Browne as President. In contrast to the current occupant of the White House, he is prinicpled, honest, and straightforward. His policies of limited government and taxation are the antidote for many of our current social and economic ills. We need to send the Clinton family back to Arkansas to face the music; therefore, we need Bob Dole in the white house! Harry Browne, Libertarian candidate for President. He is the only candidate who stands for less government in our lives and personal freedom for everybody. Bob Dole,because it will be new and fresh leadership that very important for US while enteringthe year 2000. Bob Dole. Clinton is basically a liberal piece of shit. Bob Dole. He will restore dignity and respect to the office of Presidency. Bob Dole. Clinton may be more "polished" and a better speaker but Clinton is not trustworthy. I feel Dole is more trustworthy and has integrity Dole - get government out of our personal lives and restore the country to a democratic environment where there is equal potential for all, and where success is not punished by punitive tax laws and regulation Harry Browne, because he is the only sensible candidate who wantsto restore this countries freedoms to that which it originally upheld. I'd actually like to see someone with uncanny common sense.But it's not gonna happen. Just as long as Bob Dole DOESN'Twin. bob Dole. He is the lesser of the evils. Bill Clinton he is younger and he has proved he cares. I simply don,t trust Dole. I would like to see Bob Dole elected President in 1996 because his views, while not matching my own, are closer to my own than President Clinton's and because of his relative trustworthiness and ethicality. Ross Perot, but voting for Ross Perot is helping Clinton. Reason not voting for Clinton raising taxes not full filling his promises. Clinton's too Republican for my taste, but his Supreme Court nominees are likelier to protect our civil rights than Dole's. One good, honest, person with the ability to DO the right thingfor America... A cross between Bush-Perot-Forrest Gump Maybe. I want to see Bill Clinton because he is young enough to relate to our young people, and is of a fine age. Bob Dole, with all due respect, is an old fool. Ralph Nader, because he would work to reduce the influence of big money in government, and encourage real citizen participation. I'm for Dole because character and honesty still mean something! Bob Dole, He represents integrity, experience, wisdom and supports true freedom. Bob Dole should be president because he upholds morals, has a viable economic plan for our future and understands and will uphold foreign policy. I would like to see Bob Dole as our next president of the United States because he has the enthusiam and the experience to guide this nation through the 21st century. Harry Browne: Because he is the only candidate who has given a detailed plan on how to reduce the size of goverment,balance the budget,reduce crime,and is the only one to promise to uphold the constitution as a literal document. This plan can be found in the book Why Goverment Does'nt Work. Bob Dole, because he has a proven track record for success,and he does not have the immoral background like Clinton Harry Browne. Liberty vanishes under the heel of the omnipotentstate. Libertarianism will restore freedom in our country. Bob Dole, because he is an honest man who beleives in the American people and their abilities to succeed.Goverment today doesnot help people by making them dependent,they must be Independent! BOB DOLE, because I like him and his policies. I'd like Alan Keyes but I guess I am stuck with Dole for the moment. Bob Dole. I think that he is an honest person and would do right by the people in the country. I think that he is more apt to keep his promises that he has made to the people of the United States.Clinton is someone that says what he thinks people want him to say. He has already proven that he is not true to his word. I also believe that him and his wife are into some real shady deals. that if it was anyone else we would be in jail. I would like to see Harry Browne win the presidency. Mainly because our present two parties are so deeply entrenched, that they canno thelp but to be corrupt! Dole, Four more years of Clinton will result in more give away programs. Bob Dole, for a realistic shot a real tax relief Harry Browne--because he is the only candidate running who consistently stands for reduced governmental involvementin our everyday lives. I will vote for Harry Browne, because I want to see individualfreedoms increased, size of government drastically reduced, property rights restored, and corporate protection rescinded. I think Harry Browne should be our next president because he supportsthe freedom that we should have. Harry browne because i am tired of big goverment.Telling me how i am going to run my life,raise my kids and how much money theywill take. Harry Browne is the only real choice for president in 1996. Hewants to reduce government, abolish the income tax, and end theinsane "War on Drugs", returning personal freedom to all U.S.citizens. Bob Dole Because I trust Him to appoint conservitive Judges to the Supreme Court. Bob Dole, because Clinton has pronved he cannot be trusted. Bill Clinton. He brings to America a fiscally responsible social consciousness. Harry Browne Al Gore. Too much ability to waste and well trained Bill Clinton, he has already done a good job as president, he is a good speaker, and he definitely has more character than Bob Dole! Anyone but a professional politician. You can tell they're lying because their lips are moving. Education funding, and see Abortion be a woman's choice. And have any child go to any school that they want to go to!!!! action and compassion It is time to elect a third party candidate like Harry Browne. The Republicans and Democrats are worn out, corrupt and manipulative in our society. Their time is past Ross Perot ; Simply due to the fact that the other 2 major politiccal parties are unproductive and do not take any responsability for their actions.Ross Perot is not liike that Browne (says he) will return government to roles defined in constitution. Actually has ideas on how to make changes. government is way too big and unresponsive, and neither Dole nor Clinton has any inclination to do anything to reduce it. Although I realize that Harry Browne is not likely to garner the needed electoral votes, he is the one for whom I have voted absentee. Bob Dole. He can be trusted to lead this nation back into world prominance. Harry Browne. Because the government needs to stay out of our lives. 90% of the problems relating to drugs are a direct result of the fact that they are illegal. Ross Perot. Government reformation is long past due!! bill clinton. moderate enough for me. i need a CEO, not a priest HOWARD PHILLIPS He is against the new world order. He is forthe constitution, civil liberties, and LESS government. Harry Browne. He will address the problems that face our society. I want Harry Browne to be elected, because I want our governmentdecimated to its most important Constitutional functions. bob dole ,his causes are better for america Ross Perot because he is cool! Clinton because he is less likely to pander to big business and will protect the environment more. Dole is too weak and perhaps out of touch with serious problems. Hary Browne!!!! Bill Clinton - Maintained class and dignity during 4 years of constant criticism and hate from the other party. He's also in MY generation-near 50! Hope health care is brought back to the forefront. Bob Dole- I feel that he cares more about traditional family values, the burdon oftaxes on the family. He is more trustworthy,caring and honest. We need a leader that we can trustto do the right thing for our country, not sell it out. Ralph Nader. Bill Clinton has no integrety. Bob Dole doesn't care about people. Ralph Nader has spent his whole career working for public safety. Clinton. Not because I think he has done a good job, but that I fear what a Dole/Helms foreign would do to both international relations and international business. We need WIPO (World Intellectual Property Org.-part of the UN), and we need to do things with the UN and not just by ourself. Richard Marcinko- We need a Prez who won't put up with shit fromterrorists; one who will kick some major terrorist ass! Dole, The primary way to stimulate the economy is through lower taxation. This has been proven throughout history and is backed by professional economists everywhere. I also like the man running the government to have some integrity. With the evidence that I have, there is no comparison. Clinton; good policies how about if they had an election and no one voted who would be the pres.then what a concept! or if every one voted for them self Perot- I agree with him on many of the issues. I would havevoted for Dole, but his negative campaigning has gone too far. Bill Clinton: He fights for the rights of Gays and Lesbians withoutseeing this as a fight against "family" values. Yes, I wish he would and could do more, but that probably isn't possible in this political climate. Harry Browne, because the main problem we face is the tremendous percentage of the GNP spent by the Gov't. Harry Browne- Our only chance to return the country to the people Ralph Nader --- an intelligent servant of the public and NOT apolitician (or servant of the military-industrial complex). Clinton, because he supports student aid Socialism sucks!!!! We must stop relying on the federal government.VOTE FOR HARRY BROWNE!!!! Harry Browne - there is no alternative to individual liberty Bob Dole. Clinton must go; he has the only chance of beating him. Harry Browne, because he is the only candidate willing to admit that the federal government has been acting out of its constitutional authority for this entire century. Clinton! I don't always agree with him but he comes the closest. Dole. I beleive he will do his best to fullfill the "Contract for America" which is in the best interest of this country and will bring us back to what this country was founded on. clinton Harry Browne is the only man who will reduce government and bring liberty and freedom back to our country Dole, because he is more competent, more experienced and a mor moral person Harry Browne because he is the only candidate that is really concerned about reducing the overall government intrusion in our lives. If people could ever get the message I think a huge majority would agree with him. The special interests and politicians will try their best to ridicule or denigrate him. Dole, We can't afford the social changes brought on by a lame duck Moderately liberal Clinton. Harry Browne. Both of the major parties are corrupt, and Perot is too unstable. I think that President Clinton has worked hard and has had significant progress in a number of important areas. The election of Sen. Dole would signal a win for the rich and for big business to the detriment to the environment. Dole, because Clinton is evil. Bob Dole - best choice. Clinton's moral (immoral!) transparancy will destroy the fabric of this nation.the fabric of this nation. BILL CLINTON IS MORE IN TOUCH WITH REALITY THAN ALL OF THE OTHER CANDIDATES - THE LIBERTARIAN VIEW IS TOO EXTREME AND MISCALCULATED. I DO WISH THAT WHOMEVER WINS WOULD CONCENTRATE ON POLITICAL AND CAMPAIGN REFORM ISSUES AS WELL AS TRYING TO BALANCE THE BUDGET AND CLEAN UP THE INEFFICIENT PROGRAMS. CLINTON AND GORE HAVE TACKLED THESE PROBLEMS BUT NEED TO DO BETTER. Someone who is primarily concerned with improving all aspects of America first, and ignoring other countries until we get ourselves straightened out. No matter how long it takes, even if we have to close our borders for a little while. bob dole is a very good candidate....why....i think he would turn this country around for the better. President Dole. Bill Clinton does not have the moral fiber to take us into the next century. Bob Dole, because I trust him a lot more than Bill Clinton. Dole, although Powell, Forbes, or Gingrich would have been even better. Bob Dole. He represents a non-controversial and solid pro-american backgroundThe president I vote for has to be a solid representative of our nation and to to the political leaders abroad. I want to see Bob Dole as our nations next prresident. He has the experience and knowledge to a run a country of this magnitude. Bill Clinton, for example has the character of a fence post- none! Our leader should be the most respected and influential person that this country should produce. The idea of reducing the deficit, departments in the Federal government, and amending welfare are what Bob Dole is all about in the next generation to come. Bob Dole has been in the Congress for a quarter of acentury, you would think he would know what he was doing, and he does. Next, is the issue ofthe 15% tax cut across the board, I think that it could use some mending, nonetheless, its a great idea for America and I think with some debate over it this tax cut will prove prosperous in the end!!!!!!! Clinton, it is the only way that the Repubs will get the message that they have to be serious about supporting less Government. Bob Dole, He may not be the best, but in my opion he cares for this country much more than Bill Clinton. Harry Brown, because he wants to dramatically reduce the size of government and get it out of everywhere it shouldn't be. He could be the next coming of Thomas Jefferson! Bob Dole. Smaller government with more power to the states and power to the people. Moral leadership with a sense of reality and common sense. Nader, someone who could break the mold and not be responsible to a politcal party for his office. Additionally the main politcal parties are just arms of special interest groups which tend to overirde the interest of the whole for their own selfish gain. Bob Dole. Because Bill Clinton has no moral fiber, takes credit where credit is not due, is not trustworthty, and is a congenital liar. Bob Dole is a man of integrity and deserves a shot at running the U.S. DOLE This country need strong leadership. The currnent administration can not be trusted, therefor can not effectively lead our nation. WILLIAM CLINTON-THE MAN IS INTELLIGENT, COMPASSIONATE, SYMPATHIC FARSIGHTED AND ARTICULATE. SUCH CANNOT BE SAID OF DOLE. HE CANNOT SPEAK IN COMPLETE SENTENCES, THEY ARE ALWAYS CLIPPED. IT'S A WONDER HE EVER GOT TO WHERE HE IS-ALBEIT IT IS NOW ALL OVER. Bob Dole because Bill Clinton only performs according to the polls and does not stand for anything. No leadership! Wishy Washy Bob Dole - to reduce the federal government Someone not interested in PAC's, or status quo. Someone who is morally and ethically respected by the constituents, as well as other world leadersSomeone who can take a stand, whether popular or not, and stick with it, regardless of how the current polls are running! I want to see a president that doesn't always listen to polls and does what is truly right for the country. Harry Browne. As a 15 year-old I will be the one paying taxes when the National Debt reaches critical mass. Harry Browne will reduce the government so I don't have to fear the future. Browne as only one who would seriously reduce the power of government. Harry Browne. Return the "Governing" back to "We The People" as mandated in our US Constitution. Harry Browne. Bill Clinton. He is the only president that has done any thing since JFK. For hundreds of years the corrupt leaders of the U.S. have unconstitutionally taken power away from the american people. I want the government out of my bedroom, this is why I support Harry Browne in 96. Bob Dole: Anyone but Clinton Bob Dole is the bridge to the truth. Bill Clinton is the bridge to socialism. Dole:he seems to have more faith in the people of this nation to do what is right for them selves Harry Browne. He is the only candidate with a plan to reduce government to a level that is healthy for our liberties. I want to see someone who is not corporate suported and says whathe wants at least a little more than what they think the people want.I've considered Ross Perot but really favor Ralph Nader. We need tostop the Dem/Rep dictatorship of news coverage and everything else.No foreign sponsers to american campaigners! Howard Phillips. He is the only candidate who understands the significance of the U.S. Declaration of Independence and Constitution, and has pledged to work toward returning the national government to its constitutional functions. Browne. Neither Clinton or Dole inspires any trust (but at leastClinton isn't a senile puppet of the Gringrich monster), and both have sold much of themselves to the Xtian right. (ich!) Perotwould just make the Feds an extension of his business empire, Seig HeilRoss -- bait and switch to a Fascist state run by a paranoid wacko. (Hard to puke and laugh at the same time.) I want to see Harry Browne as the next President, so our childrenwon't have to wake up homeless and on welfare or at least paying 70% of their income to support their government. Bill Clinton - He is a progressive President who makes good on most of his ideas. Bob Dole, lesser of two evils. I would not trust any politician I know of in this office I want somebody who will reduce government size, keep his promises, and respect the individual over the collective. Even though I'm a Republican, I'm voting for Browne. clinton.he did a good job last time and I believe that if he will stay he will be even better Harry Browne. Ummm... He's the only one whose ideas i agree with. Bob Dole - Integerty Harry Browne to reduce government back to a level consistent withthe constitution and the founding fathers understanding of the dangersin government out of control. Harry Browne. Neither Dole nor Clinton have any intention ofshrinking our bloated, economy-destroying fed gov't. Browne does. Anyone but Dole/Clinton. Why? Haven't we learned anything by now? Bob Dole because of his legislative experience, his integrity, & honesty. He can be trusted. Harry Browne - government is the problem, not the solution. Harry BrowneThe only candidate who is really serious about reducing government Harry Browne -- although I'm certain this will not happen. I strongly support his platform of economic conservatism and civil libertarianism (duh -- that's why he's a Libertarian, eh?). Harry Browne, because unlike Dole and Clinton, he doesn't wantto screw all of us over. Clinton..Clinton..he's our man if he can't lie dole can..Dull..Dull..he's our man if he can't put us to sleep Newt can.We the People...Reclaim our country..and vote Harry Brown. Harry Browne - he addresses issues other candidates ignore (particularly Social Security) Harry Browne. He'll cut the federal government down to constitutional size and restore real individual liberty NOW. His proposal to pay off the debt and fund social security by selling federal assets which are not authorized by the constitution is the only practical solution being offered by any candidate. Harry Browne because he will cut the federal government down to its constitutionally mandated functions and increase freedom. I would prefer Bob Dole for his integrity and his ability to workwith people of both parties. Clinton, because, while he is not too old to be president, Dole is too old to learn to be president, and will certainly be too old by the end of his term.He is also too damn mean, and has no vision, other that the hocus pocus 15%. Clinton, on the other hand may truly make 14 years of education the norm, which will benefit the nation immeasurably in the medium term. Being truthful about the upcoming "new world order" and how it willeffect everyone. Put strict limits on commercial lobbyists $ donationsand influence on government. Harry Browne. The two major parties have failed it is now time for them to take a back seat. Bill Clinton - Because he had proved to us that he can improve the economyand reduce the deficit at the same time. Dole has no real new ideas and is too busycriticizing Clinton and doesn't seem to care about average citizens, but rather his ownego. Thank You. Dole, the lesser of two evils. Would like to see less government and less entitlement spending. bob dole. better man, better character Harry Browne, so the government can return to its strict constitutionalfunctions and size. Let's purge the New Deal and Fair Deal. The War onPoverty was just as successful and the current War on Drugs. Perot, he actually has good ideas and unlike Clinton, is trying to balance the budget. Keyes or Phillips because these men have strong, solid ethics and display discernment and wisdom Harry Browne, because he will get the government off our backs, out ofour pockets, and out of our bedrooms. I would like to see Bill Clinton be reelected because he has allowed are economy to remain stable. I also support him because he believes in strong family values that will help our nation. Howard Pillips because we need to get away from the 2 parties that are selling our country down the tubes. Robert Dole. He is a reasonably moral man that can be trusted - as trusted as any politician. One, however, that seems to keep his word. Dole. Clinton has no intigerity and can not be trusted. While no candidate meets all of ones needs/wants, I feel that Bill Clinton best represents my wants and needs. Harry Browne- The Candidate who Will reduce Government to the minimum, not just promise it. Harry Browne would help to return this nation to original foundation,the Constitution. By abolishing the fiat currency that now enslaves all of our citizens, the working man and woman will be able to prosper as never before in an economy that rewards productivity and allows for the aquisition of wealth for the common citizen. I truly think Browne's the best; however, I'll not be surprised if he loses. Dole's only advantage is: his not Clinton. Clinton's advantage: he spends so much time seducing women, he doesn't have a chance to do real damage. Bod Dole - because throughout his career if he gave you his word on something he would do it. You can trust him. Bill Clinton's head turns more than Linda Blair in the exorcist. No one addressed the heart of the problem, and the solution, like Alan Keyes. It is a disgrace that America finally produced such a man, only to watch him be completely ignored by the mainstream press... and the Republican establishment. I guess at this point I would vote for Clinton over Dole. Dole has let things like the tobaco industry and relegious right dictate to much of his campaign. Bob Dole. We need to get rid of the eco-cookoos. The "silent majority" responsible americans don't need ridiculous regs to make them act responsibly. The big corps. need tax breaks so they can provide jobs for the people. Harry Browne because he has rational solutions to our most pressing problems. Ross Perott for he has the best business sense of the bunch and Iwould rather our president be up to the economic and strategic testsof the office rather than a smooth politician. Bill Clinton because I feel that Bob Dole will not help the economyand that he will not be able to balance the budget. Browne -- He is the only one who says he will downsize gov, and Ibelieve him. The "big 2" have had the run of the mill for toomany years now, so it's time for a change before something moreserious happens. I would like to see Bill Clinton because of his stand on education. I feel that providing a good education to everyone would make us more competitve world wide. Vote Harry Browne!! If you want a smaller government, vote for it! Harry Browne, The national debt is destroying our nation, social security is going bankrupt. Its time to get completely out of debt and completely remove government from our daily lives. Lets get back to personal responsibility, liberty and freedom for all. Harry Browne seems to have a very good platform and plan to eliminate the national debt, down size government, get us out of the foriegn entanglements we find our selves in today. Our nation became the greatest nation on earth long before we got invlved as the world policeman, a welfare state, and a socialist society. Now with $5 trillion in debt now is the time to just say NO! Howard Phillips - he represents real change, a reduction in government, and a platform based on strong moral principals. clinton, cuz dole's social ideas are way scary. clinton is the lesser of two evils. Howard Phillips. He has a consistent worldview and understands our constitutional republic. Clinton,because he is more moderate and forward looking. Bill Clinton. Wheras I don't agree with many of his dealings/moral dlillemas etc. I do feel that he has and hopes to do the best for the country in the next four years. That is, if he is allowed to...and if we get some of the New and "Eager To Prove Themselves" Senators out of the way. Ginrich is responsible for the Republicans downfall, if, it comes to pass. I like Harry Browne for President because he is the only candidate who understands that government is part of the problem vice a solution. Bob Dole, because Clinton is a bold faced liar, look at the cover ups. Bob Dole spendstime thinking about what he's saying. Clinton just says it because it's rehearsed, he doesn'teven know what he's saying. Two presidents cut taxes and added revenue to the treasury. One wasPresident Kennedy and the other was President Reagan. PresidentReagan,s problem was a democratic congress. Ralph Nader is the only candidate who speaks out against corporatedomination of our government at all levels. We need to rebuild ourdemocracy from the ground up and restore real power to the citizenryand wrest it away from the wealthy and powerful few. Bill Clinton with a reasonable Congress to work with this time. Alan Keyes or Jack Kemp Bob Dole because he is moral, truthful, will appoint strict constructionist judges, will try to replace the IRS with a fairer, flatter tax plan, and will cooperate with a conservative congress. Harry Brown, I believe in a Libertarian society. Clinton. Because I feel that a republican president would mean drastic cuts in important programs like protecting the environment,education, support for the arts, maintaining the U.S. infrastructure. Harry Browne - he has a detailed plan for reducing governmentand at the same time giving the people something in place of it. Bill Clinton, I think he has tried to do a good job, and will continue to do so. Harry Browne. I believe he is the only candidate who will keep his word about reducing teh size and scope of the federal government. Bill Clinton, primarily because he is a better candidate than Bob Dole. Bob Dole, His political views are closer to mine than clinton. Bob Dole -because he is a man of character Bob Dole. He will advance a policy agenda which reduces taxes, reduces government, turns more responsibility back to the states, and generally will get government out of our lives. Harry Browne is the only candidate with the legitimate answer to solve the governments problems. Shrink it. Bob Dole because Clinton is not trustworthy in ANY aspect. Harry Browne is my choice because he's the only candidate willingto cut government, reduce spending and reduce taxes. Bob Dole. He has integrity and understands what the nation needs. He doesn't focus on the special interest groups. Bob Dole - Bill Clinton pursued his personal agenda (and that of his liberal buddies) throughout his current term... at the expense of our liberties and pocketbooks! Harry Browne - limited government Harry Browne. He's the ONLY candidate with a specific, principled plan to rescue the U.S. from big government and eroding freedom and the looming economic crisis. Bill Clinton. I think Bob Dole's only goal is to be 'top dog' before he dies. Bob Dole -- There is no reason to re-elect Bill Clinton, a person of such horrible moral thread. I don't think any because it should be a woman because this world would be a much better place if a woman was in charge. none because they all seem not to have the qualifications Harry Browne because he has a definite workable plan for reducing the size of federal government, restoring power to the states, and eliminating the IRS so that each individual can have more disposable income with wich to help themselves, their family, friends, and those in need. Harry Browne---He stands for the ONLY moral position of RESPONSIBLE Freedom. I want to see Clinton as President in 1996, because he has solid economic plans that are geared towards improving the well-being of the American people. He has also been in the seat for 4 years and knows the realities of what exactly can be done and what is wishful thinking, unlike Dole who believes he can give a 15% tax break and actually has no idea the implecations of that. Harry Browne, as he is the only candidate to run on real concernsand not on personality and negativity. Harry Brown, because I am sick of the other two parties and all of their lies and bickering Harry Browne, because he is for constitutional govt. Harry Browne, because he is the only candidate that actually has a non-sound byte platform, and I agree with the platform. dole, because clinton is a liar and a cheat and cannot be believed or trusted. Ross Perot.He states facts and does not gloss things over with politics. Bob Dole, I would hope that he truly cares about the people and do what is best for our country. Not for the liberals or big business. We need to get back to the basics of what our country was founded on, and keep trying to turn this into a godless socialist type government. Ralph Nader because he is williing to fight the two-party system, reduce big-business' role in government, and give aid and opportunity to those that have been hurt by our nation's greed. Harry Browne; I believe in a minimalist government since government fails at anything it touches for very basic reasons. Government takes from the productive members of society and gives to the non-producers thus harming all. Bill Clinton is foward thinking and is an effective bridge to the future. His interests in improving medical care for the average citizen should be given a chance. His efforts on world peace should not be ignored. Of the two candidates I'd rather see Clinton as president over Dole.Dole is too out of touch with the younger generation. Someone more conservative and for less government. Though neither of the major candidates is ideal, Bob Dole appears to take the same stance on the issues that I would. I also have great doubts concerning President Clinton's character as evidenced in the way he has handled his private and public life. I just don't trust him. Harry Browne, he is the only candidate who has concrete plans for reducing the size and scope of federal government I would like to see Harry Browne as President and I think it would be fantastic to have a woman as VP also. It's about time we had a woman in higher government! Bob Dole, we need to decrease the size of the federal government, We need to get back to the basic foundation our country was founded on. We need to return to love & respect for each other, with honesty & morality. BILL CLINTON HE HAS DONE SOMETHING FOR THE ECONOMY AND IT SHOWS. Dole, so the GOP Congress can be unfettered. Clinton - most qualified and not a sellout to 30 yrs of DC politics Harry Browne - Dole cannot articulate the qualitative difference between Republicans and Democrats. Perot knows the problems, but has no credible platform or artuculable ideology. republicrats make goverment bigger while pretending to "protect" the public's "values" and "rights" to other peoples money.Therefore I want Libertarian Harry Browne to be president of the United States.Huge tax cuts,huge spending cuts and a balenced budget NOW Harry Browne. He is the only candidate sincerely promoting reduction in the size of government. I would like to witness the re-election of Bill Clinton. He does not base his ideas in tax cuts for the wealthy and vague ideas of 'trickle-down' economics. harry browne Browne. The times have changed. We are going to face a new world as the information age comes about. It is time to get rid of the political buzwords and talk about the real issues. SS, how to develop a competitve economy not a protectionist one, lower taxes, less government, and individual rights. The politics of fear and hate is getting old.Nick ChecotaSeattle - WA I'd like to see Bill Clinton as president. I know it is sad but its sort of a lesser of two evils things with me Libertarian Harry Browne, because responsible people need theFederal Government off of their backs and irresponsible peopleneed to learn responsibility. Among many factors I identify more w/ Dole's conservative economic views. Also, I want a president that my child can look up to and respect and Clinton is not that man. Howard Phillips-the only truly pro-life candidate.would try to return us to a Constitutional Republic Harry Browne and Libertarians are principled and follow the Constitution, not special interests like everyone else. Harry Browne I've had a life time of expanding government. At twelve I figured out that laws don't make people good. Bill Clinton becaue he is so smart (the 9th smartest president ever and he is so well read. Harry Browne - I want to greatly reduce the size and influence of the federal government, which costs $$$$$, interferes with our lives (IRS, drug war, workplace regulation), and generally makes a mess of everything it gets involved in. Harry Browne's plan to sell unneeded federal Assets to finance annuitiesfor toady's Senior Citizens is a honest, fair approach for putting an end to this Ponzi Scheme once and for all. Harry Browne. He is pledged not to advocate force for political or social causes.He believes in "govern your neighbor as yourself". Bill Clinton, who as a consumate politician will be able to put forth programs without having to worry about reelection. I also believe that Bob Dole, fine senator that he has been, has missed his time. I'm terribly afraid of his chosen running mate. Harry Browne because it is time to get government out of our lives and to get control/responsibility back to the individual/community. Howard Phillips of The US Taxpayers Party because he is the ONLY TRUE Conservative, Constitutional, and 100%Pro-Life Individual!!Thank you for your consideration.ATJ. Harry Brown. To end this DRUG WAR on society. Clinton. The US has seen considerable growth over the last four years. Clinton, better education support policies, he's reducing the deficit, etc... Harry Browne has the best plan for dealing with drug issues as well as releasing non-violent drug offenders that take up precious prison space. Harry Browne - Immediately slash federal spending, immediately end the Income Tax and shut down the IRS, immediately balance the budget. Harry Browne is the only candidate that has any interest in cutting back the out of control intrusive government that has destoyed our economy, our morals, our environment,our privacy, our safety, and our lives.the voters in this country have no real interest in saving our country because the majority are either getting paid of by the government or are so discusted by the corruption and the control that the people in power have over all phases of the process specially the PRESS. Harry Browne is the only candidate who understands the natureand proper role of government. Harry Browne because I vote for principled candidates. We must breakout of the two-party system. Harry Browne because he is the only candidate that is willing to accept the truth and not tell us only what we want to hear. Wipe out the federal deficit in 6 yrs. or greatly reduce it by at least 75%.Return dignity to the working class of this country by;promoting not destroying the Unions,raise the minimum wage again and soon,people can not live on such a low pay scale as that.Reduce crime and remove all assult weapons from the streets. Bob Dole. Because he represents our religious and politicalviewpoints. He has integrity. He has a great vision for USA. Harry Browne - the only real advocate of a Republic-based society Harry Browne is our best hope for restoring liberty andprosperity. Harry Browne because I like most of his positions and think that he means it. Harry Browne because both Clinton and Dole seem to want to create police states. Democrats want our money. Republicans want our rights. I want a Libertarian. Bob Dole, I hate to think how high our taxes will go if Clinton is re-elected Bob Dole!!! He is a good man, with a proven record. He stand by his word, and is a man of strong moral fiber. If Bill Clinton is re-elected I fear America is DOOMED!!! Harry Browne, because he wants to reduce the federal government, and protect civil liberties. Harry Browne, He has the only credible plan to reduce the federal government to it's constitutional limits. Without doing this we are headed towards the most devastating financial collapse in history. Harry Browne, because one of his major platform issues is to eliminategovernment programs (99% of which I feel are poorly implementedor not needed in the first place) and to eliminate federal taxes(which I feel support more bad or at best useless things than goodthings). I think people will willingly pay for what is importantto them if it is not just handed to them. I want to see Harry Browne, because the Libertarians are the onlyparty truly seeking freedom and prosperity for Americans. I would like to see Harry Browne reduce the current size of the national government, reducing the amount of taxes paid by Americans on outdated and ineffectual sociopolitical constructs. Harry Browne, because he believes in Constitutional government,and because he will eliminate the rampant corruption within thePresidency. Harry Brown - He is not left or right he is sensible. Why let governmenttake on tasks it wasn't constitutionally designed to? Stop spending on all these extra gov't programs and let people keep the money they earned! Anyone who will respect the Bill of Rights Harry Browne - he will cut government size, spending, and intrusiveness. I want to see Bill Clinton win this election because I believe he has done a good job up to this point against great odds. Given a second term I believe he can help lead our country competently. Harry Browne is the best man to lead our country! Bob Dole - service to country, honor, and integrity Clinton, to hold off power of conservative Republicans Harry Browne; he is the only candidate who has complete integrity in what he is proposing, to reduce government and clean up the mess it's created. Harry Browne for President. He is the only candidate with the best interests of the Constitutional Body of Government, We the People, at heart and in principle. Harry Browne, because he emulates how I feel about what being an American is all about...Liberty and freedom. Harry Browne because he is believable, he will reduce government and thereby solve most of our country's problems. Harry Browne. The Federal govt oversteps its bounds in every direction. Let's get back to the Constitution. Harry Browne because he is commited to getting the government out of our lives. Bob Dole, because I feel he is the best capable man for the office,and I'm tired of Clinton's attempts. Harry Browne, I believe in all government or no government. He limits a lot of government policies. The Libertarian Platform (Harry Browne). Also, to answer yourdebate question, both Harry Browne and Perot should have beenincluded. They are both on the ballot in 50 states. Harry Browne is the only one who will save us from big money running the usa Harry Browne...the Libertarian philosophy is closest to what I believe.Less government.An added answer to the question Perot in debates. All candidateswho are on the ballor in all 50 states should have been in the debates. So, to answer ... Perot and Harry Browne should have beenincluded. Harry Browne. He would work to free us from big government. Harry Browne, With rights returned to the states, People would feel they could have more control, with control comes responsability. Dole, as he is more likely -- with Kemp and a GOP Congress, to bring taxes and spending back into balance and truly reduce the size of government. As for Clinton, he is the least qualified, most venal man ever to hold the office. Bob Dole because of his tax cuts, reputation and gained respect. His strong sense of morality and decency and his support and experience in the military. Howard Phillips - with a commitment to slash government to itsConstitutional skeleton. Harry Browne has real solutions to the problems caused by an overbearing, intrusive, dumb, government. He will limit government to its constitutionally enumerated powers, instead of limiting individual liberty like the other candidates. I would like to see Harry Browne. I don't agree totaly with the liberterians, but their ideas are best suited for me. Harr Browne because government doesn't work. He will immediately take action to correct all of the problems that the Rep/Dem government has created ove rthe years. dole; with clinton the size of government will only grow Harry Browne is the best man for President because he is sincerein reducing the size of government and returning personal liberties back to the individual Harry Browne would bring real reform to the Federal Government,getting it out of both our bedrooms and pocketbooks. A president who promotes strong family values, stabilizing and strengthening the economy, and reducing the defecit Smaller government and a return to the Constitution as it waswritten. 39 scandals in the current administration, Clinton's not doing much until the election year, the stock market almost crashing twice causing the public to elect overwhelmingly a Republican Congress. Harry Browne because he is serious about cutting down the size of government. Our government faces bankruptcy if it remains on its current course. Only Harry Browne has proposed to fundamentally alter that course. Harry Browne. He will work to reduce government to it's essence. Dole. Because I dislike Clinton's policies and lack of personal integrity. I really wanted Colin Powell. Bill Clinton, Because he is the best choice at this time. Harry Browne. Politically (though not in character) Dole and Clinton (the biggest scoundrel to be President this century) are nearly identical. Harry Browne. He is the only real candidate who stands for less government, not more. Bob Dole. HE is trustworthy and honest. As a veteran it's an insult to me to have a Draft Dodger as Commander in Chief. Anyone BUT Dole or Clinton would actually be real progress. ANY true "outsider" would shake things up, but only Harry Browne has a workable set of policies to implement. There's not a dime's worth of difference between Dole & Clinton -- I want change, and am voting Libertarian! Harry Browne - incorruptible Harry Browne - government is not just "too big", it'sabout 10 times too big. Harry Browne. He has integrity. All else comes from that. Clinton, because I am pro-choice and so is he. Plus, I don't like Bob Dole. He's too old! DOLE, he is the moral leader Colin Powell; leadership and consistency in carrying out his duties and beliefs. He is an effective speaker and has charisma and simple style. Bob Dole is a better person, and a better canidate. wh I want to see Harry Browne as president because I share the same philosophical base as him. Harry Browne. America is no longer the land of the free. We are slaves to an ever increasing government, to more and more political correctness, and to less and less freedom I would like to see Harry Browne as president since he is theonly candidate that has a consistant platform, and he hasactually considered and constructed its details himself in anattempt to improve this country. Through this years campaign, hehas remained true to his ideals and has not compromised hisprincipals (such as not taking federal money even though the USgovernment was attempting to force it upon him, and not askingthe US court system to become involved in a private matter suchas the debates). Bill Clinton...he has improved the economy over his tenure in office and he seems to deal with his own issues face first. I'd like to see Harry Browne but I know he won't win. If Clinton wins maybe the country will wake up! I want to see Al Gore for president because he is more liberal than Clinton and more interested in my issues (environment, less corporate power in government) Perot, so that maybe the government would be more interested in what the public wants instead of special interest groups. Harry Browne. He is the only candidate truly determined to decrease the size of government. Harry Browne. Because the alternatives are unacceptable, I shall vote for the Good, not the lessor of evils. Ross Perot is bought and paid for by the Republicrats and Democins tospoil the chances of a real third party Harry Browne. He is promising to do what I have been sayingfor years that I would do if I were President. Bob Dole is a God-fearing man, unlike President Clinton who seems to have too many scandals going on to trust him and his genuine beliefs. Dole because, Clinton is two faced and does not support themilitary. Harry Browne: best in a field of "me-firsters." Bill Clinton. It is said to say this, but one of the main reasons I would choose him is because I would have to move out of the country if Bob Dole was elected. He scares me to death!!! I am a white, upper-class, heterosexual female. I can't imagine how much he scared lower to middle class, black gays or any other minority. Harry Browne will empower the individual by reducing government, not by proposing non-existant government 'solutions' to ourproblems (many of which have their roots in governmentintervention in the first place). me. Clinton. Four years of experince has qualified him to be a capable president Harry Browne - the only candidate that understands that governmentdoes not work! Ralph Nader. Current Indiana Gov. Evan Bayh has done a wonderful job and is a definite consideration. Harry Browne: The Candidate of Principle from the Party of Principle Bob Dole, he is someone I can respect. He is the kind of individual that has made this country great! Look At his life and then look at Bill Clinton. Harry Browne! He understands what is wrong with society. Dole because he has the experience and depth of character to be a world leader. Harry Browne is the logical choice, the only candidate who recognizes the coercive sector for what it is. Government needs to be slashed, not increased. Ralph Nader. See question 12. Bob Dole; Clinton tried already Harry Browne, to drastically cut the scope of government and itsburden and intrusiveness in our lives. Harry Browne. Harry Browne is the ONLY candidate who will reduce the size and scope of Government. Harry Browne-He is the most supportative of civil liberties Bob Dole for his philosophy regarding govt.size, family Bob Dole. Tax cut, better Presidentical image and better foriegn policy. Harry Browne, because he'll end the outmoded legacy of the New Deal. Dole, I beleive the ever increasing number of serious scandals in the Clinton white house are numbing america sense of right and wrong, and Dole would restore the national conscious, as well as improve our economic conditions and personal freedoms. Harry Browne. He believes in drastically reducing our government and defending our civil liberties. Until her death my choice would have been Barbara Jordon. Now -- Carol Mosely Braun Bill Clinton: Because so many people have turned away from ourmoral base. Harry Browne is the only candidate worth considering. Harry Browne I'm not Libertarian on all issues, but on manyI am sick of the Democratic/Republican choices -- they'reboth too Liberal. Bob Dole: His views reflect most of my own. Runner up: Harry Browne: His views reflect most of my own, and he isn't tied to a left or right platform. Browne ... the only candidate who is committed, as a matter ofideological principle, to dramatically downsizing government. Howard Phillips is the only positive choice I could vote for withoutfeeling guilty. Dole would be a wasted vote, Clinton is a criminal. DOLE BECAUSE CLINTON'S CAMPAIGN PLEDGES ARE ONLY AS RELIABLE AS HIS PAST FLIP FLOPS ON ALL ISSUES. HE SAYS BIG GOVERNMENT IS DEAD WHILE WE WOULD HAVE NATIONAL HEALTH PROGRAM CREATING 20 SOME NEW AGENCIES IF HE HAD HIS WAY. We need to turn around on the path of economic destruction. Our national debt is a disgrace. I want my children to have better opportunity not to be burdened with a debt due toGovernment irresponsibility. Harry Browne, He will legalize drugs which will reduce crime.And I will not pay as many taxes and education will improve whenthe government is not as deeply involved. Bill Clinton, lesser of two evils. More realistic and flexible given the right situation. A return to individual rights and liberties, and a return to Constitutional Law. Harry Browne, He represents moral, ethical, and resposible ideas, that strengthen families and the economy. Harry Browne, simply because he want's freedom. freedom from an over zealous, out of control government. Caimpaign reform to include all parties. Reduce Government. It does not WORK!!! Harry Browne is the only candidate that is seriousabout reducing the size and scope of government. Colin Powell has both the leadership qualities and integraty it takes to be President. Harry Browne to restore the Constitution and dissolve the IRS and eliminate at least 50% of the Federal government that is illegal under the Constitution. He would inform people of their right on the jury to dissolve bad laws by voting innocent in cases where the law in question is un-Constitutional. Harry Browne. The only candidate serious about reducing the government size. Harry Browne. He is consistently for getting the governmentout of peoples' lives and returning power to the communitiesand people An independent (preferrably Harry Browne) because an election which results in the winner being either Republican or Democrat will produce an administration which just perpetuates the status quo: Government will contiue to grow, taxes will be raised, corruption will continue, PAC's will gain more control and the deficit will increase. If we want change (and I certainly do), it will have to come from outside the "establishment". HARRY BROWNE BECAUSE THE REPUBLICANS AND DEMOCRATS HAVE BEEN MESSING UP THIS COUNTRY FOR YEARS! Harry Brown, We need help to protect our liberties. Harry Browne is the only candidate for smaller government. BobDole said it himself in the first Presidential debate, Clintonwants government to grow by 20% over 6 years, Dole wants it to*grow* by only 14%. Doesn't sound like smaller government to me... Harry Browne is the only candidate who proposes to realistically slash the national debt. All others merely spew forth campaign rhetoric. I want Harry Browne because I want real change and the real actions that must be taken to save this country from its Ponzi schemes of the past. President Clinton. Frankly, I'm choosing the lesser of two evils. I don't Bob Dole can be trusted especially with maintaing certain government programs. Harry Browne, to restore the contitution bill clinton 'has done a good,overall BOB DOLE BECAUSE WE CANNOT TRUST BILL CLINTON bill clinton 'has done a good,overall Harry Browne, because he promises to reduce government Harry Browne, for constitionally limited government Harry Browne because Government Doesn't Work! I want to see Libertarian candidate Harry Browne as presidentin 1996. I am very concerned that the ruling Democrat andRepublican Parties have become a mutual "Me too" society, I want to Dole as president although he is still not conservative enough for me. Harry Browne, because we should be free and responsible forour own lives. Harry Browne has the only viable plan whichwill eliminate both the national debt (not just the deficit seven years from now) and the income tax (not just scaling itback for some). I want Harry Browne to be president. He is the only canadate who wants to restore the government to Constitutional levels. Who - Harry Browne. Why - Unlike your questions such as #7, Harry browne stands for change and choice not simply a question of degree of agreement on the status quo. Harry Browne asks "Why do it" rather than "How much should I spend on it?" I voted for Harry Browne (through early voting) because he's honest and has a specific, workable plan for reducing government, getting rid of the income tax, and paying off the national debt at the same time. If you want to know more, drop by my home page at http://www.voy.net/~rhood. Anyone with an understanding of political history and the nature of the state (any state), and who cares about maintaining the individual liberty (and the accompanying individual responsibility) upon which this nation was founded will vote Libertarian - Harry Browne.A vote for the Demopublicans is an abdication of your responsibility to preserve the life, liberty and pursuit of happiness for yourself, your children, and our society. Harry Browne because I want government dramatically cut. My futureand my family's future depend on it. Dole! He believes the people not the govemment can make this countrythe best it can be. I believe give the people a chance to be the bestthey can be,and this country well stay the greatest in the world. dole, reduce government intrusion and bring some dignity and respect back to the office of the presidency. Bob Dole. Bring a little respect (via honesty) back into the office. Browne He believes in self government with the Fed power severly limited by the Constitution. Harry Browne, he is the only candidate who understands that 1)government doesn't work, 2) that government can't be reformed (read 'Why Government Doesn't Work', to find out why), and 3) the only candidate who really wants to reduce government to be bound within the limits of our constitution. Harry Browne - we need a person with a consistent, thought out political andeconomic program which is morally defensible and which does not depend uponthe use of force to carry it out (other than in the defense of personal rightslife and property). I believe Bob Dole should be president. I do not trust Bill Clinton and am afraid of what he will do in four more years. Harry Browne. Less government Harry Browne. The libertarians are the only party that representand defend the liberties that made this country great and are theonly philosphically consistent party. Harry Browne. Because Government Doesn't work.Restore the Constitution. Harry Browne will reduce government to only those functions mandated by the Constitution. Harry Browne.I agree with the Libertarian point of view of increasing personal responsibility and decreasing government's. Harry Browne, to fight for personal/civil liberties and put an end to party-politics. Harry Browne. I think his time has come, and America is ready for a change. Harry Browne- eliminate IRS, reduce gov't to role prescribed in art.1, sec.8 of Constitution. I am capable of governing myself,thank you. Bob Dole.GOBOBDOLEGOBOBDOLEGOBOBDOLE Harry Browne. The Libertarian Party is the *only* small-governmentparty in this country, the only party dedicated to changing thesystem, and the only party that supports the principles of individualfreedom and responsibility. Harry Browne. To get us back to strictly the constitution,and get the government out of the way and off our backs. Basically to save us from coming financial disaster that goverment has us heading towards. Browne...will return US to a constitutional republic. We are adrift! Harry Browne, he is the only candidate in all 50 states who wants to DRASTICALLY reduce the size of government. Harry Browne. He has the strongest ethical and moral foundation (refused federal matching funds!) and the best ideas, and I don't want to wait seven or ten years to find out (again) that Reps and Dems lie - reduce government now!! Pay off the debt now!! Zero out the deficit now!! Slash taxes now!! And most important: reduce government drastically now!! http://www.lp.org. Browne. He will actually eliminate, not "reduce", "re-engineer" or"reinvent" the failed federal programs Harry Browne, because he offers fresh ideas and does not havehis hands tied by the usual special interest groups. Harry Browne. I consider the Constitution to be of greater importance than people's own personal ideas on how and what government should do. Harry Browne. He will reduce the size of government and allow people to keep the money they earn. Also, he took no matching funds. Harry Browne, because GOVERNMENT DOESN'T WORK Harry Browne because I have seen both sides promise to reduce government and each year it gets bigger and our taxes go up. Of the candidates that are running on any sort of a major ticket, I see none that I would like in office. Bill Clinton is too immoral, Bob Dole is a power-hungry fool, I cannot trust Ross Perot, and I have no confidence in Ralph Nader's ability to lead our country. My vote goes for Ralph Nader because of the views he represents and of the two, my hope goes for Bill Clinton because he will not destroy our government with an unreasonable tax plan. Harry Browne, It is time to drastically reduce government before it distroys our children future through bankrupcy and a total lost of civil liberties. Harry Browne is by far the best candidate because he is the only one willing to cut government back down to what the Constitution states it should be. Browne, because he is the only one running who would actually take immediate executive actions to reduce federal bureaucracy, regulatory excess and spending. He represents identifiable ideas about issues rather than pursuing a popularity contest. Ross Perot, we need a president that is out for us and not forhis own political career. Harry Browne,Libertarian Party-He's the ONLY candidate that will protect our civil liberties and keep us safe from government intrusion. He will also sut down the IRS, end social programs that don't work (welfare, ect.) END TAXATION and give us back our money, thus freeing up businesses to be prosperous, stimulating the economy, and giving us back our lives. Harry Browne, it's the only chance we have of reducing government before our economy collapses. clinton, because I cannot have dole as presedent Harry Browne..He's the only credible one with a workable plan to cut government. Harry Browne, because the Federal Government is too large andpowerful. Dole. The Judges, fix the IRS and the regulation and tax cut Re-elect Lincoln.He's dead and can't do no harm! Harry Browne. Because he is the only one who will truly reduce government. I want Harry Browne to be president. I belive that government is too big, there is a possibility of a New World Order, our country is turning socialist, there is too much taxing, and many others. Harry Browne, new blood. Clinton has waffled too much, and we don't need more money going to the rich from the Republicans. Harry Browne: The ONLY candidate who would really reduce the size of government as president. Harry Browne, the belief is that we need LESS government. Government should not dictate how we live our livesif we are not endangering others or committing crimes. Harry Browne. He is the only candidate who puts the Constitution of the United States first, and foremost. Harry Browne ofcourse. Why? He has workable doable ideas. What he proposes isthe most ethical set of ideas I have ever seen from a wog. Further he is honestly trying to getthe beurocrats out of our faces and put "the people" back in charge of their own affairs. No Taxes on our income has beena great but highly suppressed idea for decades. It is time. I am sick of the lying hypocritical cheating pork barrell lovingmaggots that have been running my country all my life. When the last major war was over, they should have all been retired or fired! Harry Browne is for little or no federal government just as I am. Harry Browne is for little or no federal government just as I am. Harry Browne. The Libertarian Party, in existance for 21 years is a legitimate political party. Harry Browne and the Libertarians have _real_ answers to return the country to the Constitutional form mandated by our founding fathers. He'll produce other than the "more of the same" that's come from both Dems and Reps. Protection of enviorment, better relations with third world nations, and morality provided in the entertainment world. Also I would like to see the economy grow with economic discipline among the people. Libertarian Harry Browne! He will cut spending and taxes and doit NOW! Harry Browne - He is the only candidate that for personal freedom and severely limited government. Harry Browne. He is the ONLY candidate who represents a partyfounded on the Jeffersonian principles of Personal LibertyFIRST. Harry Browne would be best because he wants to reduce government to Constitutional levels. He is the only one who even has a clue as to what would help this country get back on the right track. Harry Browne. I'll give up my favorite programs if he'll agree not to steal my earnings. Bill Clinton. He has demonstrated he can make a difference in the economy by more evenly weighing the needs of the individual together with the needs of business. HARRY BROWNE-THE ONLY CANDIDATE WHO COULD INCREASE VOTER TURNOUT. HE'S A VOTE FOR THE "GOOD" VERSUS THE "EVILS" OF THE LESSER PARTIES. Go Harry! Harry BrowneLegalize freedom Hary Browne for Civil and Econmic liberties Harry Browne. He supports radical concepts such as self-ownership, self-responsibility, and you should be able to determine how to exercise dominion over your property, your earnings, and your body. Bill Clinton because Bob dole is too old and crazy Harry Browne. The problem is not with a conservative or liberal,left-wing or right-wing, demopublican or repocrat government, butwith government in general. I would like to see Bob Dole elected as the next president because I think that is very important for the leader of our country to have values that we should strive to have. I believe that he fits that description. Harry Browne, because he is the only candidate committed to reducing government to its constitutional limits and protecting civil liberties (including the 2nd Amendment). Harry Browne. Eliminate income tax and federal welfare programs. Reduce Government to constitutional size and responsibilities I'd like to see a 3rd party candidate win (though, I realize that this is imposible in our 2 party system), because I feel that the Republicans and Democrats have both lost touch with what they and their parties really stand for. Frankly, the Republicans and Democrats seem to be ineffectual at everything except fighting with each other. Harry Browne because he will attempt to do what he says. I want a lot less government, particularly federal government. Harry Browne. Government is too big and corrupted. It doesn't work as it was intended. The real problem is the lack of responsiblity of the individual whether it is freely givenup or 'taken away'. Harry Browne -- because he is the only one with a legitimateplan to significantly reduce the size and scope of the Federalgovernment. Harry Browne is the only candidate who will make the across theboard cuts needed to bring the government under control. HARRY BROWN BECAUSE HE IS FIGHTING FOR ALL OUR LIBERTIES Harry Browne. The Constitution and Bill of Rights have been walked upon long enough. The government is a failure. Harry Browne, to cut taxes NOW, to cut back on the government NOW,eliminate the defecit NOW, balance the budget NOW, save and privatize social security NOW, and to restore full employment NOW.Not a bad platform, really! Harry Browne, because he knows the problems and the solutions, andis the only candidate truly committed to smaller government. Harry Browne - he is the only candidate in whom one can believe that he means what he says - get government out of our personal lives, return power to the states and abolish the unconstitutional income tax Harry Browne is the only candidate with a consistent set of ideas. Harry Browne. It's the "government", stupid!!! Harry Browne. He is the only candidate who want's to return our government to it's constitutional size. Harry Browne because he would scale back the presidency to a level of power appropriate to the office. Harry Browne - He has all the right ideas and is highly principled. Says what he means and means what he says. Kind of refreshing! Harry Browne, he is the only candidate who will truely cut government. Harry Browne. Government doesn't work, and he has a plan to get it back to size. Bill Clinton. During his last four years, I have had more financial success than during George Bush's 4 years, and I feel the president also cares more for the poor and middle class, and has a working plan on all issues that will help our country succeed well into the 21st century. Bob Dole. He is an honest, trustworthy man. He has experience and integrity way beyond what our current president could even dream of having. I think he has insights that will take us into the next century and I think he can reduce the deficit and give us a tax break. If I have a tax break, I will spend it or save it and that will in turn help the economy. If I shop somewhere with my money, it may make that business need to hire a new clerk. That newly-hired clerk (hopefully an ex-welfare recipiet!) will be contributing to the economy and paying taxes, thus raising revenue. This is a small example of what WILL HAPPEN when Mr. Dole is elected. Harry Browne - because the best government for me is myself. Harry Browne, because he cares about our rights. I support Harry Browne because he is the only candidate that actually wants to cut government instead of only slowing its growth. Harry Browne, Libertarian for president. He is the only man who's philosophy respects everman's unalienable right to his self and his property. Harry Browne - the only sane choice. Government is out of control Harry Browne because he is the only choice that will stick by what he says and promise only what he can deliver. Bob Dole because he will reduce taxes, reduce gov't spending and he has the moral character to lead this country to be a respected nation again. I think Harry Browne should be president, because we need less government. Much less. harry browne because he's not a socialist browne. see http://www.harrybrowne96.org/ for details. =) Harry Browne--Give power and responsibility back to the people. Harry Browne, because of his understanding that Gov't does not and should not be the magic gun to solve everyone's problems. Only Harry Brownse is committed to reducing the Federal Gov't to its constitutional functions and appropriate size. Harry Browne because I would like to keep what I earn. Government doesnt work. Someone with strong ethical standards. Clinton and Dole both fail miserably on thispoint, selling influence to the highest party donor. It's obscene. Browne--> he is the oly one that has a pro-citizen plan Harry Browne, Hes the only canidate actually for great cuts in the size of Government. He wants to abolish the IRS. This would free people of Government intrusion and Productivity would rise and the Country in my opinion would prosper like never before. Browne - a plan to reduce government and return power tothe responsible, free individual. Bob Dole, Clinton is a socialist. Harry Browne. The only candidate who would make a difference. Harry Browne because I would have to be crazy to turn down a 20-25%raise! Harry Browne is the only candidate who wants to and knows howto reduce govt to anywhere near reasonable levels. Harry Browne, simple consideration of the govt. we've gottenfrom the 2 major parties, and the incredible cost ... Harry Browneis the only candidate with an outlined plan to reduce govt. withfiscal integrety in his first year in office. Someone other than a Democrat or Republican because these parties donot care about the people. I feel like I am in a huge high school and we are voting on the homecoming queen. Our representation sucks and the choices do too. Harry Browne, because he's the only candidate with a serious grip on the issues. Harry Browne because government is too large and intrusive. Harry Browne - We have to stop this fast track movement to becoming a Nwe World Order police state. Harry Browne, because he's the only one who can save ourdemocracy from the special interests. Harry Browne is the only candidate who will really reduce thecost *and* intrusiveness of the federal government. Those who wish to reform government are dreaming. Harry Browne is the only candidatethat recognizes that government doesn't work and therefore can't be reformed, and he is theoncly candidate that has a plan for reducing gov't to its scope as defined by the Consitution. Browne. Our strength is our freedom. Without it, we have nothing;morals become hollow, and promises mean nothing. We can depend onlyon ourselves, and should no longer be fooled by impotent governmentprograms and its corrupt policies. Harry Browne.He's the only candidate who advocates real change and liberty. Harry Browne. He would cut government spending and taxation to the bare bones, and get the bureaucrats out of my life. Harry Browne- The only candidate who stands for consistent application of the constitution and the limits placed on federal government. Individual liberty, personal responsibility and a workable plan to eliminate the deficit AND the income tax are some of the planks of his platform. Harry Browne because he is the only candidate who is for reducing the size of government. I want to see Harry Browne because only he will reduce costly,counter-productive, oppressive government activities. I want to see harry browne for president because I think he will implement what he says,and I think his positions are valid. Harry Browne!Read " WHY GOVERNMENT DOSEN'T WORK " Unfortunately neither Bill nor Bob will get much done, but I'mafraid of seeing anyone in office who owes naything to the ChristianRight.Population control is the big issue here folks. We don't have enough resources to sustain all of ourselves here. Anyone got any answers? Harry Browne, because government REALLY doesn't work--trust me. Want free trade, open immigration, a repeal of Drug Prohibition, the government out of your bedroom, an end to government mandated racial discrimination, repeal of the income tax, repeal of social security, and a LOT more freedoms additionally returned to you? Then vote for Harry Browne. Harry Browne because he recognises the benefits of legalized drugs. Harry Browne - The federal government has overstepped its Constituitional roots and we need to get rid of many of the illegal laws and intrusions. Harry Browne - Government Doesn't Work Bob Dole. Clinton is too liberal and too dishonest. Harry Browne. He's the only candidate whose positions are founded on a consistent philosophy rather than political winds. Harry Browne, because he is the only candidate committed to reducing government size, cost and intrusiveness across the board. Harry Browne, because has has principles and good sense. i don't think the government should dictate moral standards, norshould it prosecute "victimless" crimes (like drug possession).government needs to balance the budget and deal primarily withlaw enforcement; and should research and promote, but not legislate,programs to help out citizens who need it.. (sorry, it's a bitcomplex).no candidate matches this description; maybe a combination ofHarry Browne and Newt Gingrich (who does a great job of being acheerleader for non-government social programs). Harry Browne, the Libertarian candidate, is the only one whoboth proposed to reduce the size of government and has aspecific plan for doing so. Harry Browne, because in simple truth, he is the only candidate that approches being a moral person. Harry Browne, because he will scale back gov. Harry Browne - The only candidate with a WRITTEN plan, a blueprint, published and available in any bookstore, (Why Government Doesn't Work) that details exactly how he will reduce govermnet size, eliminate the income tax and the IRS, and return the country to the Constitutional basis upon which it was founded. No rhetoric, just real, solid plans. Clinton Only Harry Browne wants to reduce government and give us back our Constitutional Rights. Only Harry Browne has a workable plan for big tax cuts NOW, big spending cuts NOW and a balanced budget NOW. I would like to see Harry Browne reduce the Federal government. Harry Browne, because he is the only candidate proposing todrastically reduce the scope and size of government. Harry Browne; He's the only candidate who is serious about reducing the size of government. Harry Browne he's the only person with ethics. Harry Browne. He's the only candidate who consistently supports reducing the size and invasive nature of government. Dole, because he has more character. Clinton is in some ways an effective politician but does not deserve another term. Clinton, He is a great Campainer, but a lousy President I would like to see a president with morals and character and one that wants less government. Browne, he is the only candidate with a principled view...everyoneelse is either status quo or some variety of lunatic. Harry Browne, because he is the only candidate who understands that GOVERNMENT DOES NOT WORK!!! Bill clinton is the forced choice due to more humane behaviourand age. He looks less of an "insider". Bob Dole. Bill & Hillary are corrupt and immoral. They are not good role models for children or adults!! HARRY BROWNE, BECAUSE HE IS THE ONLY CANDIDATE THAT WILL NOT FORCEHIS POLITICAL OR MORAL VIEWS ON US. An individual who has the definite mission of creating an environment where each individual can achieve, to the best of her/his limitations, all that is achievable through education, economic strength and environmental awareness! I have no choice at this time Bob Dole is the Republican presidential candidate and his credibility, character, and experience make him a much better choice than Bill Clinton, who is in short supply of these. Howard Phillips - Supports causes I believe in! Bill Clinton. It is his last to prove himself. Either Ralph Nader or Colin Powell would be trustworthy leadersat least in the sense that they mean what they say. I have absolutely no sense of what Clint-Dole really believes about anything. Ralph Nader believes in something so much, he can give a speech without notecards, "Preparation grilling," etc. He is also not for sale;these two things make him a real leader. At this time Howard Phillips supports the return to a constitutionalfor of government - socialism does not and cannot work Bob Dole Will stimulate the economy and reduce taxes. Dole. I feel he is honest. Clinton is shady in his dealings with people and the government. He is like a yo yo. Colin Powell captures the imagination, is intelligent, has charisma, and is an eloquent speaker. Those are the most important qualities of the President in its current manifestation. I am white. People of the caliber of a Jesse Jackson , Ralph Nader etc. Howard Phillips - I believe He stands for the ideals and principles that were instituted by our Founding Fathers. We need to get God back in America again and stop playing politics!! Harry Browne because he is the only candidate to consistenty stand for smaller gov't, more personal freedom/responsibility. Bob Dole - Character IS an issue! Bill Clinton, as I have seen improvement in my quality of lifein the last four years. This is a stark contrast to the 12 Reagan/Bush years. Bill Clinton Clinton. Dole is vague on issues. He's also living in the pastThis is the 90s not the 60s Bill Clinton because I like his style, and I loathe Bob Dole i would like to see perot because the other two parties are not try to fix the problems by devising new ideas but rather want to pour more money into them,and i consider that a waste. dole. i don't want to have national health care. Bob Dole, because of his proven Character. I feel that he will limit the size and scope of the Federal Government. The 15% tax cut would give more of our money back to us and not to the Federal Government in the form of oppressive taxes. I also have no trust in Bill Clinton, it is election time and he is trying to appear as conservative as possible to get votes, but in his heart he wants liberal policies, bigger government and four more years. Harry Browne - The only candidate who will return usto Constitutionally limited government. Clinton Clinton, because he will best balance social issues, with economic growth and fiscal constraint requirements Browne! The Government is FAR too bloated and Browne is the only candidateI see wanting to cut all the bloat. Dole has the knowledge, and the leadership qualities that I am looking for in a Pres. He has the character that I expect from the pres. Dole will win on Nov. 5 I would like to see Bob Dole for president so as to avoid governmental gridlock. Bill Clinton should be President in 1996. He is more respresentative of the American people and offers the best and most workable solutions foe improving the ills of the country. Harry Browne, because I would like government to get mostlyout of people's pockets and entirely out of their bedrooms. Dole is better than Clinton because of image, morals, and commitment Bob Dole. He has an incredible political background and walks on a firm foundation of what his issues are, and the man has "integrity". BOB DOLE; CHARACTER; BOB DOLE IS OUTSTANDING AND BILL CLINTON IS THE OPPOSITE. THIS COUNTRY CANNOT STAND ANOTHER 4 YEARS OF SLEAZE Harry Browne. Liberterian ideas espouse reducing government intrusions in citizens lives. We're adults and I resent have the Govt Nanny watching over me. Harry Browne. I want the government off of my back, out of my billfold an dout of my bedroom. It's MY life to live, for better or worse. harry browne seems to be the only canidate that legitimately desires to reduce the size of government and not just talk about taxes and programs Bob Dole because of his honesty, integrity, and character William Bennett. He is a true conservative with high ethical standards. I will vote for Harry Browne because he is the only candidate that wants to reduce government to the size and functions limited by the constitution. Bob Dole: He has a strong sense of what makes this nation great. Family,the Constitution, our position in the world politically,economically and defensively. I would _like_ to see a third-party candidate president in 1996 because I think it's the only way we'll see any real change.However, realistically looking at the candidates I'd have to settle for Clinton over Dole. Pres.Clinton is easily the best Pres. in years. Harry Browne because he understands reality better than all the other candidates. Bob Dole, because he is an honest man and will bring morale fiber back to our country. He supports the military and bring it back to the strength it needs to be. His vision is real and he understands the needs of the people. He is not a draft dodger. Harry Browne -- the only candidate who would *actually* bring about lower present and future taxes and reduce the size and intrusion of government. Harry Browne sends a strong message that I want much less govt.Voting for him builds the party for the future. Dole. He's fought for our country's benefit all of his life.A 15% tax cut generates more taxes from the 15% increase inin public financial activity. It's just a shame he doesn't smokepot like our current Prez. Bill Clinton, because Bob Dole is a facist and a rascist. He has no interes in what the people of the U.S. need, only what the economic elite will benefit from. DoleWe need a change in goverment direction I really have decided not to vote for president, because I have decided not to consent to voting for the lesser evil anymore. And Nader is running a lousy campaign. Harry Browne as he's the only one who will _really_ cut taxes and government. The assholes(R)/weasels(D) are old hat. Harry Browne He is the only candidate who has any principles. Dole. Less government. Clinton is a well-intentioned, yet misguided hillbilly Marxist. Harry Browne, because he would act to ELIMINATE the Income Tax & the IRS. That alone is sufficient to earn our undying admiration. Coupled with the rest of his platform, he is a STAND OUT candidate with a great running-mate in Jo Jorgensen. Bill clinton, because he is trying to do something about the tabaco industrys. I would like to see Bob Dole as president. His tax plan can work,and will work. The evidence comes with comparing our tax rate asa country over its history. The rate of tax has gone up nearlyevery year. It doesn't take a brain surgeon to figure out thatgovernment can operate less, and more efficiently when it does operate, leading to more money in taxpayers pockets. Harry Browne is the only candidate on all 50 ballots who would actually reduce the size of government. Period. Bob Dole. More trustworthy, better economic plan, more apt to sign the right bills, will appoint conservative judges This is liberally slanted Poll. Loss of moral conviction as well as religious influence, crime deficit, too high taxes, Abortion, Government corruption, drugs, cost of healthcare are all equally a problem there is no one problem.States should have more controll in some areas Federal Government should have controll in others. We should be good stewards of the planet but it should be reasoable it is not more important than the economy but the economy is not more important than the environment. The deficit will be lowered with lower taxes. The government already mandates morals by laws. Unions only protects the bad employee. Bob Dole.I don't want to give Clinton a second chance to mess up again. jim carry, everyone loves him. Bob dole because we have better chance to remain free than with that stinking comunist we have in office now. I want to see Bob Dole as the president. Dole has more character in his little finger then Clinton has in his entire famnily. Bob Dole, because i have the impression the he's genuine.He'snot flashy.but more important,he's honest and more than qualified Bob Dole, due to the fact that character is the primary element of a good leader.There is no substitute for honesty and integrity. Bob Dole. I can't trust Clinton Dole... because... Clinton lied about inhaling and he protested against America In a foreign country!!! Harry Browne -- We must get government out of our lives at the ballot box .... while we still have the chance. Bob Dole's plans will help stenghten our country both economically and morally. His prescence and leadership capabilities will make us more respected world-wideas opposed to Clinton who will say anything to anybody in order to get elected. Clinton has no moral authority and just cares about being in a power position. Its all ego with him. Bob Dole because he is conservative and will limit power of govermant We are better off now than we were four years ago. Clinton is trying to advance important programs to benefit the nation as a whole. I would like to see Bill Clinton as pres. in '96. He seems to have his tax breaks and plans in order and still be able to reduce the deficit Harry Browne. He seems the most intelligent choice we've had in ages.He's not a politician, and he talks good sense. Go read what he's saying, and make your own choice. dole- less government,less taxes, limit spending to revenuedole- less government and taxes, limits on spending and entitlements Ralph Nader would make the best president. He hasn't sold out to any corporate interests, and he would put the good of the majority of people ahead of profits for those few who own corporations. I would like to see Bob Dole as president because he will bring more honesty and is more experienced in domestic as well as foriegn policy. Although I am not totally satisfied with either candidate, I Bill Clinton is less satisfactory to me than Bob Dole. BILL CLINTON. HE HAS DONE A GREAT JOB FOR THE FIRST FOUR YEARS AND I WANT TO SEE HIM CONTINUE FOR THE NEXT FOUR. Dole the lesser of two evils Harry Browne: The only canidate who is dedicated to bringing the Fed. Gov't back in compliance w/Constitution Bob Dole Clinton because of age, good record and support of civil liberties. Harry Browne because there's not a dimes worth of difference inthe way Bob Dole and Bill Clinton do business. Bill Weld; I like his record, and his stance as a fiscal conservative whilestaying out of "morality" issues. William F Buckley is the only one i know of that could even hope to get us put of this mess! Bob Dole, I don't trust Clinton. The FBI files causes me great anguish. Clinton, I don't trust Dole to do the things he proposes for the good of the whole country. This country needs a president who is honest and trustworthy. Who has a fear of God and high moral standards. Who works for thepeople, not against them. We need someone who will not take ourbasic rights away and will respect the right to one's own personaldefense. We need someone who will not have daily scandals in thepress. Someone who doesn't cheat on his wife and who didn't dodgethe draft. Someone who fought for their country. Bill Clintonis not this man. But Bob Dole comes pretty close. DOLE/KEMP in 96! Clinton because of his greatER sensitivity to issues of economic justicethe gap between rich and poor (which has a lot to do with crime,welfare, etc.) Interesting that the huge gap between rich andpoor was not even a choice for "greatest problem" in this country. Harry Browne because he wants to cut down the goverment Bill Clinton because he is a better candidate. Harry Brown.... because if he were to win I believe he would do all he could to reduce government... which I think *needs* to be done. I think that if more people thought he had a chance of winning, they would vote for him as well. I also think that our country would benefit if everyone began to question the logic behind their own beliefs. I would like to see Colin Powell become president because he grewup with everything agaist him but today he is a great Army General. As for Clinton and Dole, Clinton did a good job, but I don't think he deserves a second term and Dole's tax plan will only cause thedeficit to skyrocket and force tax increases in four years. Also, I believe Dole is too out of touch with teenagers to deal with drug problems. Dole, I believe that Clinton's legal problems will hamper his effectivness in a Republican controlled House and/or Senate. Harry Browne for a drastic reduction in the size,scope and cost ofthe federal gov't. I agree with most of Dole's ideas and views, with the exception of pro-life. Bill Clinton because I believe he is doing a good job. Bob Dole, because he is reliable, known for decades to be a rocksolid politician, and his plans are quite reasonable.His opponent on the other hand, is not a presidential material. Bob Dole is an honest man of integrity. He almost gave his ownlife and went through much physical pain and agony for his country. I believe he is totally devoted to it's welfare. I would like to see Bob Dole as President because I know he can lead this country to a firm economical standing while at the same time prove himself to be a leader in not only morals and character, but also courage. All the other issues are not even in question. Bob Dole -- Only viable candidate who believes government should be smaller and less intrusive in our busness.Bill Clinton is a lying manipulative Crook. Bob Dole. He is a man of integrity and experience. He CAN reduce taxes and balance the budget at the same time. I intend to vote for Harry Browne, because I feel that he is thecandidate most likely to be concerned about civil liberties. Dole- I feel his goals to be directed toward family and its developemetn -in conjunction with the rebuilding of America. Harry Browne, He is the only canidate with a real plan to reduce government,taxes,and make people responsible for themselvs not relient on the government. Bob Dole, I think that people should be in control of their lifes morethan the Gov't is. BOB DOLE, BECAUSE I BELIEVE HIS PLAN IS BETTER SUITED TO OUR NEEDS. I really wish there were better canidates.There is just something about Dole and Perot that I Don't like.It seems like that just want to rule the world? B. Dole, because Mr. Dole is a good man and Clinton is a sleaze ball. Bill Clinton cares about specific solutions to problems. See his solution for increasing vaccination rates in children which helps the health of the whole society and revamping the student loan system to give more money to students and less to bankers and reworking the cooperation between the EPA and landowners with the Nature Conservancy and others for a better economy and a better enviroment. Bob Dole - Its hard to image after coming out of the economic success of the 80's people still are skeptical of a tax break.The only thing I have seen Clinton do to reduce the deficit israise taxes - Dole plans to reduce spending and stimulate the economy (a stronger effort). Harry Browne. Bob Dole Bill Clinton; the best combination of competence, experience, moderation and compassion for the job. Bob Dole, because he's honest and has the experience to become a very good leader in our fast growing country. Harry Browne. He is the only candidate who respects the U.S. constitution,and will seak to balance the budget and limit the Fed. Gov. to its constitutionalfunctions. Bob Dole, the Democrates had their chance in 92-94. I am not better off than I was then. It`s time for the Republicans to make the difference. I want to see stuff about Bob dolecause he is interesting I want to see Clinton; his objectives have not been met yet, but I believe they are worth pursuing for four more years. Bob Dole. Character counts! Clinton, I am tired of Dole bashing Clinton. In my opinion, since Dole is bashing Clinton, Clinton must be doing somethingright. Bob Dole. He is the last of the World War II generation. I do not feel the people of this country are as patriotic as they should be.Senetor Dole could bring back pride in our country. That is important to me. Bob Dole....because he is an honest person of which we can all be proud of and can trust. Clinton, because he has a plan for the future that is working andwill continue to work. Bill Clinton - I feel that Mr. Dole has placed too much emphasis on the past with little vision for the future. Dole will help restore decency to our lives and downsize government. Clinton because he is a good president, and because Dole is cynical. Bob Dole - I hate Clinton Newt Gingrich - not afraid to say what he thinks. Has hisown ideas and tries to sell them. Not follow the wind. Howeverhe's not running now. Bill Clinton, because he has a genuine plan to eliminate the deficit while protecting medicare, medicaid, education, and the environment. Harry Browne to decrease government intrusion in my life. Harry Browne....Politics the way our founding fathers meant it to be. Bill Clinton Clinton is more for the blue collar worker than Dole is. Bob Dole because character matters. Bob Dole, because he is someone I can trust. Bob Dole because character matters. Harry Browne is the best candidate because he understands that government doesn't work and wants to help Americans rather than himself. Ralph Nader. Very little difference between Dole/Clinton. Both are the puppets of big business after taking their millions of dollars for the campaign. Big corporations are being given major tax breaks and write offs while citizens are asked to pay more to help limit the debt. It's the biggest problem facing this country, and Dole and Clinton aren't talking about it because both are drinking from that well. Nader is the only one of the candidates determined to end big business influence in our governmet. Censorship scares me. Make the government smaller. It's none of their business what I do with my money and what I do in my bedroom. bob dole... shows far better character than slick Willie.. clinton must lose.....after all he's a loser... Bob Dole, I'm from Alaska & Federal government intrusion is gastlyHow would you like to live in a place where 92% of all land isowned by the federal govrnment, and the people that are trying to run it from Washinton DC. -SCOTT- Harry Browne. He's the only candidate who has a philosophy that's consistant with the founding fathers'.Basically, he's right! Harry Browne is the only candidate talking about reversing 100 years worth of increasing Federal intervention in every problem short of dandruff. Bill Clinton understands COMPROMISE,this is a strength not a weakness and has produced a highly successful four years. I value performance over past history! I want for president someone I can look up to as a leader, one whose moral and ethical foundation is above reproach. In other words, I want someone I can trust and believe in to do what is right for my country. Dole, Moral Conviction and intent to decrease Governmental intrusion into our lives and pocket books without letting the truly needy slip through the cracks of society. after 40 years Dole has done all the damage he needs to I'll take Clinton I firmly believe that Harry Browne would be the best president this country has ever seen.This insane, megalithic government needs dismantled, and he is the only candidate who advocates such action. Bob Dole-his faith in the family and the locality is better suited to the American way than the "government knows best" notions of Clinton. Bob Dole-despite fears of Republicans running amuck - He has shown he has the ability to compromise on items without compromising his word. Howard Phillips is the only candidate who will govern according to the Constitution. The words of Dole and Clinton mean nothing in termsof their actions. Harry Browne. The Libertarian party is the only party committed to the founding principles of our, country - limited government, personal freedom, and individual responsibility. Bill Clinton because I support his views far more than I supportBob Dole's. I believe Dole's tax plan is insanely impossible and impractical. I want to see Bob Dole as president because he is a man of great integrity and character who has the qualities of experience, leadership, wisdom, and a strong relationship with God that will enable him to be a president that will make the necessary reforms needed in reducing the size of government and reestablishing the Judeo-Christian values as the moral foundation of our society. Bob Dole is a man whose word is his bond. The American people can trust this man. Honesty is so hard to find in the curent administration. Bob Dole's economic and foreign policies will truly put us on the right track to cross the bridge into the twenty-first century. Howard Phillips because of the Party's platform which calls for a return to ideas that this Country was founded on; we need a retrurn to the US Constitution! bill clinton Howard Phillips, the ONLY true conservative. 1-800-2-VETO-IRS, http://www.ustaxpayers.org Harry Browne. He is the only canadiate who makes sense. Ross is my vote to show the utter disgust with the political situation! HARRY BROWNE, he's the man with the plan! Legalize it! BILL CLINTO - GREAT JOB IN BAD CIRCUMSTANCES. WITH A COOPerative congress he could be a grat president Bob Dole he has the best ideas. We've already seen Clinton and I don't think anyone wants that agian. Browne or Perot, in order to show Dem's & Rep's that they are not acting in good faith as perceived by the general population,and to give referenced ideas a voice, rather than meaningless "statistic wars". Bob Dole because we can TRUST what he says and we can BELIEVE he will do what he says, unlike his opponent. For those of you who vote for Clinton, just remember what people were saying right before the election, as Clinton is going through his impeachment hearings. Harry Brown .His promise to end the war on drugs is good. I'm subject to ramdom drug testing and it is degrading. Bob Dole, as I feel the other choice will lead to socialisum, and the "New World Order". bob dole he is more truthful and i believe the promises he is making. he doesnt want larger goverment and believes in local goverment and small business Robert Dole will make the better president of the current election becausehe represents the values and the integrity expected of the leader of theworld. His view of the future laced with the high standards of the pastis a step towards the only viable path to greater freedom from the stifflinggoverment grip. Harry Browne should be our next President because he will trade off the entitlements boondoggle and abolish the income tax. Bill Clinton, I don't like Dole. Harry Browne, because everyone else sucks. Bill Clinton -- because I trust Al Gore and want to see him win in 2000. Browne, less govt. A strong conservative to sign the conservative legislation from Congress! I feel President has earned another four years. I don't feel former Senator Dole has a vision of the future. He is still fighting WWII. Bob Dole, because i feel that he has better moral character and with good morals will come the ability to make better governmental decisions Harry Browne, because although he does not stand for absolutely everything that I do, he is close enough. Even if he is able to cut the gov't by only 10% it will still be 10% smaller, not 3 r 5 or 30% greater. DOLE BECAUSE SO NEWT CAN GO FOR IT Harry Browne because he is the only one who is trustworthy and will reduce government while protecting the constitution. Bill Clinton because he is not going used the government to dictate a moral code. Harry Browne. We need far less government. Dole/Less Government Clinton. Dole scares me, i don't think he's sincere, and he's too old. Bill Clinton only becuase he is lookong into the future. I feel that we cannot move forward without looking forward. Clinton because he seems easier to trust. Harry Browne. It is a far-fetched dream, but I am not the first American to dream about liberty. Mr. Clinton. He leans towards the right on economics and the left on social issues. Doesn't mandate morals..but protectsthe freedom of others. Does it really matter? Bob Dole, because he will further the necessary move back towardpersonal responsibility and away from the "victim" mentality. Harry Browne. The Libertarian Party has a set of beliefs from which it derives all its stands on issues. Other parties waver too much in their thinking. I ACTUALLY AM NOT REALLY SURE THAY BOTH MAKE GREAT ARGUMENTS BUT WHO ISTELLING THE TRUTH?? THAT IS THE BIG QUESTION. WHO SHOULD WE TRUST Harry Browne. Republicans are like abused spouses. Even though they get beat up, they keep coming back. The Republican politician, like the abusive spouse, keeps saying they will never do it again.But when the spouse comes back, they beat them again. Harry Browne is the shelter. The Republicans can learn only if they suffer. Let's make them suffer. BOB DOLE Dole: Because I believe he is an honest man who would try to keep his word, and not laugh in the face of the American people. Harry Browne. He is not only the Libertarian candidate, he is the best Libertarian candidate ever. I wish we could have a pres who actually keeps his promises and helps reduce crime, drugs, teen pregnancy, and makes education a real priority. Clinton - Younger and more moderate than Dole bob doyle - the royle of gov. is allow people to make the best of their own lives, not dictate how you should/should not live... (less gov. involement), this is what republicans stand for in general. Harry Browne, The two main parties have lied to us for all these years so lets give Harry Browne a chance. Bill Clinton. Although he did break his promise to cut taxes, his policy played an important part in lowering interest rates. I was able to refinance loans and save over $200.00 a month. The savings I realized are far more than I would save from Bob Doles 15% tax cut. In addition, Ronald Reagan cut taxes and look what happened to the deficit. Americans are now paying close to $1,000 per person just to cover the interest expense on the deficit created during the Reagan/Bush era. I guess what it al boils down to is the classic arugment of monetary versus fiscal policy. In the past for years, Bill Clinton's tax increase where offset by cuts in interest thus still managing to stimulate the economy and lower the deficit. Libertarian Harry Browne....the only viable candidate that would drastically reduce the size of government. Bob Dole. I will unhappily vote for Dole because of his age,buthe is a war hero andand ethical person. Clinton is morally corrupt. His past and presentlife represents almost all values I oppose. I'd like to see Bill Clinton remain in office. He seemed to do a reasonable job last term, and he has good ideas as well as morals. The environment is an important asset to future generations, and it appears to me that Clinton realizes this as well and plans to accomplish something with it. Bob Dole. I will unhappily vote for Dole since he is a war hero andand ethic person. Clinton is morally corrupt. His past and presentlife represents almost all values I oppose. I vote for Clinton not by choice, but by neccesity. I shudder to think what sort of rash plans that the "new" Republicans of Congress, if they, as they will likely, retain a majority, will do with a puppet such as Dole in the white house I would like to see Bob Dole for president because he has more of the same beliefs as I do, and I believe in his character, while Clinton's I am skeptical about. don't feel comfortable w/ anyone running now.poss.collin powell? Senator Bob Dole because Clinton is a draft dodger, a liberal, a womanizer and is not trustworthy. Libertarian Harry Browne, because he is the only candidatewho will reduce government Bob Dole becaues we need a leader that is responisble and takesa stand on a issue and dose not change his mind the next day. Some one who truly believes that government should keep its hands both out of your pocket and out of your pants. Clinton, becuase he's kept fighting for the middle and lower class Americans. He is more in tune to the needs of the country going into the next century. Bob Dole: He has the best vision for America. Namely, he can be trusted to cut taxes, balance the budeget, and encourage economic growth, while reducing the size of an intrusive government. Given the choice of Dole vs. Clinton, I want Clinton to win. I feel that Clinton is far more conservative than I am and I rarely vote for anyone who supports the death penalty, but I feel that a Dole administration would increase the gap between the richest and poorest Americans. Harry Browne..less intrusive government and increased civil and personal liberties. Bob Dole.We must always remember when we become apathetic and no longer care what our leaders character is we are in danger of losing our freedom, Hitler was elected. Harry Browne! He isn't a liar and he is lucid. Qualities I see lacking in the other canditates I would like to see a candidate that is willing to cut Social Security, Medicare, and Medicaid. Anyone who ignores this necessity lacks the true foresite to take us into the 21st century. Harry Browne, the only candidate who understands individual liberty. Bob Dole. Because he knows the right way to run the government. He is old and wiser than Bill, and he is in it for the people. Harry Browne. He's consistent, up-front, and has well thought out plans. Bill Clinton...I like his position on issues dealing with small business I want to see Dole win, because most of Clintons plans benefit the "the minorities", and although this is important, it should not be done at the expense of the majority. Bob Dole, because I feel that he has a better plan for the future, and he has a word that I can believe. BOB DOLE- NOT BECAUSE OF HIM BUT BECAUSE OF THE PARTY. I WOULDRATHER VOTE FOR THE PARTY AND PEOPLE HE IS GOING TO BRING WITHHIM TO THE OFFICE. Bob Dole: I believe in a conservative economic planClinton's foreign policy is terrible. Troops out of Bosnia! Harry Browne. Our worst problems are caused by the governmentincompetently meddling in order to "fix" things. BOB DOLE, WHO BELIEVES IN THE PEOPLE THAT THEY CAN ACHIEVE WITHOUT THE GOVERNMENT HELP (INTRUSION). Harry Brown To return this country to it's greatness, and to allow indiduals to succeed on their own marits. Harry Browne because America should be a free country. To be afree country, we need to reduce government. I would like to see Harry Browne elected because I think he would do hisbest to reduce the federal government to its constitutionaly authorizedsize................. Bob Dole. Clinton is an embarrassment to the United States.Clinton invites terrorists to the White House ie. Gerry Adams.He gives our weapons to terrorrist nations ie. 16 F-16's to Jordan Bob Dole because he is a better man. Anyone but Clinton to hopefully restore restpect to the office of the President DOLE. I BELEIVE HIM Bob Dole. Or more accurately, not Bill Clinton. We can't trust him to keep promises and he either doesn't understand economics or he is intentionally misrepresenting economic principles and history in the attempt to get elected. Take a wild guess from my answers... ;-) and the reasons are integrity & trust. Bob Dole because of his 15% tax cut and economic growth plan. His administration will give the power back to the people where it belongs. Bob Dole. I feel he can return trust in our government and a more ethical leadership. harry browne because he advocates policies that most closely match the beliefs of the framers of our constitution. Dole is the only one truly consern about the future of our children and he is not just using a slick word to get elected. Bill Clinton isusing the Republican ideas and calling them his own. Look at what he said he was going to do in 1992. He has done a 180 and supports everything Bush supported in 1992. Clinton cannotbe trusted. FBI FILES, Case In Point. Harry Browne wants to eliminate the income tax, and retire trhe debt in the same amount of time Bob Dole proposes to get out of his white house bed. Stop endorsing the Fake candidates. Tell Dole and Clinton you are sick of taxes, Vote Browne! Harry Browne. Only "third-party" candidates advocate reducing government; Harry and the Libertarians are consistent and clear. I want to see the most responsible, truthful, and ethical candidate as president. Of the two candidates, I think Bob Dole fits those requirements. Ralph Nader because he is the only one with the spine to stand up to American Big Business Bob Dole Bob Dole shows more leadership, and strength in character. He seems to be someone who does not feel that you have to please everyone, becuase that is not possible. Harry Browne; because he favors less government on all issues at all times. Harry Browne - He will reduce government to it's original intent and stop the waste and corruption that has become the Washington establishment of the social and corporate welfare state. Bill Clinton - his beliefs better align with mine. harry browne. less government control over every aspect of peoples lives.he is for privatization of all issues. Clinton is a futurist with sensitivity, committment, energy, and creativity. Clinton, despite his pandering to the moment by moment change in the direction of the poltical wind, has his heart in the right place. Bob Dole, because Bill Clinton is a phoney two faced liar. In President Clinton's first election he addressed several important issues facing this country as a whole and it's constituents which he later retracted when in officecleading to a growing distrust of anything Clinton says. Tax increases must end somewhere or there will be nothing left to tax. President Dole...I think President Clinton is doing things that areillegal Bob Dole, not necessarily because he is the best candidate, but because Pres. Clinton does not deserve another term. The president has promised much, waffled even more and delievered nothing. Browne, tired of politics as usual, want to try something different Bob Dole because clinton wants to RULE not lead Harry Browne -- You will not get one spending cut proposal from Clinton or Dole. Tax cuts are possible IF we have spending cuts. Problem is, the major canidates will not propose any. Neither Dole nor Clinton embody many of the traits I'd like to seein our next president. We need someone who's less intersted in fighting"the opposition" and runs this country a little more like a business. Browne for supporting the constitution Bob Dole - Big Government like big business tends to become insular and merely promotes itself. This has to stop and I don't see a Bill Clintont promoting smaller federal government . President President President Clinton connects with people, Dole is one track==negative and would not be a good policy connection with foreign countries he is too negative answered every question with an attack not a solution;;; I want to see either Perot or Jack Kemp (maybe Dole will die).I will vote for Browne to spread his message, but he does not havethe experience to be President. Bob Dole, because he reflects a higher personal integrity and moral base than Bill Clinton. Bill Clinton: Cause he is pro-choice, pro environment, for theaverage person - not big business. Just because I'm from Kansas, doesn't mean I'm for dole! Harry Browne- the only candidate who wants to reduce the federal government, sweep our burdensome regulations and end the income tax. President Clinton should be in the president in 1996 because he has the most vision for the future Harry Browne will limit government employees' control over my life. The government is a menace to our civilization. I think Bill Clinton would be the best choice. I don't see any way that Dole's economic plan can work. You can't cut taxes, reduce the deficit, and not have to cut some important programs Ralph Nader - he will not be influenced by big business,or money Ross perot. Ross is right how a simply business plan could fix our economy, and basic problem solving steps could find solutions for everything else.Please, no more career politicians. The have destroyed enough. Harry Browne--because he is the only candidate committed to reducing the size of government. Haryy Browne -- he is the only candidate that will ACTUALLY reduce the size and scope of government Harry Browne. He stands for reducing the government down tosize. He has real ideas, not major party rhetoric. Harry Browne- unlike the three most metioned, he's the only one who keeps in mind the US has a CONSTITUTION! Harry Browne because he is the only candidate who knows that Government solutions don't work! I want Bob Dole to win because I truely believe that his word is good, he is upstanding and that he would and could give us the 15% tax break. (P.S., I didn't answer the two questions that were leading and inferred they were mutually exclusive [e.g., tax break vs. the debt.]) Bob Dole should be the next president because I trust him to lead our country in the proper direction more so than I trust Clinton. Bob Dole. He is a better role-model for everyone. He is more trustworthy. Bob Dole/Jack Kemp: Smaller government (not NO government, as the press would paint conservatives),and less bureaucratic control of individuals' lives is critical to our nation. DOLE One interesting thing I note is that most of the people I talk towho are against Clinton have an almost irrational hatred of theman almost exclusively based on what they've heard on radio & television. You can't talk to a single anti-Clinton person whodoesn't spew a bunch of unsubstantiated innuendo; the basis oftheir prejudice is not logical. If you look at Clinton's recordof accomplishments, it's quite clear he has worked very hard todeliver on his promises. Anyone who expects too much from politicials(in general) is deluding themselves, but I believe history willshow Clinton to be an excellent president, probably even betterthan Kennedy. He supported a wide variety of very intelligent legislationthat various special interest groups love to demean but when you look at the facts, things like the Brady Bill, Family Leave, FeinsteinAmendment, Don't Ask Don't Tell in the military, are sound andmoderate proposals - they're not liberal - they just make sense.Clinton WILL become re-elected because the American people arestupid, but not quite stupid enough to think the republicans, orany other candidate is being realistic in their promises or sincerein their concern for the country's future. The person who will revamp the goverment before Social Security is gone and before Medicare is gone and before we become tax slaves. Bob Dole because he has honest plans to make America a better place. Bob Dole -- High moral and ethical charactor. His honorable service to America during war time. And his belief in the American people. Bob Dole. We all must take more responsibility for our own lives. We have been giving away too many of our freedoms. I want to see a communist revolution in 1996. Either Ross Perot or Ralph Nader because they would shake things upand boot out the entrenched special interests. ANY OF THE THIRD PARTY CANDIDATES, AS THEY ARE PRESENTING REAL ISSUES UNLIKE THE TWO BOZOS THAT ARE PART OF OUR PROBLEM. Questions, comments, suggestions? Contact us. Return to theHome Page. Copyright ©1996, /InterCommerceCorporation, All rights reserved worldwide Send comments to Webmaster@Survey.net WT02-B22-6IA060-000333-B020-65http://www.survey.net:80/pol1r.html 204.107.221.240 19970115053814 text/html 10803HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 15 Jan 1997 05:32:03 GMTServer: Apache-SSL-US/1.0.3+1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 10620Last-modified: Mon, 25 Nov 1996 20:26:44 GMT 1996 US Political Survey Results Your source for information, opinions & demographics from the Net Community! 1996 US Political Survey Results Survey started: May 6, 1995 Survey closes: November 5, 1995 Total Respondents: 5335 Your political affiliation: [ 2023]  37.9% - Republican[ 1437]  26.9% - Democrat[  912]  17.1% - Independant[  349]   6.5% - Libertarian[  185]   3.5% - No Answer[  134]   2.5% - Not a US citizen[  126]   2.4% - Not registered to vote[  120]   2.2% - Other[   36]   0.7% - United We Stand If the election were held today, who would you vote for as President? [ 1374]  25.8% - Bill Clinton[  529]   9.9% - Pat Buchanan[  503]   9.4% - Bob Dole[  494]   9.3% - Gen. Colin Powell[  376]   7.0% - Alan Keyes[  371]   7.0% - Other[  293]   5.5% - Anyone other than Clinton[  288]   5.4% - Phill Gramm[  184]   3.4% - Newt Gingrich[  162]   3.0% - Bob Dornan[  151]   2.8% - No Answer[  148]   2.8% - Jesse Jackson[  144]   2.7% - David Duke[  119]   2.2% - Pete Wilson[  111]   2.1% - Ross Perot[   60]   1.1% - Arlen Spector[   15]   0.3% - Pat Robertson How would you rate President Clinton's performance? [ 1829]  34.3% - Very bad[ 1154]  21.6% - Not so good[  961]  18.0% - Satisfactory[  836]  15.7% - Good[  303]   5.7% - No Answer[  242]   4.5% - Extremely good What is your political stance? [ 1287]  24.1% - Somewhat conservative[ 1220]  22.9% - Moderate[ 1051]  19.7% - Very conservative[  804]  15.1% - Somewhat liberal[  505]   9.5% - Very liberal[  459]   8.6% - No Answer What is the worst problem with our society? [  705]  13.2% - Government intrusion[  620]  11.6% - The national debt[  587]  11.0% - Crime[  386]   7.2% - Political/government corruption[  381]   7.1% - No Answer[  375]   7.0% - Not enough religious influence[  367]   6.9% - Other[  346]   6.5% - Education[  323]   6.1% - Big business influence[  257]   4.8% - Too much religious influence[  221]   4.1% - The media[  196]   3.7% - Welfare[  179]   3.4% - Abortion[  117]   2.2% - Rising healthcare costs[   98]   1.8% - Environmental damage[   92]   1.7% - Drugs[   75]   1.4% - Illegal immigration Are you willing to pay higher taxes to reduce the deficit? [ 3082]  57.8% - No[ 1750]  32.8% - Yes[  495]   9.3% - No Answer What is the media's bias leaning towards? [ 1917]  35.9% - Highly liberal[ 1266]  23.7% - Fairly liberal[  967]  18.1% - Fairly objective[  531]  10.0% - No Answer[  444]   8.3% - Fairly conservative[  141]   2.6% - Highly conservative[   59]   1.1% - Completely objective Which media is the most biased? [ 1707]  32.0% - No Answer[  978]  18.3% - CBS[  585]  11.0% - FOX[  522]   9.8% - NPR[  480]   9.0% - NBC[  440]   8.2% - CNN[  390]   7.3% - ABC[  223]   4.2% - C-SPAN The First Amendment... [ 2541]  47.6% - is an absolute[ 1476]  27.7% - is a standard but not an absolute[  514]   9.6% - No Answer[  320]   6.0% - shouldn't protect pornographers[  235]   4.4% - should only apply to law-abiding citizens[  167]   3.1% - shouldn't protect hate-mongers[   22]   0.4% - should be abolished What are your feelings on gun control? [ 1978]  37.1% - With VERY FEW restrictions, people should have the right to arm themselves[ 1234]  23.1% - I agree with the assault weapons ban & the Brady law, but no more regulation[ 1175]  22.0% - I support a full ban on handguns[  497]   9.3% - Anybody should have/carry whatever weapon they want[  433]   8.1% - No Answer How do you feel about healthcare? [ 2199]  41.2% - It desperately needs to be reformed, but not socialized[  839]  15.7% - We need more informative debate on the issue and less rhetoric[  747]  14.0% - It should be carefully socialized in order to cut costs[  692]  13.0% - Nothing's wrong with it - leave it alone[  473]   8.9% - No Answer[  374]   7.0% - I do not know enough to have an informed opinion Which political group is the least honest? [ 2410]  45.2% - Democrats[ 1750]  32.8% - Republicans[ 1166]  21.9% - No Answer Which political group is most serious about reducing the debt? [ 3208]  60.1% - Republicans[ 1356]  25.4% - No Answer[  761]  14.3% - Democrats Which party gets the most media coverage? [ 2388]  44.8% - Republicans[ 1810]  33.9% - Democrats[ 1128]  21.1% - No Answer Should the Capital Gains Tax be repealed? [ 2636]  49.4% - Yes[ 1464]  27.4% - No[  665]  12.5% - No Answer[  561]  10.5% - What is the Capital Gains Tax? Does "Trickle-down economics" work? [ 2370]  44.4% - No[ 2150]  40.3% - Yes[  803]  15.1% - No Answer What is your position on abortion? [ 2565]  48.1% - Pro-Choice[ 1308]  24.5% - Pro-Life[  925]  17.3% - Abortion should only be legal in cases of rape, incest or health of the mother[  525]   9.8% - No Answer What is your annual family income? [ 1610]  30.2% - $50k-$100k[ 1390]  26.1% - $25k-$50k[  945]  17.7% - No Answer[  476]   8.9% - $15k-$25k[  394]   7.4% - $100k-$200k[  352]   6.6% - Under $15k[  130]   2.4% - $200k+ In order to balance the budget, which programs would you cut or dramatically change? [ 3122]  58.5% - Politicians' salaries & benefits[ 2879]  54.0% - Campaign fund matching[ 2791]  52.3% - Welfare[ 2741]  51.4% - Entitlements[ 2583]  48.4% - National Endowment for the Arts[ 2108]  39.5% - Public Broadcasting Corporation[ 2079]  39.0% - Housing & Urban Development[ 2059]  38.6% - BATF[ 1741]  32.6% - Department of Defense[ 1677]  31.4% - Department of Education[ 1547]  29.0% - Medicare/Medicaid[ 1519]  28.5% - Federal Communications Commission[ 1480]  27.7% - Social Security[ 1477]  27.7% - Environmental Protection Agency[ 1424]  26.7% - CIA[ 1226]  23.0% - Department of Transportation[ 1044]  19.6% - NASA[ 1032]  19.3% - Student loans[  921]  17.3% - We do not need to take any harsh action; just reduce spending increases[  886]  16.6% - FBI[  831]  15.6% - Food & Drug Administration What is your position on a Balanced Budget Amendment? [ 2295]  43.0% - I support it[ 1987]  37.2% - We do not need an amendement to balance the budget; it's political lip-service[  528]   9.9% - I do not support it[  513]   9.6% - No Answer What is your position on term limitations? [ 2670]  50.0% - We do not need them at all; that is why we vote[ 2013]  37.7% - We need them for all of Congress[  534]  10.0% - No Answer[   57]   1.1% - We need them for the House of Representatives[   50]   0.9% - We need them only for the Senate If you were stranded on a desert island, who would you want to keep you company? [ 1123]  21.0% - Rush Limbaugh[ 1121]  21.0% - Bill Clinton[ 1089]  20.4% - No Answer[  932]  17.5% - A tribe of starving cannibals[  442]   8.3% - Pat Buchannon[  332]   6.2% - Ross Perot[  275]   5.2% - Bob Dole Questions, comments, suggestions? Contact us. Return to theHome Page. Copyright ©1996, /InterCommerceCorporation, All rights reserved worldwide Send comments to Webmaster@Survey.net WT02-B22-7IA060-000333-B024-151http://www.survey.net:80/pol3c.html 204.107.221.240 19970115055354 text/html 180100HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 15 Jan 1997 05:47:30 GMTServer: Apache-SSL-US/1.0.3+1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 179916Last-modified: Mon, 25 Nov 1996 20:26:45 GMT SURVEY.NET - 1996 Presidential Poll #3 - User comments (latest) Your source for information, opinions & demographics from the NetCommunity! ANNOUNCING: The Internet's finest interactive, totally-automated,immediate survey system. We can take any form and instantly create adynamic demographic database and show you the results as soon as youcomplete the survey! Previous comments archived: Part I,Part II,Part III,Part IV, Part V Political Survey #3 User comments Who will be president in 1996 and why? I'd like to see Harry Browne because He has the most logical ideas about how to end gov't dominance of the average person, whether it's welfare or taxes, immigration or foreign aid. Dole - I can trust him. Man! I leave out my vital stats (like FAMILY INCOME!), and how I feel about the Whitewater Scandal (how the hell should I know?), and this cgi-bin says I picked too many "No Answer"s. Well, vote Harry Browne and then promote your own goals with your own money. Harry Browne. I'm in love with the "Great Offer". uncompromising faith that the people have the right and responsibility to govern themself in an equitable manner. Harry Browne because he is the only candidate who will fix the problem Harry Browne is the only candidate who consistently advocates reduction of government in keeping with the spirit of the constitution. Harry Browne - because he will bring back freedom to this country. Freedom allows for love, generosity and limitless achievement for all people - including the poor, the handicapped, and the less fortunate.. Harry Browne Libertarian for President Bob Dole is the man. He has the character and ability to turn this country around. Bill and Hillary Clinton are two of the most corrupt, sleazy vermin to ever inhabit the White House. Even worse than LBJ. If Clinton is reelected we can look forward to losing more individual freedoms... right to own property will be taken away. We will lose our rights to own firearms and thusly lose our ability to stand up to a corrupt government. Harry Browne for President, he is right, government doesn't work, and has only served to make a mess of everything it has gotten its bureaucratic hands in. Elect Harry Browne!!! Vote for less gov't, not just less than Clinton wants! |||||||||||||||"Clinton wants to raise government spending by 20% over the next six years; I want to raise it 14%." -- Bob Dole ||||||||||||||| Howard Phillips - Christian, anti-abortion, no government interference Harry Browne best person Clinton....Don't like the Christian Coalition, Pat Buchanan Ralph Reed, Pat Robertson, Jerry Falwell... Bob Dole because h has honest intentions to make america better and stop government intrusion and bureacracy. bob dole because he has morals and tell us the truth not just what he thinks we want to here. Bob Dole Harry Browne Harry Browne>> get the government out of all facets of society. bob dole. the man clearly outlines the problems and he does not seem to be afraid to take positions which goes against the common political wisdom. clearly some drastic steps need to be taken in order to start a serious discussion on the major problems, like fed.budget, welfare reform, government reform, medicare/sss reforms. solutions to these problems require a person who has the "life experience". BOB DOLE , MAINLY BECAUSE OF THE FLAT TAX ISSUE I PAY MORE THAN MY SHARE SOMETIME 33 % AND WITH MY WIFES INCOME 60% AND THE IRS WANTS MORE THIS IS BECAUSE OF THE DEMOCRATES THE LAST 40 YEARS IN THE WHITE HOUSE HAVE LIFE NOT WORTH HAVE IT TAXES IS ALL WE CAN LOOK FORWARD TO . THINK ABOUT WHEN ALL OF YOU PUT CLINTON BACK IN AGAIN. Harry Browne -- Legalize Freedom I want to see Bob Dole as president because I feel he has the proper views, morals, and ideas to help the people of this country receive what is best for them. Leonard Peikoff -- he is an objectivist and philosopher. I would like for Harry Browne to become President, because he believes governement should be smaller. Bob Dole is trustworthy and has the governmental experience needed to be a competent President of the USA at this time. He wants to downsize government , balance the budget, decrease the deficit, give more freedom to people who contribute to the wellbeing of our society, turn around socialistic trends, support our currently weakened military, and stop the flow of illegal drugs into our country. All of this will benefit not only the future of our country, it will benefit the entire globe. I will not vote for anyone unless I am FOR that person. I'm 46-years old, and have voted for the "lesser of two evils" for the last time. The only man I WANT for President is Harry Browne. No other, because he is the ONLY candidate that has a clear vision on how to actually reduce the federal government. Harry Browne. The man is honest, principled, and would dismantle the nonsense in Washington. Can you imagine how much better your life would be without the income tax AT ALL? Harry Browne is the only candidate who will follow the Constitution's restrictions on the central gov't. Reducing its size to those levels will eliminate the need for an income tax, thus protecting an individual's ability to keep what s/he earns, and truly build wealth. Bob Dole -- He is a man of high moral convictions. I am more likely to believe what he says about an issue or policy than what anyone in the Clinton administration says. Bob Dole has served well and sacrificed much for the glory of America. Unlike Mr. Clinton who found a way around fighting for the very principles which he now sends others to die for. I believe Mr. Dole has the fortitude to do what is right for the whole of America not just a select few who happen to fall into certain seperatist grops estabished by the DNC over the past 40 years. Harry Brown/Jo Jorgensen - less government, less goverment power, rights back to the people and states. Though not very possible, I would like to see Harry Browne elected because of his reduction of government ideas and drug policies Harry Browne..............I believe. Harry Browne should be President because Clinton, Dole and Perot don't have the courage to face him in national public forum, and because both Democrats and Republicans have promised to bounce checks off the U.S. citizens for the next 7 to 10 years! Harry Browne Dole. Dole is an honest man which is more than what can be said about our current president. Harry Browne. Leadership aned honesty are very important chareactreristics in a presidential candidate. But most important is a clear and well defined sense of direction - Mission! Harry will reduce government and the national debt. Harry is a "Leader." Bill Clinton is a better choice than Bob Dole. Bill Clinton. He is a voice of moderation. I wish to see a revolution in 1996 with the abolition of the U.S. government as now constituted. Browne - the only principled one, and the only one who can turn the train around Bob Dole. He's experienced, honest. The Republican Party is the true party of reform. Ordinary Americans are more in line with the conservative values. This fact is suppressed by the liberal media. Harry Browne. He believes in restricting government to those powers specified by a strict interpretation of the constitution. He will dramtically downsize government. Harry Browne, because he pledges to eliminate 90% of federal government and return us to a Constitutional Republic Harry Browne. His solutions are workable, his reasons for not electing the others is correct, He is totally consistant in everything he says and does. Harry Browne - massive cuts in gov't and taxes. Clinton. I think that Dole is too old to get the job done for 4 years and I also think that the issue of getting rid of a senile Pres. has not been addressed. Harry Browne needs to win to return our country to the state in which it was intended to exist. We cannot continue to allow government to dictate how we spend our own money, how we treat our own bodies, or what we can and cannot do, especially when it affects no one but OURSELVES Harry Browne, because Government programs don't work. Forbes, because has qualities and priorities that i support, and his knowledge of the peoples needs I want to see Bill Clinton, basically because he's pro-choice, he'll probably get to add new Supreme Court members, he's more environmentally aware than the Republicans, and I DON'T want both Congress and the President to be Republican. Anyone but Clinton. A president should be honest and have integrity. Harry Browne--He stands for freedom and has written down (unlike Clinton or Dole) that he would not sign any bill that raises taxes, increases spending, increases the debt, or is too long to read in 10 days. Bob Dole should be the next president of the United States. Dole and Kemp have ideas that will truly help all americans and put our country back on the right track. Bob Dole would also bring respect back to the office of President. Harry Browne--He stands for freedom and has written down (unlike Clinton or Dole) that he would not sign any bill that raises taxes, increases spending, increases the debt, or is too long to read in 10 days. Hrry Browne - I want my country back! harry browne -- he is the only candidate i can find that has any concept of truth. all of the others are only playing their political games at our expense. Government has increased it's influence in our daily lives far beyond what is mandated by the 9th and 10th amendments of the Constitution (remember those?). I see both the Republican and the Democratic parties as being for more government, differing only in degree. I will vote Libertarian, not in the belief that Mr.Browne will get elected, but in the hope that the "mainstream" parties will see how many people vote for LP candidates and finally pay something more than lip service to reducing the size ofthe government. H. Ross Perot. This man knows the answers to America's economic woes. Also, on issues that he has been dubbed "unqualified" I believe that like any intelligent businessman he would surround himself with only the best advisors, making govt. more effective. When Clinton turned his back on his country he forfeited his right to lead the country. His administration is a disgrace. i want to see a person who will honor and uphold the Constitution of the United States, as they swear to do. Bob Dole because he is honest, morally upright. Harry Browne. One word: FREEDOM the economy stupid! BOB DOLE, HE IS A MORE HONEST PERSON AND DOES HAVE VALUES. Bob Dole would make an excellent president in 1996. He does have good morals and character bothe essential to the position of president. I believe his experiences in life would only strengthen his ability as president Harry Browne- He can get the govt. back to what the "FOUNDING FATHERS" believed it should be. Harry Browne, he will reduce the size of government I would like to see Bob Dole win and lower taxes so my business can prosper, and my family can have extra money. Harry Browne will help free us from oppressive government Harry Browne is the only one with a principled philosophy bob dole because decency counts I want Dole because The Clintons have shown a tendency to abuse power when they appear to be free from checks and balances. Dole, on the other hand, is too old to last more than one term. Bob Dole, he convinced me thru the debate. Harry Browne, we need some one who will cut moronic government laws. We also need someone who is not concerned with regulating our morality. Browne - less government Libertarian Harry Browne is the only candidate that doesn't want to steal my money! Bob Dole simply because he is republican. I fear Clinton/Gore will succeed and am not sure it makes much difference who is if they have been involved in politics very much. Harry Browne will bring the government to the size intended. President Clinton should be re-relected. Although he has become less liberal, he still has better ideas than Dole regarding which way our country should be going. Dole's idea of a 15% tax cut across the boards scares me and is not realstic. Bob Dole. 4 more years of Clinton is unfathomable. Harry Browne should be president. Why, he will reduce the size of the government and work at protecting our country. Harry Browne. He is the only candidate that recognizes the importance of limiting the federal government's powers. We need to return America to the people, allow them to act as free people, and hold them responsible when they violate the rights of others. Harry Browne will return freedom and responsibility to the American people. Harry Browne - less debt, less chaos! A President who recognizes Government is inherently evil and causes more problems than it solves. Harry Browne : he's the only candidate with the guts to rip out the power and confiscatory abuse of the fed. government by uncompromising reducing it to its constitutionally mandated functions and no more Bob Dole. It is my opinion that he will guide the USA to a more profitable future for my daughter and my grandchildren. Clinton on the other hand seems to be a well polished puppet. Dole. He is not my first choice *but* Clinton (and her husband) are crooked. They make Watergate look like a picnic Harry Browne Neither of the federally suppoted candidates are really willing to make any changes. They both want to keep their self-inherited regime to themselves, as a part of the corporate sponsored government that they have helped to perpetuate. Bob Dole because of his integrity. You may not agree with what he says, but you can believe that he will not lie to you. Bill Clinton bob dole because of experience, leadership qualities and most importantly a large sense of ethics and moral standards such as truth and honesty. Harry Browne, because he supports my views, and dupport freedom Harry Browne....Libertarian is our only answer... Clinton because I simply do not trust Bob Dole running our country. Harry Browne: His belief in personal freedom, and non interference by government match my own. Our current practice of butting in all over the world is counterproductive, and I believe President Browne would move the country to a nuetral status worldwide, saving us money, and making fewer enemies. Harry Browne represents change. Bill Clinton and Bob Dole are both "same old same old" Howard Phillips (http://www.USTaxpayers.org) because he's the only one that will uphold his oath to defend and uhold the Constitution Harry Browne. The Libertarian Party is THE party of the people. If you have 1/3 of a brain, you are libertarian. ross perot because im in love with that sexy man harry browne I want to see Bill Clinton as president in 1996. I think he is a moderate politician who can get things done by compromise/convincing others. Bob Dole/ He is not Liberal and wants less government! No Abortion and Supports the Death Penalty Harry Browne Becouse I want a change and anything is better than the other choices DOLE- TRUST HONEST TRUTHFUL Bill Clinton because he is bright and capable. Until our nomination process allows a Staesman to be nominated, it is unlikely that wecan do better. Bill Clinton. Bill Clinton Should be re-elected. Bob Dole because he has more integrity than Clinton, who is the only other real candidate. I just can't trust Clinton BOB DOLE !! HE IS GOOD FOR AMERICA AND WILL LEAD WITH HONOR AND DIGNITY. Bob Dole because he has more integrity than Clinton, who is the only other real candidate. I just can't trust Clinton Harry Browne because he is the only candidate who will actually reduce government to it's constitutional restrictions. Pres. Clinton, he has a good record the last four years, the economy is better than 4 years ago, and we are too. Browne--the current system is not working and we need to try something else. Bob Dole, because of his range of life experiences. I personally wish James Earl Jones would run. At least he is a decent, moral upstanding citizen. Bill Clinton, because a Conservative Presidency means low wages, welfare for the rich, environmental degradation, and a retreat on civil rights. I would like to see anyone but Clinton in the White House. I feel that he has abused his power and had made a mockery of the position. My preference is Bob Dole now that the race had narrowed. Bill Clinton, he has done a good job despite the smear tactics of the Reps. He supports public education, health care, a balanced budget. The Republicans represent wealthy people,not me. Clinton because he is willing to do what is right for the country not right for his party. He matches my views far better than Dole; pro choice, pro environment, anti gun, pro education, pro working man, keep the rich from getting richer. Clinton is the best of the choices bill clinton Clinton, younger, ok will forneign policy Bob Dole. I believe what he says. And I like Jack Kemp. Alan Keyes would be #1, Pat Buchanan #2, Bob Dornan #3, I GUESS Bob Dole #4 & I will vote for him because he has a shot at it. Need to get back to God - He has been taken out of our country (which it was founded on) and the US will eventually go down the tubes. Kindof like we are doing now. Go read the Bible and read Revelation to see what happens. Paul Tsongas, Jack Kemp, Steve Forbes, Liddy Dole, I think they all come across as genuine, and I like their ideas. Bob Dole. One simple reason..he's more honest. Harry Browne is the only viable alternative to the bi-partisan monopoly of our government. Bob Dole, he is mature intelligent and favors less government Harry Browne - 80+ years of the federal government taking control of increasing elements of society has failed. Let's try what the country's founders had in mind for a change. I'd like to see Bill Clinton re-elected. I believe Dole is a warmed-over George Bush, with a grating voice and old, failed ideas. Howard Phillips. He is a man of integrity. I would like a president that will change the way government operates . . . a different paradigm Bob Dole - Your poll does not touch on the country's greatest problem - the need for moral, responsible leadership. None of the questions touch on the basic moral and cultural declilne afflicting the country. Harry Browne, because, quite simply, government overstepped it's bounds decades ago. It's about time someone wants to put things right. Clinton because he s more in touch with America. Dole with a Republican Congress would only rape the American people! President Bill Clinton. I feel he is caring and greatly concerned about the children and those without a voice in our society. He wants to change the welfare system, but in a way that doesn't destroy the original purpose of the system. Reform yes destroy the system at the cost of the sick, hungry and the elderly no. The importance of public funds in the school system, not the voucher system for private schools. If the right wing of the republican party wants to brainwash their children fine, kep mine out of it. The catholic parents send their children to parochial school to teach them their religious values, the right-wingers should have to do the same. I suppose they're not willing to put their money where their mouth is though. Browne, The goverment is to big. The other candidates do not talk about reducing the budget, but reducing the % increase in the budget. Bob Dole. Bill Clinton is a disgrace to the U.S. Clinton has been caught in so many lies, how can anybody ever belive him? Harry Browne is the only candidate who supports individual liberty, individual responsibilty and less government. Harry Browne stands for many things that the today's youth also stands for. We need to promote the idea that there are more than two political parties and that a vote for the Libertarian party is not a "wasted vote". Harry Browne. His ideas are correct and any federal program can be handled at the state level with better control. clinton-he is the lesser evil of the two canditates Harry Browne. The Libertarian Party Platform makes more sense than any of the others. If God wanted all of our thoughts and actions to be dictated by a higher authority, I think he would have done it himself. Bob Dole, because it is my belief that he would be a better leader that Mr. Clinton Pres. Clinton can work with moderates of both parties. He will protect us from extremists like Gingrich. His openess and fairness give small business a "growth with responsibility" atmosphere. He will protect the environment, work for family leave, fairness in the workplace. Dole has no plan except the Republican "leave it alone and big business and the rich will do fine" attitude. Harry Browne would be my choice. Although some of his platform is deemed radical, the country needs this type of thinking to get it back on track and not continue with the current trends. The people no longer have faith in our government. Therefore you have the makings of a anarchistic mentality. We need to restore our civil and constitutional rights as well as increase the educational levels and stop taxing us to death. The two major parties no longer represent the people. They seem to only represent hemselves. As many elected officials have previously stated,"My most important task as an elected official, is to get re-elected." What does that tell you? Let's change the way government does business and truly make it a what the people want and NOT what the bureaucrates want. Harry Browne, since he's the only one talking seriously about reducing the size of government dole-best candidate Dole, In my opinion i can trust him to do what he says and i like what he is saying. Government and taxes both need to shrink if this country is to move ahead in the next century. Ralph Nader, who was excluded from your survey even though he's included on most ballots! Someone who is less influenced by the bucks big business churns out every election cycle. Bob Dole: best man for job Harry Browne because he is the only one of the candidates that will reduce the size and intrusiveness of the Fed. government, the major problem in our country. Harry Browne. The Libertarian Party is our only chance to turn this thing around. Clinton has introduced a whole new level of slime and Dole is perfectly willing to wallow in it. dole Dole Look at the alternative Somebody other than Clinton/Dole Dole because he is honest. I feel that bill clinton should be our next president because what america doesn't need is a empty conservative like bob dole. Bill Clinton Dole is nasty and too OLD !! Bob Dole. We need someone with standars not charisma. Clinton can not be trusted. He is a waffle. Bob Dole-morals above reproach-man of his word-stands by his decisions without requiring polls-By the way, I voted for Clinton in 1992 Bill Clinton, he's done a good job the last 4 years Harry Browne, because he is a solid Libertarian I would like to see a black woman as president! Harry Browne I believe that because he is honest, forthright, and decisive Bob Dole is clearly the better choice. He is pro-life, supports a balanced budget, and is against increasing govt. control across the board. Most important, Bob Dole does not waste his time on convoluted rhetoric in attempt to veil the problems of the country. The primary role of govt. is to protect the rights of the people, not to make them feel warm and fuzzy because of a proposed "bridge" to the future. I believe Bob Dole agrees with thes views. I feel that Harry Browne would be the the best choice for the United States simplely because we the people have our best intrests at heart, not our rulers who are able to gain the most by being corrupt. Indrustry will not let itself hurt its own workers. A return to the governing laws of our constitution is the best for a country "of the people, by the people, and for the people. Taxes are fairly new to the federal government, for years the federal government lived off the money collected by customs inan age with far less international trade. I feel that it is a shame that humans think that they need a master telling them what they need to give their money to, their morals to, and their freedom to. Harry Browne - Although there are a few things in the Libertarian platform that am not 100% in favor of, I can live with them. Everything else is what I believe we need to do. I think Clinton would be the best president for our country based on how we came through the past four years. Inflation has remained low and as a result our economy has been stable, with no significant disasters. Unemployment has become relatively low. And for a man that was supposed to have little exposure to foreign affairs, Clinton seems to have done a very commendable job on all fronts (Haiti, Bosnia, and the Middle East). He has had various difficulties with some of his cabinet positions, but h knows how to get the right people involved to resolve issues. I rest my case! Bob Dole has experience,is honest and will do everything in his power to do what he says. Bill Clinton clinton..he has tried hard and has made some progress in issues he cares about. i could not beleave dole said he signed his parents welfare checks, i'm puzzled about that, if he was in a position to be the signature on the check? that's the impression i got, i want a president who truly cares about family values. Bob Dole , stated aims and experience with system to change it, Clinton example health care mess Bob Dole because he will keep his word and not turn the WhiteHouse into election central Bob Dole; he will not veto balanced budget legislation passed by a Republican/conservative congress An honest person Harry Browne because he understands the proper role of government and the difference between charity and confiscation. Bob Dole- His vision for America is more long-term. His economic and social proposals benefit future generations,rather than the present. Bob Dole & republican congress Dole, I think he has good solutions to the problems of America and has military experience. He's seen a lot more than Clinton. Harry Browne, Less government is better. browne Harry Browne. America needs less government overall. Harry Browne. He will reduce the budget by half and let people use their resources unfettered by regulation to try to improve their lot. Bill Clinton - of this years choices, he's the least of the evils Harry Browne - We need a president who has the undergirding principles of individual freedom and responsibility, not one who dictates based on focus groups or the interest of PAC's. BOB DOLE BECAUSE HE HAS THE ONLY REALISTIC CHANCE TO BEAT BILL CLINTON. BILL CLINTON IS DISHONEST AND IS A DISGRACE TO THE OFFICE Clinton. Good ecologically A REPUBLICAN - THEY ARE THE ONLY PARTY LEFT WITH GODLY MORALS Colin Powell or Howard Baker or George Bush or Richard Lugar or Rubin Askew Harry Browne; less government, more responsibility on us. A person that is not corrupt and not a draft dodger. Dole has experience and will be faithfull to America, not like the great salesman we have in office today. Harry Browne. He is the only candidate who consistently states that we need less gov't, period. No revamped programs, no additional programs, no shifting money from one pot to the other, 100% less gov't. Bob Dole because he is doing this for the country. I think he is one of the most honest Presidential Canidates in a long time. Harry Browne, because we need a candidate with MORALS, ETHICS, *AND* COMMON-SENSE. bob dole fair muture experenced Bob Dole: honest, straightforward veteran Bill Clinton is my choice for president in 1996. He is progressive on most issues and has proven to be intelligent and practical in his decisions. He has rightfully placed women in positions of responsibility and I hope he will continue this trend. He seems to be in favor of separation of church and state which I consider very important, even vital to the health of our nation. He has helped to maintain safeguards for our environment as well as adding new protected lands to our public domain. I hop he will return to a strong social agenda, which will include equal rights for women and gays/lesbians/bisexuals. BOB DOLE WE NEED SOMEONE WITH SOME MORAL VALUES Harry Browne... Less governmental buerocracy Harry Browne, Because He would win the debates if allowed in them. As he demonstrated in last night's 3-party debate on C-span. Anyone but Bill Clinton because Character is important and he has demonstrated a lack of same. Character matters in all other relationships/occupations why not the presidency? I will vote for Bob Dole. I respect him. I would like to see a candidate who is willing to listen to the people because most people don't feel they are heard and therefore do nothing to try and change anything they don't like. I feel that we need a president who is going to revive the moral standards of this country. I would like to see emphasis on the family and growth within the family. I feel that openmindedness has it's place, but this country is going downhill fast because there are no moral standards being taught to our children. I lso feel that marijuana use should be legalized and regulated in the same way that alcohol is. If there cannot be this type of legalization, i feel it should be legalized for the purpose of medicine. Therefore, the person i would like to see as president is Harry Browne. Harry Browne. End big government. End government corruption. Eliminate PACs & Special intrest financial contributions. Bob Dole. Clinton & his administration is too corrupt. Bob Dole. He has a good record in the Harry Browne is the man. I support him because he is THE candidate who supports real, major decrease in the authority, spending and influence of government in all areas. Harry Browne, because I feel that the government is much too big. Bill Clinton because he has the abiltity to work with all sides, not as political as dole, compromises when necessary, some as a result some good ideas get passed instead of tabled. harry browne. he is the only candidate who can return this country to its constitutional roots of freedom , among other things. BOB DOLE-EXPERIENCE IN GOVERNMENT,IS A RESPECTABLE MAN, HAS AN UNBLEMISHED RECORD, SERVED HIS COUNTRY IN WARTIME AND DID NOT LEAVE THE U.S. AND ACTIVELY CAMPAIGN AGAINST HIS COUNTRY. TRULY UNDERSTANDS FOREIGN POLICY. bob dole. he is honest and trustworthy. he has had war experience and knows what he is asking when he commits troops. he belives in the american people. n Bob Dole should be president because he keeps his word. bob dole: I don't want to see Bill Clinton in the White House. He is incompetant and I feel he is leading this country in the wrong direction. His healthcare reforms will spell disaster, medicine will become socialized. Doctors will not be able to provide the high standard of care, leaving the American public as its victims. Bob Dole! I cannot see voting for a man who has dodged a draft and wants to send trops into battle!!! Elizabeth Dole And Hilary Clinton My ideology aligns most closely with the ideology of Harry Browne. I don't know that libertarianism is *the* answer, but I do know that the general principles it espouses -- those of individual liberty and personal responsibility -- are in line with my be Clinton has done a good job and has good ideas for the future. Bob Dole; He's a real man of honesty and integry and with great experience. Bill Clinton clearly won't last long as a result of Whitewater. Bill Clinton. He is not fanatical in either direction and this I believe is more representative of the American Population. jkljk I want Bob Dole as President as he is honest, direct, very experienced. His bridge "from" the past is the recognition that values and character do matter. Bob Dole you can trust him. Howard Phillips - He is the only 100% pro-life candidate on the ballots Pat Buchanan, because he shares more of my views than any other canidate While Bill Clinton is far from the ideal candidate he is far preferable to Bob Dole. While he may owe many special interest groups, at least, they don't include the Christian Coalition or any other right-wing religious groups. Bob Dole. He has a history of being very moderate. Bill Clinton actual actions reveal he is a raging liberal. I beleive we need to move slowly toward fewer nationally imposed solutions for local problems. Bob Dole- A man of his word,respected by Dem.and Rep. alike for his honesty. Unlike President who is unpredictable. ross perot due to his refreshing ideas on politics. Bob Dole. He is a man of character and integrity, which are currently lacking in the White House. I also agree with Bob Dole's view that lower taxes and smaller government are keys to economic growth. Howard Phillips-He wants to return gov. to its Constitutional role. Bill Clinton. Bob Dole's 15% cut is a joke. As long as a republican goes in the White House, the rich get richer! Take a look at Reagan's 8 years if you want some proof. Ross Perot - He is honest and will get the Job done - no pork Bill Clinton. Why? Because Ross Perot has no chance of winning and Bob Dole is too old. I think for all of the crisis' and scandal surrounding Clinton, he has done as good a job as anyone can accomplish in a four-year span. An Independent, Ross Perot or Henry Browne. Our existing main parties no longer serve the people, rather they serve domestic and foreign business interests. This is destroying our middle class. Based upon all the available information, I'd have to go with Harry Browne and the Libertarian platform. Clearly, the bi-partisan system isn't working anymore. Clinton is heading us right So far as I can tell, Harry Browne is the best candidate for the Presidency. Browne is the only candidate who has pledged strict and uncomprimising devotion to the terms of government laid out in the U.S. Constitution. Harry Browne's plan for federal government is the only proposed this century that matches those laid out by the framers of the Constitution. Bob Dole - Clinton has proven time and time again he can't be trusted or believed in. Bob Dole- He best represents the qualities of a President a NON-SOCIALIST AMERICAN Bob Dole/Jack Kemp: I don't trust Bill Clinton. As a democrate I feel he is a liberal with too many social programs in mind. Dole as a republican wants less gov't. Bob Dole. Because Clinton is not honest,as they say he says whatever the people want him to say. How can he be a good example for our children. Ralph Nader. He is an intelligent, honorable man who has worked hard for improving this country. Harry Browne Harry Browne is the only candidate who has ever READ the US Constitution. Harry Browne. We need to do something different.The present programs are not working. DOLE I THINK HE WILL BE BEST FOR USA Harry Browne is the best of the current crop, but it would've been better to have Ron Paul (1988 Libertarian, 1996 TX congressional candidate). BOB DOLE. He's honest and trustworth, tried and true, and a solid conservative. I want Bob Dole as my next president because he like many other republicans understand, that what we need is moral values reinstalled in today's society. The lack of moral values is the root of all problems we are facing today. Bill Clinton, Because the country is in better shape now than 4 years ago and because i believe bob dole is in the pocket of the tobacco companies and the christian coalition Dole. He is honest, and our paychecks have to much taken out for supporting the federal goverment. Bob Dole will reduce goverment growth and increace our actual spendable income. Harry Browne because I believe in the basic Libertarian principle that power must be taken away from the government and given back to individuals to make their own choices and be responsible for the consequences of those choices. Harry Browne because he is for less government I wouls like to see Harry Browne elected President because the government is way too big. Browne is the only candidate that actually wants to cut the size of the government. Alan Keyes, because he understands the real problems with the solutions and he understands that the only possible way to help America is to return it to God. Harry Browne - Libertarian philosophy puts the most control to the individual. Bill Clinton wants to grow government 20% in the next 6 years. Bob Dole wants it to "only" grow 14%. Ross Perot wants to study the problem (something he could have done for the past 4 years). Harry Browne wants to REDUCE government by 50% in one year. My vote is for Harry Browne. Harry browne. we've had the same 2 frames of mind in the white house for entirely too long. we need somebody with new ideas. unforunately, i fear that the majority of the VOTERS in this country aren't ready for new ideas. Clinton Ihave never been better off than the past four years Clinton. He has provided us with economic stability during his term as president.Although I'm still fairly young, never before have I seen economic reports that were almost entirely good.In addition I am scared by the opposition. Bob Dole, He has a proven track record of getting bi-partisan support on tough issues. He also has the respect of his senate peers both democrat and republican, something Bill Clinton doesn't have. Bill Clinton - he represents the notion that government can make a positive difference in our lives. Dr. John Hagelin because he and his party exhibit common sense and humanitarian values. In addition, Hagelin is extremely intelligent and believes highly in the power of education. Harry Browne is the only real choice if you want drastically smaller government. Even Hagelin, Phillips, and Nader want a larger government for their special programs. Their programs may seem more altruistic than Clinton or Dole, but they are still government solutions and GOVERNMENT DOESN'T WORK!! President Clinton is that much talked about but oximoronic neo liberal creation, a "New Democrat." There is no such thing. We need a clean sweep of the congress and the White House. Republicans, although highly flawed, can do what is good for the country. Democrats have outlived the New Deal and need to go. Thanks someone who cares about the country and who will force the correct issues I will vote for Clinton. He's done a good job, and has actually shaped the future of the Democratic Party as more centrist than at any time since it was radicalized during the 70s. Dole is rather a sorry figure, who has no new idea, and is merely serving up a failed tax policy. Bill Clinton. He needs the next four years to complete plans he has already begun. I just believe he's the best man, along with all of his advisers, to lead the country into the 21st Century. Clinton I feel that he really cares about all of us not just one party Bill Clinton due to his understandable and clear program for the future. President Clinton. The economy has improved during his administration, the budget deficit has been reduced. While he has not done everything he wished, he has attempted most all if not all. Whitewater: I believe if there was proof of President or Mrs. Clinton doing illigal acts the special prosecutor would act. The press and the Republicans are hounding them to death. Bob Dole because the nation cannot survive Clinton for 4 more years. Harry Browne; the best man for the job. And his coattails will elect more Libertarians to other offices, even though he himself won't win (but should!). a man whith good ethics Harry Browne. Government governs best which governs least. Power should rest in the hands of the individual. Bill Clinton. Republicans LIE. All they really want to do is CUT TAXES ON THE RICH. Otherwise, they do nothing. Clinton is the better choice by far. Harry Browne - IDEAS! I'm voting Libertarian this year for the first time. I want a smaller, less intrusive government. The only candidate who is promising me this is Harry Browne. Ralph Nader Bill Clinton. Primarily because the other candidates are terrible and couldn't lead a flock of sheep to the pasture much less the strongest nation in the world. I want to see Bill Clinton elected president to prevent the Republicans in the legislature from having carte blanche to dismantle programs that aid the needy. I don't really care how big or small the government is. We should insist on all the government that we need. I also hope that Clinton will get the chance to appoint Supreme Court judges to replace those who may retire during the next four years. Powell - character, leadership, consensus, background, moderation, faith in the U.S. Mr. Bob Dole, he is a man with honor, humility, humor, honesty, and he will be able to lead this nation with his head held high with no disgrace attach to him or those who serve with him. He will also be a stronger and more reliable world leader that other nations can respect. He will achieve economic growth and a fairer, flat tax code for the middle class who have carried the burden of our failed government socialist programs. He will also end the education mess that we have now where the school ditricts receive alot of money for each child in school but does not seem to reach the child and his need for a great education, there is much waste and administative costs that do not trickle down to our most precious resource- OUR CHILDREN!! He will also balance our budget and start to clean up the waste from our federal government. He will save Medicare before the government lets it go broke. He is the best man to be PRESIDENT! Bob Dole because as a man he is superior in every way to Bill Clinton. Bill Clinton because I feel that he has done a great job taking into consideration where the country was when he took office in 1992. BOB DOLE TRUST INTEGRTY I would love to see a man or woman who is willing to stand up for what they belive is right even if it is not the most popular stance at that given moment. I think Clinton is the best of a number of bad options. Pernicious the Musquodoboit Harbour Farm Cat, along with his amanuensis and general factotum Barnstead, is The Only Logical Choice in 1996. Bob Dole......Although I don't agree with everything he stands for, I do believe he is much more honest than Clinton. I don't think you can believe anything Clinton says in a campaign. I feel he has earned the name "Slick Willy". My opinion is that the na Clintons advancing their social issues to detriment of US. Harry Browne for less government control of our lives Clinton-effective; for education; a leader I would like to see Harry Browne for president, since he has the most consistent platform and the most credibility. i like clinton, he understands a common man problem A Libertarian i like clinton, he understands a common man problem Harry Brown - We need to make government as small as posible not grow it. ralph nader Clinton, because Dole just doesn't seem to "get it." In the debate last night he just talked rhetoric... let's move to the future please. Clinton, he is thoughtful and articulate and has shown that he has the best interests of the US at heart. Clinton, to continue moving in the appropriate direction. hillary clinton hillary clinton dole, he's trustworthy Any thrid party candidate; preferably Nader. Bob Dole. Because Clinton must go. I am also very embarrased to have voted for him in'92 Browne. It has been far too long that the actual majority has been manipulated into the moral majority. There are so many people forced daily to break some morally biased law just to pursue their constitutional right to pursuit of happiness that confidence and pride are at an all time low. I feel the survey would be much better if it took the issue of the president more seriously. Of the questions asked my answers would be 11. gov. should not mandate high morals, but should definately set the example of high morals. 12. Our country does not have one major problem, but many problems that need to be addressed. 13. Qualities of president: RESPECABLE, strong character, no-nonsense attitude. And no - the president doesn't need to be pretty to look at. Of the choices available Bob Doe will get my vote. Harry Browne as president would blow away the cobwebs of sixty years of statist, I'm-from-the-government-and-I-know-what's-best-for-you Washington arrogance. It's high time for the people of this nation to take back what the career politicians and lobbyists have corrupted. Howard Phillips of the US Taxpayers Party, supports eliminating the IRS and abortion, as well as returning to the Constitution as basis for public policy. promises kept..taxes lowered..government to be downsized!! DOLE ... MORE TRUST WORTHY ... REDUCE THE SIZE OF GOVERNMENT... BALANCE THE BUDGET...MAINTAIN STRONG MILITARY...BETTER IN FOREIGN POLICY Harry Browne because he is only candidate offering a big change and not a rerun of previously ineffective policies. ABCDP - Anyone But Clinton, Dole, or Perot. I stand by Democratic social views, however I would vote for Bob Dole because I trust him more, that's the bottom line. DOLE A MAN OF WISDOM & INTEGRETY WHICH A WORLD LEADER SHOULD PORTRAY Harry Browne. Only he will work for smaller government (rather than smaller rate of growth). The only income tax should be a 0% income tax. There are no substantial differences between Democrats and republicans so we need another choice. Bill Clinton because he has worked to achieve his campaign promises of the 1992 election. He supports measures that will help the family and improve education. Bob Dole is too old to understand the concerns of my generation (I am 20). Dole - He is trust worthy, the only man on the ticket who can lead the US into the next century with a vision that will not hurt the traditional family Clinton: Things are better now than before and Dole has been against everything that has made things better. I would like to see Bob Dole as our next President. He is a man of integrity, vision, and leadership. He is trustworthy and also have the ONLY good economic plan for the future of America. Dole. Best choice to restore morality, responsibility & integrity to the USA. Bob Dole because he believes in less taxes and less Government intervention. Harry Browne - It has become obvious over the years that the United States is quickly slipping down the slope of Socialism. The government has taken the position that it is acceptable to take away the rights and liberties of the American people in order to achieve a "more balanced" society - to take money and property from those who work hard for it and give it to those who don't. Clinton has been very weak as leader Bill Clinton - it's all about image Clinton. The country is stronger now than four years ago, lets stay on track. President Clinton should be re-elected because he has done a good job for Americans during his first term and I think his proposals for second term are good ideas for this nation. He is the only candidate who has a plan for the next four years for education, crime reduction, keeping the economy growing, and keeping America strong and free. Bill Clinton - The republicans want to help the rich get richer at the expense of the middle class. The republicans appear to be turning their backs on the poor and the elderly. President Clinton. He has the countrys best interest Bob Dole, because he will tell us the truth. Bill Clinton. Because the country is on the right track economically, emotionally, and politically in the world. Harry Browne is my ideal and will vote for him. I would vote for Bill Clinton to only provide a check and balance on a Republican Congress. Bill Clinton will win so there is no need for me to waste my vote on him. Ross Perot We need a third party to upset the control interest groups have over gov. second choice is Bob Dole it's time to get the Draftdodging Pot smoker out of office He should have never been allowed to be there in the first place. Dole is more trustworthy and serious contender who want less burden for the people. I want to see Browne for President, Because he's Pro Second Amendment, and is more realistic in his views After a shaky start Bill Clinton has decreased unemployment, reduced the deficit by over 50% and been a force for peace in the world. this is not the time to reverse course, Harry Browne, he is the only candidate who proproses true change and respect for the rights of the individual. Bob Dole/ Experience and Integrity Harry Browne. I was going to vote for Bob Dole, but I think Browne offers a choice who will get the federal government out of our lives in most areas that it has no business in. Bob Dole because he has character and that is the essence of the soul. He cares about the people and trusts God. He is a born leader! God bless him! Dole for president. Clinton talks from both sides of his mouth. He makes empty promises to whatever special interest he is addressing at the moment. We have known that in AR for a long time. He was elected governor of AR by our uneducated rural voters. Harry Browne. We need change in our society and he will bring it. He is the only candidate that I can agree with on at least 80% of the issues Howard Phillips-Us Taxpayer's Party. He has the makings of a true leader. Dole! He is a decent, honorable, honest, compassionate and intelligent man. He has REAL compassion for the American people. He beleives in freedom and self reliance. He shares all of my convictions and values. He understands basic economics and human nature. He also has a very good grasp of foriegn relations. He will restore the tarnished image of the White House and he will be a role model for our kids. Ralph Nader. He's unbeholden to any interests for campaign financing and he wants to see us ALL participate in government Bob Dole...He may not look or talk pretty, but he has integrity! I need a President I can trust, and you can trust Bob Dole to not only do what's right but act it also! GO BOB GO! Bob Dole...He may not look or talk pretty, but he has integrity! I need a President I can trust, and you can trust Bob Dole to not only do what's right but act it also! GO BOB GO! Bob Dole, I can trust the guy...I can't say the same for Mr. Clinton. I want less government. Government is non-productive, and does not produce a tangible product of worth or value. We need less government to spend less. What else is there. BOB DOLE Bill Clinton and Al Gore will win hands-down. I am sick to death of hearing and (reading) remarks bashing the President for not fighting in a war that many Americans felt was unjust and immoral. MANY young men of his (and my) generation chose to be consiencious objectors. Bob Dole and his generation were responsible for sending men of MY generation to Vietnam in the first place!! And he has the NERVE to turn around and criticize Bill Clinton for not going!? As for Bill Clinton's marijuana 'use' -- ho has the right to criticize what a generation of people did over 20 years ago?! Sounds to me like the 'generation gap' is still alive and well!! I am really a libertarian conserative but that was not a choice, so I said I was somewhat conservative. I would like a president who is fiscally conservative and pro-life on abortion. It is preferrable that he/she be moderate to libertarian on immigation, military, and drug policy. I will support Dole in November. Bob Dole because I agree with the 15% tax cut and banning the drugs. Bob Dole: Better choice of the two. Clinton is an absolute liar who cannot be trusted. Harry Browne...it's time. bob dole because he has integrity and experience and is a true american Ask the right questions! You're trying but you're still not there! rliberty@unm.edu Bob Dole. We feel Mr. Dole will keep his word and balance the budget, save Social Security, bring Ethics back into Government. Dole is the better man. I'm from Arkansas and I wouldn't trust Clinton for anything. Conservative candidate, whoever it is, we've had enough lies! Harry Browne is, as far as I can tell, the best qualified person for president. He understands that government does not work, and actually as answers to the problem of cutting it down to size! Bob Dole. Bob Dole has lived through many of the problems that the majority of Americans have been through, and this lets him relate more to the general public. Harry Browne - Libertarian: Less government, more freedom. Bob Dole. He tells the truth. He has the experience. Win,Bob! I would like to see Harry Browne as the next president because the Libertarian party stands for what I believe in and strongly supports our constitutional rights. Harry Browne. He says "Get government entirely out of Social Security. Sell Federal Assets and buy private annuities for senior citizens dependent on Social Security". Harry Browne: the other candidates (clinton&Dole) stand for more of the same Harry Browne. He is the only candidate that wants to reduce the role of government in our lives. He will follow the constitution. He will reduce taxes and cut spending. My choice is HARRY BROWNE: he understands the proper role of the Federal Government under the Constitution: protect lives and property from violence and coercion. I cannot vote for Dole or Clinton - they BOTH waffle on all major issues, and BOTH believe Government should control people, not the other way around! Ross Perot has some valuable qualities and experiences that are needed in the White House, but I believe that he would be a better Vice President. We need someone who has dealt with the political realm a little more. Bill Clinton is not the answer to our problems, but there is clearly no right choice in this election. Bob Dornan, He's the only man in office that would bleed red, white, and blue. He has never compromised his issues that I have seen him debate on C-span. He is prior military and a hard working blue collared american. Bob Dole Harry Browne - because he will put an end to the endless intrusion of government into our personal lives Clinton: Has an opinion mind and tries to do the right thing Harry Browne. He is the only candidate who is serious about cutting the government spending, taxes and government intrusion in our lives. Bill Clinton has done an acceptable job. I'm for giving him another four yearsl. Harry Browne '96 - because he supports a return to a limited national government constrained by the Constitution and the Bill of Rights. Harry Browne. Even if just a few of the Lib. planks are acted on, there will be an improvement in economic terms for our kids' future. Maybe it will be another "Shot heard around the world" in favor of personal responsibility, enterprise, and freedom, as opposed to socalism. Clinton, His record, he has attempted to do what he promised in 1992. Makes me feel I can believe him now. Bob Dole, has good values, experience in areas we need, a good knowlegable wife that will an aide not a henderince Harry Browne. Both Dole and Clinton have no persona convictions. Not only Does Browne (and a few others) have personal convictions, but they are similar to mine. Harry Browne because this country needs a strong tug back from the status quo of government intrusion into every aspect of our lives. Bob Dole, because Clinton is a pot-smoking, draft-dodging, womanizing, flag-burning, amoral, redneck with a wife who would sell her mother's soul to the devil for 10 bucks, GO BOB!!!! Bill Clinton because he might be making a few mistakes right now, but he'll get better at it. I just hope that he doesnt cut on education. Clinton is a crook Dole should win I want to see Bob Dole elected President because we have to restore integrity to the office and we need real leadership libertarian, because the republicans and democrats are both full of shit Harry Browne -- because he is the only candidate who has pledged to drastically shrink the size of government. President Clinton, & I'm sad to say, more as a lesser of two "not so goods". There is part of me that trusts Bob Dole's generation more than mine (I was born in 1948), but I worry about the influence of the religious right & the conservative COngressional Rebublicans. I was pleased with the selection of Kemp & might support him for the top spot, but he disappointed me by towing the Republican nativist line at the convention. I want to see Bill Clinton for president because I believe he has shown that he addresses the concerns of women and families by passage of such legislation as the Family and Medical Leave Act and an increase in the minimum wage. There has also been some much needed health care reform. He is also committed to seeing that our children receive a good education. In addition, I believe he will continue to make good appointments to the Federal Courts and Supreme Court. Dole. More political experience, wants balanced budget, high set of moral standards and ethical contuct, experience in foreign police harry browne.i think that he could be a good leader, and has good ideas that will make the real citizen able to live there lives as they see fit. Harry Browne - because he would really shake up the goverment and get it back to what it should be doing Bill Clinton, because I believe he has both the intellectual ability and the moral fiber to make a real difference for future generations. He has the ability to create change, at a grass roots level, which can reestablish for America the basic precepts of democratic ideology. Bill Clinton, because I believe he has both the intellectual ability and the moral fiber to make a real difference for future generations. He has the ability to create change, at a grass roots level, which can reestablish for America the basic precepts of democratic ideology. Harry Browne!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!! Bill Clinton, because I believe he has both the intellectual ability and the moral fiber to make a real difference for future generations. He has the ability to create change, at a grass roots level, which can reestablish for America the basic precepts of democratic ideology. Browne-principles-morality-big gov't sucks The only candidate committed to reducing our bloated federal government is Harry Browne, Libertarian candidate. The Rep. and Dem. candidates only talk about slowing the growth of our out-of-control federal bureaucracy, but Harry Browne will reduce the government to it's rightful size -- giving it only those powers as set forth in the US Constitution. In the transition to a 3rd wave society we need much more freedom. I will vote Libertarian. Harry Browne, empirical evidence shows government exacerbates problems far more than it relieves them. Browne because he supports the constitution. dole, bacause we need less government which in turn would reduce the cost of governing. We need to revise all social programs to enforce more individual initive. I think that the republicans are the only ones honestly favoring this. Harry Browne, the only candidate that knows govmt doesn't work Howard Phillips of the USTaxpayers Party, the only nationwide truly conservative party... Harry Browne......We need MUCH LESS government intrusion Probably BILL CLINTON because dole is old and his views are a direct contradiction to mine. I like Forbes but he dropped. CLINTON has been pretty good and other than what the media has blown out of proportion, he is pretty good. Dole is my choice. Restore honor and integrity to the White House. The Clinton administration is a disgrace to our country. Harry Browne - We must restore the liberties that this country was founded upon Vote Libertarian to restore our Constitution Dole/Kemp because there is no other choice Focus on entitlement reform by either following the recommendations of the Concord Coalition, or by 1) moving more retiree's from Medicare to Managed Care and 2) changing Social Security from pay-as-you-go to a national pension and envestment system. Basically, I would really like experienced men in politics who have nothing to lose to be president: ie Paul Tsongas as an example. Bill Clinton deserves re-election; he's not perfect but his middle of the road approach and effective reducation of the operating deceift is very important. I want anyone but Clinton to be elected in 1996. The president is arrogant, self-righteous, dishonest, corrupt, disloyal, unreliable, cowardly and totally corrupt. And her husband is worse. Clinton. Why else? Dole should have presided in 1952, not 1996! Ralph Nader understands the problems facing Americans today. He is the only candidate so far that makes much sense. Bill Clinton is by far the person with the best understanding of the contemporary scene who has the desire and the abiity to search for solutions for bringing the United states into the 21st century. Bob Dole, because he has wisdom, common sense, morals, experience, good ideas, he cares, he has so much to offer, is stable, won over the greatest of hardships, is a good man, he makes me feel that I'll be safe with him in charge, he's presidential, qualified, a man of his word, funny, has a wonderful wife and because he's truly the better man and the man who will lead us as a wise father would his child, because the country needs him and I need him to bring back true integrity and dignity to the WhiteHouse. He is strong and kind and has a good heart and I want more than I can say for him to be the next president. Dole, because I voted for Clinton last time and he lied to me! Bill Clinton, because he's actually smart, and Bob Dole is not. Harry Browne, the only candidate with new ideas and an honest belief in his own positions. Clinton. Dole, because he is a man of proven leadership and integrity Bill Clinton because he is more open-minded. Ralph Nader. He is a committed focused individual for the American Way. He really believes that democracy is the best system and that it can be made better. If we don't work with what we have our country will be consumed by anarchy--sooner or later. Bill Clinton. The alternative is too horrible to even consider. I would like to see Harry brown become president, because he, and the Libertarians are the only group of citizens who truly intend to reduce the size of federal government to a minimum, and end the legalized robbery known as income tax. Dole -- Democrats give too much to undeserving freeloaders Dole. Integrity. Experience. Decisionmaker. Truthful for the most part. Harry Browne. He is the only candidate who will actually reduce the size of government. Bill Clinton. Harry Browne, the only candidate I believe would actually reduce the size of government. clinton. the least worst among those running Harry Browne, to get the federal government out of interference which it has no Constitutional justification. Thomas Jefferson would be appalled at the mess today! Harry Browne because he is the ONLY one who will return government to its Constitutionally granted powers. Ralph Nadar. He agrees with the Green Party values of community-based economics and ecological wisdom. So do I. Perot, I believe he has the interest of American citizens in his heart, and mind, and he is a good manager! Bob Dole, because he has moral standards, unlike Bill CLinton who does not Dole because he is honest, trustworthy and a true leader with honor Bill Clinton: He is my only choice, since I am a openly gay man. Bill Clinton. He is more in touch with the America of 1996. BOB DOLE, HE HAS BEEN WILL LIKED AROUND WHITE HOUSE IN PAST YEARS. WAR VETRAN, UNDERSTANDS FOREIGN POLICY BETTER THAN CLINTON OR ANY CANDIDATE AS FAR AS THAT GOES. Harry Browne. Because I think BOTH major parties have been in power too long and we need someone with NEW ideas and who owes no 'favors'. Clinton or Dole represent NO CHOICE as both are fundamentally the same. I'd like to see Harry Browne as President as I his positions are most closely allied with what I believe of all the candidates. I won't vote for someone whose beliefs or affiliations are largely contrary to mine. I want a President that shares many of my ideals and beliefs. Big goverment is too big. Get off my back. Let people make it on their own. Pat Buchanan - he's consistent, and has convictions; which cannot be said of the others. Harry Browne for president.No real difference between Dem's & Rep's.Under each,My taxes keep going up,Government keeps growing & my Constitutional rights keep shrinking I would like to see Al Gore or another centrist/progressive Democrat, who preserves the best of the New Deal/Great Society, but also has the ability to listen to fresh ideas and welcome constructive humane reforms. forbes has some new and innovative ideas and wants to tackle the defecit Harry Browne is the only candidate who will actually REDUCE government intrusions in both our moral and economic lives. jack kemp, because he is what thiscountry needs, a strong, independent, intellegint person with good morals Bob Dole/Jack Kemp. The left viewpoint has place us on the road to destruction. We cannot afford to keep spending more than we bring in, and taxes cannot and should not be raised to accomodate the hugh spending increases. We American people need our money back. We know how best to spend it. A tax cut is the only vaccine that can help heal our sick economy. Even though I am voting for Bill Clinton - which I feel is the lesser of the political evils, I would really like to see Ralph Nader or someone that really identifies with the average American overtaxed person. Harry Browne is the only candidate who will try to end the run-away growth of cradle-to-grave government "benefits", taxes, and regulations. bob dole, experience, dedicated and not a draft dodger! HARRY BROWNE Government is TOO BIG, TOO INTRUSIVE, BENT ON COMPLETELY MICRO MANAGING OUR LIVES and NEEDS TO BE FIXED. Howard Phillips - US Taxpayers Party less government, constitutional base, preservation of life, return to individual responsibility Harry Browne ... best chance at reducing government interference in the personal lives of every American. First off, I would like to have all new candidates. I would also like equal coverage for any and all parties involved. I feel that we need a business man to run this country and not someone who is looking to change everyones personal lives. Bob Dole- Most suitable and best qualified candidate Harry Browne, because no other candidate cares one bit about our freedoms. Harry Browne/a man of principles, his word is his bond. Harry Brown, because he is the only candidate who has realistic answers for our most pressing problems. Harry Browne - LESS GOVERNMENT. NOW! Harry Browne He believes in the constitution. John Kerry, because he is a moderate liberal with a clean skeleton-free record. This spotless record allows him to promote his issues without a permanent specter of scandal. He is also an effective speaker who can bear the mantle of leadership. Harry Browne. We need to redefine the role of the federal government from what it is today to what it is described as in the Constitution. Bill Clinton, it's better to deal with someone who has already had expierence so that we can present a more united face to the outside world. HARRY BROWNE - Because the two primary warring Parties have created a gridlock in our society that is hurting the economy, the environment, and in general: our LIFE, LIBERTY AND PURSUIT OF HAPPINESS. Now, more than ever, we need to scale back the bureaucratic governmental mess that is draining our economy. There are many ways of restructuring the government to balance the budget and improve the morale of the U.S. citizenry. The Libertarians have presented the most viable solutions on the policalmarketplace. Harry Browne is the only candidate that has the correct outlook to get the Federal Government back in Washington and out of our lives. Howard Phillips. U.S. Taxpayers Party. Return to constitutional goverment. Get the federal gov. out our lives. State and Local Government is more responsive to our needs. JACK KEMP BECAUSE HE CAN UNIFY RACIAL AND ECONOMIC GROUPS FOR HE COMMON GOOD. HE BELIEVES IN WHAT HE DOES. Personally I want to see Bob Dole as our next President because I feel that he is the best man for the job. He is a man of strong character who loves this country and will work for all its citizens so that everyone is able to obatin the American dream. He has given a lot to this country throughout his life and I feel that he has proven himself as an outstanding leader and American. He is without a doubt the best and most qualified man for the job. Bob Dole He'll return govt by the people for the people I support Harry Browne because he is the only one who recognizes that the federal government has outgrown any justifiable purpose and has caused great damage to society as well as all other political institutions. Browne because he believes that government doesn't work Harry Browne because he's right: Government doesn't work. We have given too much power away to bureaucrats and it is time for us to grow up and learn to be personally responsible. Harry Browne. He's the one for MUCH LESS government. I became sick of the world in general about 6 months ago for a couple of hours. I am no longer sick of the World, but I really don't like poliutics AT ALL anywhere. I think Bob Dole is the best of the offerings. dole. I agree more with his moral issues. Harry Browne. Government is too big and has too much control over my life!! I am voting for Bob Dole because I believe he is an honorable man that I can trust unlike the lying, immoral, spineless, dope-smoking, liberal Slick Willy. Clinton is a classic liberal pretending to be a moderate. The future of our society depends upon reining in government taxes and spending. If we can limit the amount of money government has, we can automatically limit its excesses of power. Government is to provide national security, freedom to be productive and creative, basic education, and little else. Bob Dole or Bill Clinton? Clinton is carrying too much baggage, whether preceived of real. Somelthing is wrong, and the truth will eventually come out. We don't need another Watergate. Dole. because among the two he is more honestand beleivable Bob Dole. Simply put: he embodies more of my beliefs than Bill Clinton. I think Perot is joke and certainly wouldn't want him as president. Harry Browne,because the libertarian platform most closely Bill Clinton Bob Dole - more upstanding and presidential than Clinton could ever be. Harry Browne... government doesn't work and Browne is the only one with the guts to say so. Bob Dole is my Hero Harry Browne Harry Brown Harry Browne - he's our last chance Harry Browne. Intellectal integrity. closest to my own beliefs. Howard Phillips is the only candidate who truly understands and would honor the intent of the U.S. Constitution Harry Browne. While others talk about an end to the era of big government, he's the only one who will actually work for a constitutionally limited government. Bill Clinton becasue I feel he has done well in the first four years and he has done some good things for our country as well as for other countries. I feel that if we give him another four years that he will continue to do the best job that he can and I think he will find a way to work more with the Republicans to accomplish more. Ross Perot, because he is a leader, not a cheater. The other two are crooks. I don't know why Clinton the obvious crook is still in there. Bob Dole because the direction President Clinton and his administration is taking us is totally off track. Too much government is the main reason our country is slipping downward in categories like healthcare, business, and education. We need to backtrack about twenty years and turn down a different road and I believe Bob Dole and the consertative thinking is the best way to get there. A person of integrity. Harry Browne. He believes in individual freedom, personal responsibility, and freedom from government interference in our lives. I believe in those things too. cuomo Harry Browne - Eliminate taxes, get the govt out of the bedroom & boardroom Harry Browne, because government doesn't work, and he is the only candidate I see who MEANS what he says when he desires to reduce the gov't back to its minimal size. I'd like to see Harry Browne elected President in '96, because I think it would send a message to both ruling parties that "The era of Big Government is over" is more than just a slogan. THE G.O.P. is Moral?...J. Edgar Hoover, Joe McCarthey, Richard Nixon, Spiro Agnew, Rat F***ing of Ed Musky, Olie North, Ed Meese, Iran-Contra, S&L Scandal, Willie Horton, Ronny Forgot, Read George`s Lips, Just Say No. JUST SAY NO to the Grand OLD Party!!!! Harry Browne! Cut the federal government way down... it is presently too pervasively powerful, and showing no signs of slowing down or scaling back any time soon. Only Harry Browne intends to make that happen! Bill Clinton-I think he is doing a good job! Bob Dole, Because He stands for strong moral beliefs and is not involved in scandals like the man in office is now. he is trust worthy and has more experience than Clintons whole staff. President Clinton. He cares about issues that the super-rich don`t even know (or care) exist. 4 more years! A non-liar who will reduce taxes and get goverment out of my life... I want more employment and opportunities to get housing and education I like the fiscal ideas proposed by Steve Forbes and believe that they would result in the reduction of the budget and subsequently the deficit/debt. Harry Browne because he is the only one who will give us less government. Harry Browne - not just a libertarian but a sharp cookie Harry Browne, He has good ideas and a plan to carry them out. Harry Browne, he will reduce government which we need to do and he will shake up congress and the senate. Harry Browne is the only way to send Washington DC a message Somebody who really believes in the Consitution bright,energetic, committed, tolerant and balanced. Harry Browne - the only candidate supporting individual freedom Harry Browne- he knows that govt doesnt work Harry Browne, for less government, balance the budget now!, less tax, less gun control, get government out of our personal lives and out of heath care. Bill Clinton. He has a vision for the future and he is in tune with the average American. Harry Browne -- the only candidate I trust to work for a reduction in government involvement in every aspect of our lives. Bob Dole - Clinton and his socialist democrat allies are determined to convert the country to socialism. The conservative Republicans will prevent this from happening. I want Harry Browne to be president because he is the only candidate that will actually reduce the size of Government. Browne will let the free market be free (sung a la Ethel Merman) "There's NO government, like no government, like no government I know. Everything they do should be repealing, cause we know that government does not work. Politicians everywhere who are stealing, leave you that feeling, that you've been took ...." Harry Browne. Socialism has failed. The poor are still poor, the rich still rich, and the middle class still stupid. Let's return to a market ecomomy and a government that governs best governs least. Ross Perot, I think we need to get rid of the extremely corrupt Republicans and Democrats and dump NAFTA and GATT Harry Browne because the Constitution must be restored. Harry Browne. The libertarian party reflects the founding fathers vision and the intent of the constitution. Both major parties have abdicated their trust responsibility to the American public by taking the easier softer way and winning votes by fostering greed, fear and irresponsibility to win votes. Harry Browne is the only candidate that seems to understand the U.S. Constitution. Bill Clinton, because Bob Dole would spell disaster for pro-choice, affirmative action and those persons who have been unable to lift themselves out of poverty. The Republican Party would essentially leave all Americans to fend for themselves,even when they are ill-prepared to do so. ANYONE but Clinton Harry Browne: The Federal Government MUST be cut back to Constitutional size or our kids will live under a Stalinism with a teddy-bear face. Harry Browne, as he represents a movement to reduce goverment to the constitutional limits. I am sick of government as usual, and that is what we will get with Clinton or Dole. Fred Thompson and/or John McCain -- Both well-respected in Washington, both pushing campaign finance reform despite opposition from the fat cats like D'Amato, both winners in "character" issue. The American people need a choice of political candidates...it can't be just the two-party system anymore! Get the Federal Government out of our lives -- Harry Browne, Libertarian for President!! Ross Perot, We need someone who doesn't owe too many favors.to political parties. Clinton...he has done a good job these past four years and will keep us progressing. With Dole we would slip back to the Middle Ages. iddle ages. Harry Browne for his complete honesty Harry Browne, he is the only one out of all who are running who is serious about limited government and personal freedom Browne - we need our freedom back. Harry Browne to reduce size and influence of government Harry Browne because he is the only candidate who wants to make MAJOR reductions in the size of government. Less Government, Less Taxes and Traditional Family Values. Harry Browne, for a return to Constitutional governing Harry Browne, to get my & my children's life back from the government. Harry Browne - We have to start to get the government back into the hands of the people rather than on our backs. Do not know of anyone I really like; I don't like politicians/politics in general. Might vote for Clinton so that a Republican would not get in. Politics is pretty boring and way too conservative! harry brown fiscal resposibility, and protecion of freedoms guarenteed in the bill of rights Harry Browne, would push for serious government reform and budget cutting not just a slow in the increase. Harry Browne - a man who stands on the constitutional, ethical, and philosophical principles of the founders and whose sense of history is large enough to see past the periphery.the Harry Browne is my choice for President because our country needs to reduce government intrusion into our lives (i.e., stop the totalitarians). Harry Browne, because he is the only one who really will downsize government. Harry Brown, because the federal gov't is too big. Browne;You want to see an anti-government document? Read the Declaration of Independence, the U S Constitution, the Federalist papers and other founders papers. They viewed government as a necessary evil. Less is better. Howard Phillips. He will uphold the constitution and enforce individual liberties over an intrusive government. Harry Browne: I feel that the increased influx of government in our Haryy Browne is the only real hope this country has. This nation was founded by men of principle, the greatest of which being that government needed to be kept in the hands of the people. Not only are the people no longer in charge of the government, but it has run completely amok, stepping all over the rights guaranteed to us by the constitution. Harry Browne is not a politician. He is a man of principle that wants to see the country the way it was intended by the founding fathers. Harry Browne, because government is spending too much money, taking too much out of the economy in taxes, and placing too much of a burden on small businesses through regulation. Harry Browne...reduce government to constitutional limits. Harry Browne...reduce government to constitutional limits. Harry Browne - We need to reduce the size of government - NOW! Harry Browne-Principaled, a feasable plan to re-vitalize America. I wish that Gen. Colin Powell had run - this country needs him. Harry Browne. We MUST get our Federal Government back under citizen control. Harry Browne...because of my concern for constitutional integrity Steve Forbes man. He's not got any total dickweed ideas, (I'm probably sounding like one here) but he's got good ideas for _making money_ man. Which is what the US government needs to do. Harry Browne. His book "Why Government Doesn't Work" details HOW he would implement the changes needed to save our children from enslavement to the present tax system. Harry Browne. He has the courage, conviction, and honesty to do what needs to be done. Harry Browne - Because he is the ONLY candidate that will dramatically cut the federal government, plain & simple Harry Brown. He provides a practical vision of America that would be free, prosperous, and tolerent for all. Harry Browne, to reduce the government by 2/3 and restore the constitution If they arn't libertarian, they arn't American. Howard Phillips, Please include him since he is a candidate Harry Browne. Dole, he will make us proud Americans again Harry Browne. I want to see less Government overall. A Conservative Republican candidate who understands the moral bankruptcy of the country and has non-governmental intervention ideas. More pro-family. Harry Browne Harry Browne because he knows that government doesn't work. Harry Browne will pledge to uphold and support the Constitution without crossing his fingers behind his back. Howard Phillips (US Taxpayers Party) should be president. He alone stands on a platform to limit the federal government by the Constitutional bounds and return American jurisprudence to its Biblical foundation Howard Phillips-He believes in Constitution and he has character. Harry Browne. He pushes for more freedom, less government. Harry Browne Harry Browne because not only do I agree with his political philosophy but he's not afraid to tell the truth however ugly it may be, Harry Browne because he is asking the tough questions and willing to make the best decisions for America, not decisions to get him re-elected. He is a man of principle who is not a hipocrite like Bob "Tax and Spend" Dole or Bill "I rather risk other young people's lives but not my own' Clinton. Browne will slash the government down to constitutional size. HARRY BROWNE:because he would get us back to what the forefathers intended,more than any other canidate running. Someone who strongly believes in the Constitutional and against One World Government Harry Browne....we need less government not more Harry Browne because he would prevent the government from continuing to bleed our economy and degrade our culture into whining and demanding dependents istead of self responsible adults. Harry Browne. Government is too rediculously big, and it's time it got out of our pockets. And, I've had it with legislation of morality! My standards are well reasoned and objective, and I don't need to be told what I can and can't do with my person and belongings! Thanks... Howard Phillips--He is a man of principle and character, and he understands what needs to be done to bring our country back to its constitutional roots. He believes in individual freedom, and in preserving the lives of the unborn. Howard Phillips--He is a man of principle and character, and he understands what needs to be done to bring our country back to its constitutional roots. He believes in individual freedom, and in preserving the lives of the unborn. Harry Browne. Less government, it doesn't work. clinton-because of abortion policys Harry Browne for President Our money is our private property Harry Browne - the only one out there with new ideas for a breaking country! Harry Brown Harry Browne is the smartest, most honest candidate and would give me back my freedom. Harry Browne would make a great president. He has fresh ideas and isn't afraid to propose them. An honest, trustworthy president who will not cater to the wishes of only the people who gives him money, but will listen to the will of the people and follows the dictates of the Constitution of the U.S. The president is not above the law and should not treat his office as if it were a kingship. Harry Browne can bring the presidency back to what it is supposed to be. Harry Browne. Stop taking away individual rights in an attempt to cure government caused problems. Harry Browne, because he is the only candidate who would actually reduce the federal government's functions to those few authorized by the Constitution, guarantee personal liberty and economic freedom. There is only one real choice, Bob Dole, Clinton is not at worthy of the trust of the american people. Harry Browne, Its time to get a three party system Harry Browne This country needs a change to reengineer our government. Remember the Boston Tea Party. Harry Browne is the only candidate calling for America to re-evaluate the contract between individual and government. He is serving to remind us that we are the rulers of this country and that we created the government to serve our limited mutual needs. He reminds us as well that free people and a free market unencumbered by pressures generated from political (government) sources are the best source for fair solutions for all. Bob Dole The best man. Howard Phillips of U.S. Taxpayers Party Harry Browne, because he is the only candidate that won't govern by poll, he has ideas and solutions not just rhetoric Harry Browne, because I firmly believe that the best thing for our nation is the Libertarian Party Harry Browne - will reduce government, end income tax Harry Browne. He can begin to reverse many of the wrongs of our current Government. This includes the powers that the States should have. Dismantling the welfare state, changing Social Security into a private investment system, and if not dismantlingthe IRS at least greatly simplifying the tax system. And there are other changes which should be made. Harry Browne, the Libertarian candidate. He has the best answers to solve the problems of this country. Bob Dole, CLinton is a liar and a cheat. Not to mention a Crook! Him and his wife are socialist's. ANYBODY BUT CLINTON Harry Browne Harry Browne. Dems and Repubs are equally corrupt, responsible for problems, and incapable of fixing them. Time for a radical change. Bob's too old, Bill will say what you want to hear yet he won't repeal Abortion rights. Clinton, because my personal interests are enhanced by his leadership Who is John Galt? Harry Brown: Less government = more freedom+less crime. The two largest property crimes are government extortrion (taxation and asset seizure) and crimes inspired by drug prohibition. The largest losses of freedom are political crimes (e.g., use or sale of prohibited intoxicants) and regulatory intrustion into commerce. Harry Browne: he is the only candidate who has real, defined plan for reducing the size of the Federal Government, ending governmental intrusion in the personal lives of citizens, solving the Social Security crisis, and reducing the national debt. The other major candidates seem to simply want to continue growing the gov't; their "solution" is to grow the economy at a faster rate than the gov't, thus shrinking the share of GNP that gov't consumes, which just continues to propagate the growth of gov't Harry Browne, Reduce govt to constitutional limits Bob Dole, because he is a man of integrity and honor. Bill Clinton has proven himself to be less than trustworthy and honest. VOTE HARRY BROWNE!! Don't waste your vote on the same old Demo-publicans. Send a message his November. Vote Libertarian! Vote Harry Browne! Clinton because he's actually done a pretty good job, and Dole scares the crap outta me! Bill Clinton. He's performed well in the office. He believes that government can be a force for good, and he seems to want to use it to help those at the bottom of the economic order. Harry Browne--he's the only candidate who stands for what I believe in Harry Browne. Man of uncompromising principles and values based in REASON, not in fear or emotional buzzwords (like the Clinton/Dole "bipartisan party" tactics). Bob Dole. Bill Clinton has about ruined what is left good in this country. He is a disgrace to the White House, and to the American People. He should be shot except we'd then have his wife and Al Gore. Lying bastards like himself should be ashamed. Harry Browne. End the political system of one party with two names; deal with America's critical issues before the country becomes a dead great power. Harry Browne has real solutions to real problems. Harry Browne-will eliminate fed gov Harry Browne, becuase I want to run my own life. Harry Browne - I want a no-compromise, constitutional advocate to reduce the size and power and control that the federal government has over its citizens. One that will begin to limit the federal government to ONLY the functions which are allowed constitutionally. Harry Browne. Libertarians are the only party with a well defined philosophy and can be trusted to keep their word. Harry Browne, because Government doesn't work. It only promises to deliver, while mortgaging the present to the future, Harry Browne will create a new prosperity by ending big gov I wold like to see Clinton because He has good I geas for the future Harry Browne, because he holds a firm belief in the US Constitution. Anything that's not in the Constitution is no business of the Federal Government. Harry Browne.The only candidate with NEW ideas.It is unconscionable that the public will not hear him on the Presidential Debates. Harry Browne -- He believes that personal responsibility, a free-market society, and severe penalties for abusing these rights will prevail over a punitive society. Harry Browne Browne Government is the enemy! I want to see Harry Browne win, against all odds, to prove that this country is still capable of electing a President who is not beholden to either big business or big labor, but who understands that government is itself the problem for most working Americans. Only Harry Browne will give us a 100% tax cut, eliminate the IRS and put the federal government back into the box that Article I, Section 8 of the U.S. Constitution defined for it. The Founders knew first-hand the dangers of an all-powerful cenral government, but nearly all current office-holders deny the problem exists. Browne. Our country is racing towards bankruptcy and neither of the two parties seem to want to do anything about it. They promise a balanced budget five, seven, ten years in the future while maintaining 100 billion dollar deficits in the meantime. We need to get our fiscal house in order, the sooner the better. harry browne to roll back the damage done by govt past 35 years. we must end the wars on crime drugs poverty and get the feds out of local affairs Harry Browne - he's the only one who has the courage to give us massive tax cuts, massive budget cuts, & a balanced budget now - not some vague point in the future. Read his book "Why Gov't Doesn't Work" and you'll see his plan is compassionate, clearcut, and very doable. Harry Browne. His views most closely mirror mine than any other candidate currently running. Currently I am torn between Perot and Browne Harry Browne is the only candidate that Thomas Jefferson would vote for. Enough said!! Harry Browne harry browne because of the solutions the libertarian party brings to the table Browne - Reduce government intrusion and increase individual responsibility. I think Harrby Brown may be able to pull the Fed. government. out of its rut. I would like to see Harry Browne be president. The federal governmant has grown well beyond its constitutionally mandated powers and needs to be cut back severely. Only the Libertarian Party has been able to see this and they have the integrity to see it through. With a little self-responsibility put back on the American people, we would see a lot of our social and economic problems start to get straightened out. I favor Harry Browne for president. Yes, government provides many essential services but only at great cost and at the expense of liberty and privacy. Why must I reveal to the government intimate details of my personal finances, medical condition, and the charities I favor simply to maximize the return of wages I've already earned? Mr. Browne is the only major candidate who can be believed when he says he will dismantle the federal government. Harry Browne, get government out of our life and return responsibility to the individual. --- Worst problem in our society was not listed - the tax system. Harry Browne - He's the only one willing to fight hard for much less government. Harry Browne - respects constitutional authority Steve Forbes, because he has many libertarian leanings. Harry Browne for President: cut taxation 50%; kill IRS; stop drug war; separate government and education; free market economy; gold/silver standard. Harry Browne because he's the only candidate who understands that there are moral constraints on the activities of governments as well as bad consequences for real human beings when governments ignore those constraints. Harry Browne is the only one who represents my views. Bob Clinton, Bill Dole and the Republicrats are a big-government lovefest. Harry Browne. I want my children to someday live in a free country. Harry Browne because we need less government Harry Browne will pardon all federal drug war victims, veto all unbalanced budgets, conduct neutralist foreign policy. Harry Browne for President, because "Government Doesn't Work". I want to see power returned to the people, where it belongs; not in the hands of disconnected Washington bureaucrats. Harry Browne because he will reduce government intrusion. Harry Browne, because he is the only one who realizes that government does not work. Either Harry Browne or NOTA. Americans lack personal responsibility, and any other candidate would continue to have government take more of that from individuals. Harry Browne -- because I believe that government needs to be smaller and less intrusive. I want to see someone elected president, I don't care if its a minority, a women, a martian, I don't care, just as long as they learn how to read english, so they can READ the Constitution of the United States of America! Harry Browne - he want's to close down the IRS permanently and roll govenrmnet back to constitutional levels. Go Harry Browne & Jo Jorgensen!!! They are the logical choice in illogical times. BGK100396 Harry Browne. I agree with him that government should be drastically reduced. Bob Dole - I feel he is a leader and can bring back moral standards to the U.S. I feel he will be more sufficent when it comes to dealing with other countries. I feel he will do more to get rid of big goverment. Harry Browne. He is the only candidate who stands for personal responsibility and the end to government intrusion. He is also the only candidate who acknowledges that the current federal government is operating outside of constitutional authority. Harry Browne. He advocates individual responsibility and getting government off our backs. Harry Browne. He will give us a smaller government than anyone else. Harry Browne. America is ready for a large rollback in federal power. The federal government is too large and out of control. I now consider myself a former Republican. Neither of the two leading Browne. The end of the drug war and crime subsidy. A female (or male if one can be found) with a new outlook on the population. A flat tax. Real change. Harry Browne will reduce the size of the federal govt and restore the fed. govt to the size/role defined in Constitution Harry Browne! I want less Goverment Harry Browne. Browne: will reduce government intrusion in economic and personal lives Bob Dole -- Clinton would maintain the status quo of Big Government & High Taxes Harry Browne -- because I agree that for the most part, the federal govt is simply a leech on the working people in this country. And a *serious* threat to serious liberties. I will vote for Harry Browne because he is the only candidate dedicated to reducing the size, cost and intrusiveness of government and saving or restoring our civil liberties. Harry Browne. I want to see this insane "War on Drugs" stopped and get government out of our personal lives. Once a government tries to leglislate morality it has lost it's collective mind. clinton vs. dole = socialism vs. capitalism. copitalizm works because it mirrors the natural law of survival of the fittest, which is best for the species survival in the long term. likewise, the survival of our country is dependent upon competition. Harry Brown is the only candidate that has a coherent, ideals based plan. The other major candidates are slaves of opinion polls. Harry Browne, because he's the only candidate that will REDUCE government. Harry Browne, he will obey the Constitution Harry Browne. His platform is for a limited Constitutional Government. The Federal Government is trampling all over the Constitution at present and is becoming way too powerful. This is dangerous. It must stop. Green Party. Alcohol needs AA, ACOA, Allinon, Alliteen, etc to pick up the pieces of all the distroyed lives it causes, yet its legal. Why? Maybe because of something called THE CONSTITUTION? Yet Marijuana carries a criminal penalty inspite the FACT that it is far less distructive than the previously mentioned booze. I think I need a genius to help rationalize this one. Anyone? ... LET ADULTS MAKE THEIR OWN DISICIONS!!! Harry Browne. We need government out of our lives, and our pocketbooks. A person is responsable for there actions. No person, organization, or government can decide morality. Harry Browne for less government in general. Bob Dole because of Clinton's character Bill Clinton, he needs four more years to do the job he set out to do. Bob Dole, Because 4 more years of Bill is more than anyone can take Bill Clinton; because he's the best available candidate and I generally agree withhis actions and policies. Well ideally I would like to see George Bush. I can't believe we turned our backs on him in 92. He was one of our greatest Presidents. He didn't take crap from anyone!!! But I would settle for Bob Dole. I hate Clinton Ross Perot bob dole Clinton is not a leader. Dole is. The republican, to be able to act with the rep congress and get things done. The republican, to be able to act with the rep congress and get things done. Harry Browne BILL CLINTON I THINK HE IS THE BEST PERSON FOR THE JOB. bob dole-honest man Ross Perot-We need to Reform the Republicrats,they seem to be great manipulators. I'd like to see Jack Kemp as president. He is a man of principles and fights for what he believes in. Bob Dole. To bring ethics and integrity back to the white hous. Harry Browne. Both Democrats and Republicans have proven themselves unreliable and incapable of solving the problems that they generated by thier actions in the past. Affirmative action is only one example. It started out as a good idea then became a whip to browbeat people with. Bill Clinton because he is a good person who actually believes in this country's potential. Bill Clinton because he's a ladies man. Harry Browne. Because he seems to know what does not work (Gov't) and should be greatly reduced; and who should be empowered (the people). Ross Perot will address the problems facing this nation in an objective, systematic way that will yield real results. He is a candidate that cannot be corrupted by the influence of the status quo. Bob Dole because Clinton is and the democrates are jeopardizing our freedom and the Clintons have been involved in to many scandals to be called good leaders. Any other presidential candidate who has been involved in as much as the Clintons would have been more so effected. Harry Browne; Government is the problem, not the solution. Thomas Jefferson had it right, the government that rules least rules best. Return to belief in self responsibility and private organizations and businesses solving problems. The U.S. became the strongest country in the world but socialism and government regulation are now the stronest forces preventing future growth. Bill Clinton. He has done a good job so far Harry Browne! The ONLY choice for a free America and Free Americans! Bob Dole - Less government, lower taxes I would like to see Ralph Nader as president, because he is the only candidate who is willing to talk about our country's biggest problem: the destruction of our democracy by unaccountable corporate power. John Kasich (sp?). Kasich is passionate about balancing the budget and Bill Clinton because he is the only guy to have a non-conservative view of American society. The Social Conservatism isn't an pertinent answer to solve the problems now Harry Browne -- Best chance for a free society Harry Browne, because he's a Libertarian Clinton: Education Top Priority, Weighted Environment Reform, Honest Welfare Reform, Steady Deficit Reduction, Strong Foreign Policy, Not afraid to share credit, Not afraid to admit mistakes and move on, Most Leadership Qualities, Good sense of fairness and judgement and practices the teachings of Christ. Harry Browne, he knows what the Constitution means. I hope to see Bill Clinton reelected in '96. Although I do not agree with everything that Clinton has done, I do feel that I share far more common ideas with him than with Dole (the only other candidate with any chance of winnning). From the statistics that I have seen, things are somewhat better in the U.S. now than they were 4 years ago. Clinton's way leads to a potentially better future, where Dole's leads only into memories of a distant past. Very strong moral pricinciples, belongs to a trational family, committed christian, Alan Keyes would be my choice Harry Browne, merely because we share the same views Harry Browne. The only rational choice for limited government and individual rights. Ralph Nader, because I believe he'd be a much better choice tha the either Clinton or Dole and because he deals with issues that concern me like the environment. WE NEED SOMEONE WHO WILL STOP THE FISCAL CHILD ABUSE. IT IS IMMORAL TO MAKE THE NEXT GENERATION FOOT THE BILL FOR OUR SOCIAL PROGRAMS. I don't care if it's Ronald McDonald, I want someone to increase taxes, decrease spending, and pay off the debt. Bob Dole: He will decentralize government. RALPH NADAR: He is a consumer advocate who is the only real candidate who truly wants reform. clinton because of the extremism of Newt gingrich and other so-called conservatives BOB DOLE, HONEST,MORAL,PROVEN QUALITIES I will vote for Harry Browne just as I have voted for the Libertarian candidate in each election since 1980. I will do so because I believe the Libertarian philosophy of individual responsibility and minimalist government is the only hope for the survival of individual freedom in the 21st Century. The only -- not the best, but the ONLY -- answer to the drug situation is full and complete legalization. The only answer to controlling government intrusion is the wholesale elimination of government departmnts. Jefferson, the genious who gave us these United States of America, rightly said that "That government governs best which governs least." Washington, whose perseverance secured our liberty, rightly said "avoid entangling alliances." Franklin, whose diplomatic genious secured our constitution, said "Those who would exchange liberty for security deserve neither liberty NOR security." They were right then; they are right now. Harry Browne, because he is the only candidate who running who believes in personal responsibility, not more government programs. I want to see Bill Clinton be reelected because I feel he cares more about the middle and lower classes than Bob Dole does. For once I would like a President that truly honors the Constitution as intended by the Founding Fathers. That's why I support Harry Browne, Libertarian for President. Bob Dole. I don't think that Bill Clinton is trustworthy or intelligent enough to be a national leader. Clinton, our generation can point this country in the right direction for us,Doles has brought us to this far,we can make it better for all. Bill Clinton is a puppet of the wealthy! Of course he sends out tons of propaganda (aka lies) intended to deceive people into believing he is one of us "I feel your pain." Clinton has never felt any pain, he ran from Vietnam. Clinton is a big member of the Trilateral Commission and the Council on Foreign Relations. They want a 1 world government because that suits the needs of the wealthy. Send Clinton home to Arkansas! I would like to see Bill Clinton as President. He posseses a combination of ideals(deficit reduction, student loans,increase of our manufacturing base)which appeal to me as a voter. Thank you Dole because Klinton is a crooked scumbag bob dole Bill Clinton. He is a middle aged, healthy, and a strong man with acceptable political agenda Harry Browne. I would like to see Harry Brown elected in 1996 because we need a third party. The Rep and Dem are so similar. I don't want morality legislated either Bill Clinton He has the brains, the experience and cares about the average American. Anyone who will end the Drug War! Bill clinton because he sincerely care for the problem of ordinary people and middle class. I also support his decision on the welfare issue. I believe it is time to revamp the welfare issue. I don't it is fare for any hard working tax payer to pay for somebody else who is especially capable of work.But i don't support the republican idea of solving the problems. NO DOLE!!! ...In the face of the deficit issue, He wants to cut taxes on the rich. Man, the rich have it tough in this country! Now they`re all pissed off at Bill Clinton because he evened the playing field on taxation. Trickle-Down was G.O.P. imperialism at its worst! And the ECONOMY went down the tubes. Clinton has had to undure rediculous lies just because YOU RICH FAT CATS aren`t willing to shoulder your fair tax burden. We middle class are sick of carrying you slugs! You had your fun the 80`s (remmber the recession?), now its our turn (Gee, unemployement and interest rates are down now). NOW THAT`S CHANGE FOR THE BETTER! Harry Browne should become the President. We need a leader to dismantle the too large too expensive too intrusive Government. He is the only candidate that will do this Harry Browne would restore government to its proper functions. david duke BOB DOLE He can be trusted to do what he says he'll do. Bob Dole, Because he will sign the conservative legislation that Clinton vetoed. Honesty and integrity, willingness to take a stand and give straight answers. Dole-The better man! Harry Browne, because he believes in the constitution. I want someone who will get the government out of everything except what they are suppose to handle per the constitution. Howard Phillips * There will be no peace until the King of Peace is on the throne. God alone is sovereign and the nation who fears Him and obeys His Law, happy and prosperous will be that nation!The farther a nation moves away from His Law the more corruption and distruction that nation will experience. Harry Browne - He is the only candidate that actually knows what the Constitution says and agrees to uphold it. The federal government has too much power!! Despite personal short commings, Cliton has done a good job. He can stay another term and keep the status quo. Harry Browne - he is the only candidate with a well thought out plan for drastically downsizing federal government to bring it back to its Constitutional limits. bob dole. liberalism and socialism don`t make it. that says it all! Harry Browne:Although I disagree with several of the LP platform statements, I do believe that he would do more good for the USA than anyone else running. There isn't much difference between the D's & the R's. Neither want to restore constitutional government. Clinton, cares about the little person Colin Powell Jimmy Hoffa Bill Clinton. Bob Dole is pandering to the ultra-conservative element, and never supported supply-side before. Dole to bring honor back to the White House Clinton, in-touch, compationate sinsere in goals I feel that Bill Clinton has done an excellent job of running this country despite opposition from a Republican congress. I would like to see him as President again, perhaps with a bit more support from new legislators. Harry Browne. I'm a Democrat, and don't agree with everything he says. But he's much closer to the original spirit of the party founded by Jefferson: the Democratic Party. Bill Clinton he's pro-choice CLINTON Harry Browne. He says it succintly: GOVERNMENT DOESN"T WORK. The less the better. Dole. The group in the White House now have Socialist tendencies.I believe they are interested totaly in their own agendas and have little real interest in ALL of the American people. Dole. THE MOST PRESSING PROBLEM FACING THE FIRST WORLD IS POLLUTION. SINCE THIS TYPE DAMAGE CANNOT QUICKLY OR EASILY BE REVERSED, WE NEED ACTION NOW. RALPH NADAR AND THE GREEN PARTY OUGHT TO WIN, BUT WON'T. Bob Dole The Clintons are liars, manipulative, dishonest, facades in general. Harry Browne- less government; more individual freedom. I would not automatically like to see Harry Browne elected, i just want him to be able to be allowed in the debates!!!!!!!!! Bob Dole. His traditional values he has lived with consistancy. His ability to lead with conviction far surpasses Pres. Clinton's flip flops. Morally Clinton is an afront to God. Bob Dole- Harry Brown doesn't have a change - yet Harry Browne Bill Clinton, because he has improved the economy. As a small business owner, I can honestly say that business has been great during Clinton's term. Bob Dole! I feel it is important to elect a man with morals, integrity, and trustworthyness. The Clinton Administration has been filled with corruption and scandel to the point I am embrassed to be an American. clinton -------- if its not broke ,dont fix it Harry Browne. government does not work Harry Browne, for all the things he said he would do if elected. For what those things are see his acceptance speech on C-Span, or read his book WHY GOVERMENT DOESN'T WORK. Bob Dole, because I believe he has more ability to chose good people to surround his presidency. People need to realize that when they elect a man to the office of president that they are also electing the his supporting cast. Harry Browne: I believe we need less federal government and also to break the two-party system. We should have four major parties to accurately represent political ideologies. I would like to see Bill Clinton as president. My reason is backed by the old saying that states that one should go with the less of the two evils. Harry Browne, for finally enforcing the constitution. Life, Liberty, and the persuit of happiness. Ross Paroe because he recognizes the problems that need fixing Harry Browne-- he's the only candidate who understands the importance of freedom! Harry Browne should be elected President in 1996 because he is the only candidate who advocates complete return to constitutional government. dole because the president should stand by his true belief right or wrong.our president should be held to a higher standard. Bob Dole...More Trust worthy... I respect more I would like to see more coverage of the whitewater scandal and Vince foster. Although I do not agree with all of President Clinton's political views, I do think he will make a better president than Bob Dole would. Bill Clinton because he won't die during his term because of old age and his ears don't make him look like DUMBO! Bob Dole, A man of integrity, compassion, and love of country. Harry Browne;the only candidate that will make us free again Howard Philipps, or Harry Browne. Decimate Union government. Give us our money back. We need a candidate who is the kind whom voters can say "This is who I will vote for". Someone with a clear, uncompromising sence of direction. We do not currently have such a candidate. Sen. Dole--ethics, morality, ethisc.... Harry Browne - He is the only candidate who has a realistic view of what government is supposed to do. - Protect the citizenry and be limited by the Constitution Harry Hagelin, Natural Law Party, has ideas that maintain and reclaim civil liberties, but are not as radical as libertarian. Bill Clinton. He has shown the capacity to learn in office and is pragmatic and and flexible. While greater commitment certain positions would at times be good, I have been looking a long time for a pragmatic Democrat who sees a role for government but who acknowledges there are better ways for government to do things. Bill Clinton - for americas futures Bob Dole - the only other candidate who could win - anyone rather than Clinton Bob DULL is too damn old!!!!!!!!! Bill Clinton because he is not afraid to move to the center. Things get done this way. Bill Clinton, young, vision, moderate: not an extremist nor a liberal I want to see Harry Browne for President because he will place the peple in control once again. I feel that the Constitution should be the supreme law, just as he does. I would rather see Bill Clinton than Bob Dole Clinton -- because Clinton and Dole are the only viable choice, and Dole's economic package simply isn't feasible. Dole Harry Browne because he is the only candidate that really represents a force for dramatic reduction in government interference in our lives and in civil society. Harry Browne because he already knows Government does not work! I WANT TO SEE BOB DOLE ELECTED PRESIDENT. I LIVE IN BROOKLYN, NY, AND I CAN'T LOOK OUT MY WINDOW AND VOTE FOR A LIBERAL IN GOOD CONSCIENCE. CRIME AND DRUGS ARE RAMPANT THROUGHOUT OUR STREETS, AND THE ONLY WAY TO FIX IT IS TO IMPLEMENT TOUGH ANTI-CRIME M A.B.C. "Anybody But Clinton. The past four years represent one of the most dammaging times to individual liberty, freedom and business in our history. Dole may represent less of an immediate threat and he and the Congress and Senate that follow him may be "educatable" by the people to be less intrusive. Clinton, because the country has moved ahead. For all hios faults, he is capable. Anyone with moral courage, strong convictions, discernment, and determination who can fulfill the duties and inspire the public to reach for higher standards. Ross Perot, he is a better alternative to those who are running. BILL CLINTON HE IS NOT FOR THE CHRISTIAN COALITION Neither; considering the candidates, I have to vote for the one I can tolerate: Dole Dole, we need a man of integrity. Harry Browne -- He combines the best sides of the Republicans and Democrats into one Bob Dole. He has a record of doing what he says he will do. The few things that Bill Clinton has accomplished have been primarily a watered down version of the Republican efforts and the items he promised to do when he was elected havn't happened. Harry Browne. The other major candidates are part of the problem of government which is too big.I believe Browne is the one most likely to get the monkey off our backs. Bob Dole, Because i believe character matters CLINTON...REPUBS TOO RADICAL...DO AWAY WITH NATL WX SERVICE. Dole, because he seems to ben an honorable person, & the Didocrats have screwed things up long enough. Anyone who supports individual rights and reciprocal responsibility. Harry Browne, to cut off Leviathan's tentacles Bill Clinton is a fine president with excellent values very close to my own. He sees the value of free enterprise but values care for unfortunates, children and elderly more. He is for gun control, environmental protection, better access to education for all, better PUBLIC schools. I agree with most of his values, so of course, I'll vote for him. Harry Browne -- I'm tired of government legislating moral standards on the people of this country. Bob Dole. He's got a good plan to make our lives easier again--cutting our taxes and balancing the budget. He's an honest man who will do what he says because he comes from a time when a man's word was his bond. Clinton on the other hand, has done NOTHING in the last two years. He is no better than he was when he tried his gays-in-the-military, Lani Guinier shenanigans. He is incompentent and doesn't know how to be President. By God, we need some adult leadership in the White House. Harry Browne, because he makes sense. Harry Browne - Clinton & Dole are just doing the same old thing in the same old way I would like to see Harry Browne be our next President. Even though I am not old enough to vote, I am old enough to know what exactly has been going on this country for the seventeen years I've been living in it, and partisan politics has turned our government into a money grubbing hog house. We need someone new, who knows what the people want and what the people need, and isn't going to *tell* the people what they want and need. Harry Browne. He's the only one that makes any sense. Bill Clinton. Moderate policies that majoirty of Americans will benefit and agree with Bob Dole. Bill Clinton scares me. I really do not trust him especially in a second term when he will have no one to answer to in the next election. We should be wary of those who want to take our individual rights away from us. don't care someone with enough to moral values to make changes in govt Bill Clinton, he has experience. Dole does not harry browne because he wants smaller government Gen.Colin Powell.He is a working man not a political snob,and is anti-racial. Gen.Colin Powell.He is a working man not a political snob,and is anti-racial. I would like to see Bob Dole as president because he is much more of a responsible person and I believe he will guide this country along a much better path than Clinton. dole; clinton with a democratic congress is worrisome Bob Dole - pro-life and against late term abortions - clinton is for them Bill Clinton. I do not like anything about the other candidates Harry Browne, because his answers on all issues are the ones most in line with common sense. Harry Browne He is what freedom is all about and the way our country was at one time (The constitution people a lot of people died for it) Harry Browne - because he will end the insane war on drugs and allow us to take back the freedoms guaranteed us by the constitution. Bill Clinton is the smartest, kindest, most well informed candidate in the race. He will definately get my vote. Bill Clinton. I'm better off than I was 4 years ago! bob dole Harry Browne, He seems to be the only canidate I can agree with most of the time on most issues Downsizing of government, cleaning up the trash in Washington. More emphasis to the home front, IE lets get a grip on making our own homes working too. That means getting control of your own nasty little children. Bob Dole, will help reduce size of gov't, balance budget, cut wasteful gov't programs, prefers free enterprise answers instead of Hillary's socialized medicine. Harry Browne. He's the only one who is willing to bring government under control. Howard Phillips, the TRUE Conservative Candidate. I want to see Harry Browne because he has some ideas, as opposed to the other candicates who between them haven't got a single one. From the little I have heard about Howard Phillips he is the one I would WANT for President. However, I think I will probally vote for Bob Dole because he is electable. Howard Phillips seems to have some good ideas. Bob Dole is a good man too. I can't vote for Bill Clinton because I don't trust him. Bob Dole. I believe that he possesses the courage, character, and fortitude, that it will take to forge on into the new century. He is aligned with my ideals in smaller government and less taxes. He has a level head and an open mind, but he is not unwi Bill Clinton. There is no other viable candidate. Harry Browne, he's the only candidate who recognizes the truth--that neither "more" government or "better" government is the solution. A *TINY* government is the solution. Harry Browne - Government (especially the two-party system) is not working! Buchanan, has a better feel for us "little people". Harry Browne represents integrity and responsibility. Bob Dole - He is experienced; honest and will reduce taxes which in turn will stimulate the economy. Harry Browne, because he is a Washington outsider and a Since I see the continual erosion of American personal liberties, and continual government intrusion in our private and public lives, I will quit voting Republican (like I have all my life), and vote Libertarian. I will also help the Libertarian Party gain momentum in this, and future elections. I also believe that cannibis should be re-legalized, or at least changed to a Schedule II or III substance, and that relevant, concise, and honest debate about legalizing certain other illegal substances shoul take place. There are no "winners" in the field. One is a lame duck, the other is a dying duck... one with high moral standards and does the right thing for the people of this country. Keeps his word. an honest men or women. colin powell-if he were elected as pres., then the Civil ar would REALLY be over Bill Browne. He would make our country free again, like our founders intended. The government we have now is the classic "tyranny of the majority" that the founders warned against. Browne or Perot; they would not countenance 'business as usual' with the same old blinders on. Bill Clinton, I like the way he has run the country (as much as one person is able to.) Harry Browne -- lower taxes now, less spending now: personal liberty! bill clinton I would like to see Harry Browne become the president because he has the only honest and workable solutions to the problems in our society and our economy. I truly hope Bob Dole is our next President because he understands what is really important to families who are trying to so the right thing. I also believe that Bill Clinton is for some reason ashamed of being an American. We need to be proud of ourselves again. Harry Browne, the country is running away from the constitution and Dole and Clinton are chasing it. Harry Browne I want to see Harry Browne for president in 1996. I believe in minimal government; minimal taxes, minimal spending. I know that more economic freedom means more economic prosperity. In addition, I believe that the government has no business trying to teach us morals. Finally, the Democrats and Republicans have only INCREASED taxes and INCREASED spending at least since World War Two. Government doesn't work. Harry Browne, I no longer believe that we can reform government, we need to get back to the basics in terms of government. Clinton - I think Dole is so desparate to win that he will "get in bed" with whatever group he has to to win. He seems to compromise his standards, like the pro-choice issue. Harry Browne, because I personally support much of his position and believe that the Dems and the Rubs have become corrupt in the desire to maintain power. Clinton -- why change. Trend looks great. Alternative is unacceptable. Clinton has a solid economic record behind him during his administration. He also is the true education president, more so than any Republican in recent history. When you look at the numbers, Clinton is the overwhelmingly best choice for the average middle class american. Harry Browne, because he is the only candidate calling for actual reduction of government across the board, at the level we need (ie, drastic cuts, not 15%). Perot Browne, Small Government,: #15 needs one more option no tax!! Bob Dole - We need someone who is honest, supports our military and wants to to better the lives of ALL Americans. Bob Dole I want to see Ross Perot because he is not part of the same old Washington crowd. He is an outsider and is unassailable to outside special interest groups, as his wealth insulates him from corruption. He is a proven success, and is an honorable man based upon his past deeds. Harry Browne. He's the only candidate who supports the Constitution, would trim back the federal government to something approaching it's Constitutional limits, and he's the only candidate with any integrity (for example, he's the only candidate who qualified for and refused federal matching funds). Browne. I'd love to see how much government we could do away with Harry Browne.....I believe he truley knows that Govement doesn't Work....so keep it small and out of my life Harry Browne - Let's get back to the constitution Bob Dole. His stance on many of the issues is close to what I believe in. Yet, there are a few things that I think in the issues that will be his downfall in the debates and inevitabely the Presidential election. Clinton, because he is a pragmatic moderate and will set the stage for Gore who will be the 'technology" president. Harry Browne: the only candidate who believes that we are not the property of the state. Harry Browne - I want the federal government to work for me- not vise/versa. Bill Clinton, even though he has made some mistakes with environmental issues, he and Gore are our best hope Mr. Browne because I hate government involvment in my day to day life, IRS, and troops overseas (12yrs Mil svc) I would like to see Pat Buchanan mostly because he is the most likely pro-life canidate. I am hurt by the stand against students of illegal migrant workers. Where do I turn in my diploma is that the next step to void deplomas of former illegals. The current policy will discriminate against students with strong latino features how is this policy going to be executed and by whom? Why is the latino being hunted? I do support legal imigration, but why are you targeting the hard workers that contribute possitivly to our economy many of these students turn into productive citizens. Clinton will win on his age and good looks. His political rhetoric which blames the Republicans for all the worlds's ill is selling pretty good. Dole has not come off well in the media who always play up the age factor. A Republican. That is my party Harry Browne is the only candidate with a solid campaign platform who doesn't resort to name calling, and actually states his views on issues. Harry Browne-because govt is way too big & powerful & he is the only candidate who seriously wants to do something about it. Less government, Harry Browne! I'm sick of "knee-jerk" government regulation and the increased public tax burden that goes along with it. Bob Dole! He has higher moral standards, wants less government, and I trust him much more than Bill Clinton. I think that this country can only get better by raising moral standards. Bob Dole has a better record of these standings and I think he will put them into practice. I think that Bill Clinton covers up quite aa bit and I do not think that I can trust him. Despite the winner, I do pray that America returns to God so this can continue being the greatest country in the world! Browne: He'll end the war on drugs - The WOD is wasily the most destructive governmental policy in effect right now, eroding civil liberties on all fronts, as well as turning our cities into battlegrounds. Dole, as he demonstrates leadership for all, not for a few. Bill Clinton. The baby boom generation is now in control. Beats me. There's no one to want to vote for. Bill Clinton. Economy has been better thelast few years then in the early '90's. Bob Dole Because of his 15% tax cut and Jack Kemp. Clinton, because he is more liberal than Dole, is likely to be better on the environment, gay rigths, human rights, police brutality. But I'm voting for Nader to express my opinion that Nader's issues need to be heard. Bob Dole: He's got the experience. He's got the integrity. He's got the ideas. I like it. What a choice? I have Bob Dole -- a career politician and butt kisser (how soon some forget) and I have Bill Clinton -- Socialist, Lying Scumbag, and probably second degree murderer -- There is only ONE truly "presidential" candidate (and yes, I have met all three in addition to Mr. Perot) that candidate is Mr. Harry Browne. He is the only candidate that wants to act in the interests of ALL AMERICANS -- not corporations, not black women, not foreign interests, just AMERICANS. Furthermore, any woman tha votes for Mr. Clinton (assuming that she is not subsidised by one of his many "programs" ) is casting a vote against all women as this man clearly has no respect for women in general. Harry Browne - he's the only candidate that offers a choice between what we have and what we would like to have; the only candidate with a published plan of action, not random empty promises; the only candidate with a philosophy Harry Browne because he will work to reduce government intrusion into our lives,government spending, and taxes. I see President Clinton retaining the presidency. He has demonstrated that he is a moderate who will comprimise on sensible issues. He has protected the nation against the radical proposals of the Republican right wing and has made some of the liberal programs that were not working all that well more efficient. Bill Clinton because he has experience. Clinton because he's pro-choice in abortion and he's a good leader. Harry Browne. I'm tired of having "Big Brother" over my shoulder. Bill Clinton, he's cool! Harry Browne, because I think we need major reductions in taxes and government power. Liddy Dole because she's smarter than all of the males who are running, including her husband. Harry Browne is the only candidate with coherent, principled positions on the role of government in our society: Government Doesn't Work. Bob Dole, He is the only Republican Candidate. He must be supported,Clinton defeated,and lets get this conservitive show on the road. I want Bill CLinton for President in 1996 because he is the best candidate adn he cares the most. Bob Dole He is a better man and of truer charactor I'd like to see Harry Browne because He has the most logical ideas about how to end gov't dominance of the average person, whether it's welfare or taxes, immigration or foreign aid. Harry Browne government is too large and intrusive..radically reduce its size Harry Browne is the only candidate with realistic solutions Harry Browne. He is the only man of principle running. He is the only candidate suggesting a 'literal' constitutional government. Harry Browne- Get government out of our lives ! fBob Dole simply on the basis of moral character, integrity, and his wife! Harry Browne will fulfill the destiny of America because he will dismantle the Federal government. Bob Dole because Bill Clinton represeents the worst in politics, no firm guiding philosophy with am extreme ability to mislead and the charisma to accomplish it. Harrry Browne. We need to totally reform the government in its current state to bring about any serious, positive change. Bill Clinton, because the old men in the GOP control too much already I want to see the next president ban afirmative action. I also want him to legalize drugs, so there prices will crash so drug raqchetearing will become a none profitable buisness. When prohibition was reapeled the price of liquer hit the floor, and the mob stoped there bootleging. Harry Browne. I sick and tired of having the government confiscate my money to give to people who will not work. Bill Clinton. If the "working man" has any chance to regain some lost ground, Clinton is better equipped to respond. Clinton - the economy is better Neither Republicans nor Democrats speak for scaling back federal government. That's why I have switched to Libertarian. Harry Browne - You can vote for what you've always had, or vote for what you've always wanted... not bob dole time to migrate if he wins Browne. Because he is the only candidate interested in a smaller Frederal Government. Harry Browne consistently presents valid, logical arguments for his platform. Most major problems in this country can be traced to government intrusion into individual rights and coercion of the will of the many on the few. BOB DOLE I BELIEVE CHARACTER DOES MATTER. I DO NOT BELIEVE THE PRESIDENT'S APPARENT SHIFT TO THE CENTER. HE IS IN HIS 1992 CAMPAIGNE MODE. ONCE IN OFFICE HE GOVERNS AS A LIBERAL. Bob Dole, He has a better record of sticking to his ideals, and compromising when the necessary. Bob Dole, I share his views and the views of the Republican party, But I do see some points with the Democratic party. Harry Browne: Govt is meant as an extension of self-defense, not as Big Brother Harry Browne - the federal government needs to get out of people's lives and concentrate only on those things they do well. Let state and local governments take care of all issues which they are capable of handling (most of them). Harry Browne. He is the only person with a realistic plan and desire to reduce the federal government. any third party candidate, to open up the poltical arena Harry Browne. He is not a professional politician. Wants liberty both economically and personally I would like to see Bill Clinton re-elected for President. Why? Because I truly believe he is for the hard-working families of America, and He would like to make our lives just a little bit better and the world a better place to live in. Harry Browne - Govt needs to be cut back now and he's the only one who will do it Harry Browne. Government doesn't work. As long as government depends upon coersion to accomplish it's objectives, it will never work. Honor and charactor are essential qualities of a President of the United States. Bill Clinton and his wife are a disgrace to our country and an insult to the men and women who have given their lives preserving our great nation. Bob Dole will lead our country into the appropriate direction. He has a strong character and sound moral judgment. He is trustworthy, and has a deep faith in the ability of every american. When Clinton first entered the White House, we had a democratic president and a democratic congress. Not much was accomplished. The economy has grown healthier and stronger only recently. Much of its success can be attributed to the republicans in congress. Clinton and the democrats take all the glory. Also, contraryto popular belief, Dole is not a mean-spirited old man who only cares for the white, rich, male. He wants everyone to succeed, and not to be dependent upon social programs. As a hispanic college student, I know I didn't get where I am today because of affirmative action. I got where I am because I worked hard, and for someone to tell me I wouldn't be here if it weren't for affirmative aciton is, in my mind, insulting. Women and minorities must not allow ourselves to depend on affirmative action for success We must depend on ourselves, our own abilities and determination. Bob Dole will lead our country into the appropriate direction. He has a strong character and sound moral judgment. He is trustworthy, and has a deep faith in the ability of every american. Harry Browne, to reduce amount of my property confiscated in the form of taxes. Also, to end the "War on Drugs". bob dole,because we need to complete the agenda set by the republicans and mandated by the voters in 1994. I feel as though I've lost some of my liberty with the debate mess. I want to choose. I do not want someone else to make my mind up and jam it down my throat. We need others with new ideas. I have not made my mind up yet. I do not want anger to get in the way. Bill Clinton because he believes in opportunity for all. Harry Browne - Government just doesn't work! Harry will give back the country and lives to we the people. Ralph Nader. He is intelligent, logical and represents what is right for all people Harry Browne for President. I believe that the Federal Government has overreached it's original powers over our daily lives to the point of being ridiculous. The Constitution says that the states should have the power, and I believe that it'll take a Libertarian President to bring that power back to the states. Harry Browne. He wants to take the country away from the gov't and give it back to the people. Harry Browne, The most important issue for the future is that we stop, and start to turn back government's overwhelming involvment in America's Economy and Morality. Bob Dole never forgot where he came from, knows where he's going and not ashamed at being where he is today. He is a good man ...via my daughter a 13 year old with good common sense...dito my 8 year old, 13 year old a spouse. Bob Dole...As a former Combat Engineer, I cannot see how our military personnel can take Bill Clinton seriously as their "leader", given his character and lack of sound, moral judgement. I believe Bob Dole to be a MUCH greater man for the job. (Character matters greatly). Harry Browne. He would return us to Constitutional government and individual freedom. Harry Browne is the only trult great candidate running for the office of President of the United States in 1996. Harry Browne: Give America back to the people and the States! Ralph Nader; we need someone from OUTSIDE the typical political sphere, someone who will stick to his guns! I was planning on voting for Bob Dole, mainly to make sure that Clinton doesn't get re-elected. But I have become convinced that I must vote my conscience, therefore I am supporting Harry Browne and the Libertarians in November. We need to restore the Constitution. I would like to see President Clinton re-elected because I believe that in a second term he would be free to tackle issues such as entitlement reform which could not be touched by a candidate who was seeking another term. Harry Brown - While Dole & Clinton only disagree on how much additional government control is acceptable, Browne actually intends to REDUCE GOVERNMENT. Clinton because he has performed. Dick Lamm - The Reform party has the best agenda for America, but a psychotic as a candidate. The Reform Party needs to distance itself from Ross Perot. I just wish Perot had realized the same before flushing any chance of the Reform Party's ascendance Browne, We wouldn't need a flat tax if elected and government would be reduced to where we could afford it. Bob Dole should be president. He is honost and a true American. He is not a lying, snivelling, immoral pig that sits in the White House today. Harry Browne! Of the candidates, he is the only one who can be trusted to do what he says. He says what he means and means what he says whether you agree with him or not. He IS honest and sincere. You know where he stands. Harry Browne - because Libertarian ideas are the only ones that make real sense. not bill clinton Bob Dole, because he has integrity, honesty, conservative views regaring government, and concern for all Americans, not just special interest groups. Bob Dole--integrity does MATTER! Clinton has remained vigilant to the special interests which got him there. He fooled us once and I'm not sure I can afford another "middle class tax cut." By the way, where is that cure for AIDS promised in 1992? Dole, I feel that he would be the best choice for the job. BILL CLINTON..TO CONTINUE HIS PROGRAMS OF MODERATE REFORM Harry Browne. He has read, understood, and agrees with the concepts of the original documents our countries founders wrote and agreed to. Harry Browne. We need to drasitically reduce government spending and intervention in our lives, and return our hard earned money to the people who have earned it, so we can determine how we want to spend our money. Governemt does a horribly ineffective job at everything it tries to do, from the War on Drugs, to Welfare "reform", to immigration policy, to education. Politics has become the game of behind-the-scenes special interest, and we never really know the motives of our public officials. Harry Browne, a smaller Federal government will be a better government. Harry Browne--Get government's hands out of my pockets and their nose out of my business. Harry Browne because things would get done. Browne is the only candidate I can take even REMOTELY seriously. The republicans want to mandate their skewed version of morality. The democrats want to force you to give to "charitable" cause they select, and they give mere lipservice to protection of social freedoms. The libertarians seem to be the only party interested in protecting the individual's rights. I'm a registered Democrat still, but I'll be voting Libertarian - I'll be voting for Browne and Jorgensen. Harry Browne: time for a change. Tired of the same old Democrat/Republican go nowhere crap A president who really believes in the constitution and is willing to take an oath never to sign any bill into law that violates individual rights and freedoms. Bob Dole, although he's been in government far too long, he represents more closely my values morally, politically, and ethically. bob dole,less government,less taxes harry browne, no one else will take an axe to the monster Bill Clinton bob dole - we need a true stateman in the white house, not some yuppie baby boomer draft dodger adulterer and lie thru the teeth We need Harry Browne now, before civil liberties are taken away not after. Clinton, Democratic government is the best for the most Harry Browne . He is uncompromising in his conviction to return the U.S. to a true constitutional government as our founding fathers intended. Harry Browne Bob Dole, He's the man for the Job!!! BOB DOLE - TO MOVE WITH REP CONGRESS Bill Clinton, because at least the economy is doing better, and he at least has made some stands for "non-intrusive" government policies. Bill Clinton I do not want to see either party control the house,senate,and the white house. Harry Browne Want integrety to return to the White House---Dole! Bob Dole, of thousands of reasons, one would be because we shouldn't let a guy who ran away from military duty be a commender of most fierce army in the world. Bill Clinton. I think he did an excellent job as president in the last four years. Clinton-As a president, he's done a good job I'd like to see Harry Browne as President in 1996, because he understands that the primary purpose of government is to safeguard the freedoms of Americans, not to strip them for the political convenience of appeasing a particular interest. Government should not be anybody's Big Stick, and it is time to stop punishing people who have not committed any crime. Harry Browne, Both Republicans and Demacrats are too entrenched it our political system. Dole - He never attended a rally where the American flag was burned. Clinton. Must send a message to congress with democratic sweep. I am an independant voter, and I feel that harry browne would make the best president from the choices because he stands for something concrete, he seems uncompromising, and committed to the things for which he claims he stands. That is not always so evident with the other candidates. I agree with his platform. Bob Dole. Honesty. Values. strength of character. Government and foreign policy experience. I hope other Democrats will see how Bill Clinton has constantly lied and misled the public. First he was against family values in 92, now he is running on family values. Every issue he talks about he talks out both sides of his mouth. At least Bob Dole is a war hero who doesn't lie! bill clinton because he knows where he wants to take the country going into the next century Erik Wel�n beacuse he�s a good man that don�t trust in god and he�s a communist Eric Wel�n Someone who cares, loves America, and can get the job done. HARRY BROWNE!!!!!!!! Ralph Nader--America desperately needs more than two parties! fghkj Bob Dole because he seems more focused and doesn't say what a particular groop wants to hear Browne, Our country has fallen into corruption from the insane drug war. We need to end the drug war, end prohibition II. I don't know - someone who has vision, high moral character and doesn't want all of my money Anyone who desires the power associated with the presidency should automatically be disqualified. As H. Browne would remove the largest portion of power from both the presidency and the government in general he is the only candidate remotely qualified. Bill Clinton because Bob Dole wants to end my existence of me in the United States. I am a legal immigrant soon to be a United States citizen. BOB DOLE TO REDUCE THE SIZE OF GOVERNMENT AND TO GIVE BACK MY MONEY Bill Clinton. He HAS NOT raised middle income taxs (like Reagan/Bush did repeatedly!), and he has succeeded in created millions of new jobs while lowering interest rates and cutting into the Reagan/Bush Deficit. He`s also endured the Lies and Dirty Tricks of the GOP (just ask Ross Perot). He also realises that not everyone can afford to send their children to private schools, so we MUST improve the quality of Public schools. The GOP thinks everyone can afford private schools....why?...because THEY`RE OT OF TOUCH!!! I am voting for Harry Brown because he wants to make a big change. Some of his views are drastic, but are we not in a drastic situation anyway? The REPs and DEMs will make no difference if elected, so I am voting for someone who might. Bill Clinton, for his stance upon education, a change in the welfare area, and his assertive nature in dealing with foriegn relations. Bob Dole Clinton is morally bankrupt and a pathological liar. Clinto because Dole is full of mean ideas as he is mean spirited himself. Dole because of the electable candidates, he is the only one with moral integrity, honesty, and trustworthiness. He also has the experience of dealing with Congress and would be a good role model for the country which cannot be said of Bill Clinton CLINTON. HE HAS GROWN WITH THE JOB Clinton: He speaks to the younger generation Harry Browne--the only one who believes the Constitution means what it says. Clinton: Not because he is best for the job, but because I'm scared of Dole - fear being one of the best motivators known. Harry Browne, to reduce the size of the government Harry Browne - He embraces most, if not all, of the ideas that I agree with. Bob Dole, because he has character. Clinton. He's displayed enough political skill in weaving an overall middle course. Noone wants liberals, nor do they want the christian coalition or extreme right wing candidates. Harry Browne--He is a Constitutionalist and he is straightforward with the American people Bob Dole... The best man for the job. Also the most experienced person for the job, including Bill Clinton. Bob Dole because he's the best choice we have Ross Perot Libertarian all the way! Harry Browne. Government doesn't work. Harry Browne due to his posture of less government and more control in the hands of the people. Harry Browne- The country needs to dump the incumbant parties. Clinton - Republicans will hand govt over to wealthy/big business/religious right. Harry Browne for his common sense return to the constitution, promised relief from taxation, and his consistency to his principles. His practical straightforward answers regarding the budget, education, crime, and what the federal government should and should not do make him my choice. Browne. The might be some type of social-logical advancement within our lifetime if the government would stop intervienning in everything it's afraid of. i.e. advances in energy, space explaration, education, ... Clinton, because he has a feel towards the people of this country. He may have made some errors in judgement but what human dosen't. Dole seems to worry about big business and the wealthy, not the low and middle class people of this country. Harry Browne or any other libertarian. Excessive government caused by excessive faith in government is the root cause of most of our problems. Bill Clinton, because of what he has been able to accomplish despite a hostile Republican Congress. The United States is better due to many of his efforts. Bob Dole is so old, he reminises about when baskin robbins had only 2 flavors. Bill Clinton because he has stood his ground on the national debt. Harry Browne - Best for the country I want, with all my heart, to see Harry Browne become our next president. None of the other candidates are serious about change -- reducing government control and increasing individual responsibility. Harry Browne is the only person who can clean out Washington, and the only person who knows how to do it. Bill Clinton. While too eager to please, he's held his ground on many important issues. Furthermore, he will do far more than Dole (alas, less than the Greens) to protect our environment. The Libertarian Candidate Harry Browne. He is one guy who seems to be making sense on a number of important issues. Bob Dole - Only viable alternative to the incumbent who has become totally unacceptable! Bob Dole. I am not sure if this country can stand another 4 years of being a liberal welfare state. Dole. I feel that he has morals which the current administration lacks. Clinton is promising everything to everybody. I'm thinking of my kids and grandkids. Harry Browne - He's a Libertarian and they're the only ones who know what freedom truely is. Harry Browne, because he's the only one promoting smaller government and more freedom, which will clearly benefit all Americans, and especially those now economically disadvantaged. A Libertarian Candidate: I think we can no longer afford to continue attempting to control by legislation that which can only be accomplished by motivated individuals, and it makes a mockery of government to try. Harry Browne; only a return to the principles of the Declaration of Independence and reliance on the sanctity of the Constitution can restore this nation to the vision the Founding Fathers had for it and its people. Bob Dole I belive he would give us less government Bob Dole - Economically responsible without regard to polls. Proven his ability to overcome obstacles. He has the respect of foreign leaders. Harry Browne. Let's see some press exposure, soon. Harry BRowne, because everyone else wants MORE government. Only Harry understands that government doesn't work, and will let me live my life as I choose. Harry Browne! Our government is out of control and falling fast. The two big parties are self serving at our expense. U. S. will soon implode. Steve Forbes Harry Browne, because he will reduce government. Harry Browne - He is dedicated to eliminating the national debt, drastically reducing the size and power of the federal government, supporting the Constitution, and respecting the rights of US citizens. Bill clinton, He's done everything he can to make change. B.C. - Why would we (at least we the middle class) want to go back to REAGANOMICS?...Sky High Interrest Rates, High Unemployement, Dirty Tricks Politics, Deregulation (see Silveraddow), Misinformation...PITHETIC! Clinton/Gore for WORKING America. GORE/GEPHART 2000! Ross Perot. No political influence. Straight business sense. Deficit reduction. LOVE HIS CHARTS BABY!!!! Harry Browne, because government doesn't work. NOT BOB DOLE!...Here`s a guy who wants to president so bad that he`s allowed himself to become the mouthpeace of the Far-Right even though his resume speaks of a moderate political carreer. We don`t need another Reagan bumbling through the White House, creating tax loop holes for the you-know-who. THE RICH SHOULD PAY THEIR TAXES LIKE THE REST OF US! "PUT UP OR SHUT UP" - RON REAGAN 1984 Harry Browne. Is a man of principle. Although I don't agree with all of his/libertarian positions, in general I agree that he will take the country in the right direction, i.e. less govt/individual responsibility/opportunity Bob Dole. He is a man who gets things done and doesn't just talk about it. He is a man of action, and someone who I can respect. Ralph Nader is the only honest man running! CLINTON. He's the man. Rich people suck. Bob Dole because I trust him. Bill Clinton is too slick and he's really a liberal. Bob Dole. The best man for the job. clinton better choice Harry Browne. He's the only candidate that will prevent the US military from continuing to destablize the world. Bill Clinton has done a good job for the past 4 years. Bill Clinton is the more moderate candidate; I would not vote for a conservative, nor for someone who is too liberal; most of the actions Clinton has taken are ones that I agree with. Bob Dole will turn this country into what it is supposed to be. Harry Browne - the only candidate looking to truly reduce government Howard Phillips of the USTP. The ONLY candidate that matches the four choices I made above. Harry Browne Bill Clinton- he is an honest person. he has handled situations well. He is young and has less health problems. Bill Clinton - jobs are up, economy in good shape, some positive strides in fighting crime,policies on education Bob Dole. The Republicans should have an opportunity to provide solutions to the major problems facing our country. Democrats have failed. Bill Clinton. He's done a good job reducing the deficit and lowering interest rates. BILL CLINTON, HE HAS DONE AN OUTSTANDING JOB Anybody but Clinton. I would like to see Dole elected as I feel the country needs to have a more conservative influence. I perceive that he is for less government. I do not trust Clinton and cannot vote for him. I feel that Dole is simply a more capable man and he has the right ideas. Clinton, on the other hand, seem to want to steer America towards socialism, which has failed in every single country that has tried it. But what else would you expect from a 60's-throw-back draft dodger who smoked pot. What's it to you? Bob Dole because I can't stand Clinton. Bill Clinton, he's done a good job; not an idealogue BOB DOLE BECAUSE HE IS HONEST Ross Perot, because he is less likely to be able to be corrupted by lobbiest since he has wealth of his own. He also is a successful business man which is what our finacially ruined gov't needs. I want Bob Dole for our president because his standards and beliefs are the most similar to mine. Harry Brown Browne. He is the only one who realizes that solutions to our problems are best solved in civil society (not political society). He says "Gov't Doesn't Work", but what's left unsaid is that free markets and individual liberty does! I'd like to see anyone but the man that disgraces the office now. Bill Clinton does not finish what he starts and he lies about what he is going to really do and everyone believes him that is a democrat Bob Dole - Reduce government spending. I want to see Bob Dole and Jack Kemp in the WhiteHouse because of their integrity and morality. Gen. C. Powell because every time he opens his mouth, he makes more sense. DROP TAXES I would like to see Bob Dole elected as our next President. This election is about the future of our country and the direction that we are headed. The person that is able to appoint and nominate Federal judges is the person that will have the greatest control over the direction that our country is headed. I trust Bob Dole to make the best selections for apoointing judges and the future of our country. A republican because the democrat party is now socialist bob dole ,better the devil you know than the one you don't. Harry Browne - we need to restore constitutional government I wan to see Bob Dole for pres. for my kids they need less govt. and I need nore money in my pocket ... Clinton - If re-elected he cannot afford to become a lame duck since Dems will be looking to him for action that will continue to benefit the party in general after he leaves the White House. Jesse Jackson since there is no real left wing/liberal presence in US politics and one is needed. Clinton has 4 years experience. As a college student depending on financial aid, it is important for me to have a democrat in the White house Harry Browne, because I like him best. RALPH NADER Harry Browne - Of the candidates of which I am aware, his views accord most clearly with the U.S. Constitution and the legitimate purposes of government. Bob Dole only because he is the better of the two. Bill Bradley Harry Browne, I am a staunch Libertarian and while I think there are better Libertarian candidates, I will vote with my party. Dole...Trustworthy/Conservative Ralph Nader because he has the knowledge and experience to immediately make a turnaround to the current pathy of the country, i.e., a legacy and Democratic continuation of Reaganomics. He has more principles than the rest of the Presidential field put tog Harry Browne should be president. His policies can restore prosperity and freedom to this country. Harry Browne. Big government is way out of control and the Libertarian party is THE ONLY PARTY that has views consistent with the US Constitution. Republicans and Democrats are vitually indistinguishable. Dole is the best man for the job I would like to see Bill Clinton reelected. He has a good head on his shoulders. He is leading this country in the right direction. Your survey questions are very biased Bill Clinton should be president. Bob dole for president. We need to get Hilliry's husband Bill out of the White House. He thinks he can save eveyone, in the wild only the strong survive, and thats how it should be!! Bob Dole. He knows politics and how Washington works, he supports the military and is not a hippie. Harry Browne because he makes the most sense Harry Browne Harry Browne because he believes in the Constitution (and is therefor the most qualified candidate for the job). Character counts - Give us a man we can believe in - Bob Dole I'd like to see Harry Browne as president because he respects and believes in people's freedom and ability to make their own decisions. He also expects people to be responsible for the decisions they make. Harry Browne, I know he would reduce the size and intrusiveness of government. Bill Clinton. By far the best candidate of the choices at hand... Newt Gingrich, I think he truely wants to see this country continue to be the greatest nation ever. Jack Kemp - A man with ideas and character Bob Dole because he is more in line with my beliefs Harry Brown. It's time we had a true Libertarian in office. We need the government to stop trying to run our personal lives. Browne. We need change NOW not in 7 years. Bob Dole seems to be our only choice--can't trust Clinton Ralph Nader - pro consumer I am voting for Ralph Nader because of his concern for the Environment and because of the need for reform of the two party system. Bob Dole because he seems like he understands the American People, unlike his opponent Bill Clinton. Bob Dole, tax cuts, smaller fed. gov., integrity, believable Harry Brown, because he will do his best to reduce the overall government and return freedom to the people of the United States. Bob Dole, because he's 10 times the man bill clinton. and big government suck's Bob Dole. Honest, trustworthy, experienced. Bob, with out a a second thought! For four years we have had Bill and, well to be frank I'm not the least bit impressed! Bob is honest, he's a conservative with a conservative tack record, Bill sounds more and more conservative every day, yet we all know he's a Liberal. There's nothing wrong with being Liberal, even though I might disagree with you. But for Heavens sake!!, if you're going to call yourself Liberal act that way. In short I like some of Bill has to say, but what I like are the things Bb saya too, and frankly I put more trust in Bob's intent on actually doing them!!! Bob Dole. He has ethics, integrity and character. He is a proven leader and will not be an embarrasment to our country. He has vision and plans for America that I agree with. Harry Browne because he admits the war on drugs is lost and should be ended. Any Libertarian candidate (therefore Harry Browne in this election). Since 1966 according to IRS published statistics, the federal government receipts have grown from 130.8 billions (adjusted to 1980 currency) to the current figure of 1320.9 billion (also 1980 currency). That's a growth of 1000% even though the population has grown only approx 25%. The government has become a monster beyond our control - an entity entirely unconcerned with the protection of the rights of freedom and property upon wich this nation was founded. I will only vote for a candidate who recognizes that the only legitimate function of government is the protection of the individual from the use of coercive force. It is not the function of government to prohibit voluntary trade between free individuals. It is not the function of government to force its populace to fund ill-managed programs of supposed "charitable" end. It is not the function of government to enforce ill-founded religious "moral" precepts upon its people. There is to my knowledge only one political party in the U.S. at this time which represents a belief in the classical liberal principles upon which this great nation was founded. That party, the Libertarian party, despite whatever faults it may have, and despite any disagreements I may have with its official stance on select issues, is the only party I recognize as being a viable choice in the upcoming elections. Although I normally do not bother to vote (lacking a suitable candidate for which to cast myvote), I will be voting in this election. I will be voting for Harry Browne. ROSS PEROT- PROVEN RECORD OF ACCOMPLISHMENT I want to see Ross Perot, He would be the best at getting our country back on its feet financialy. I think without major changes at reducing our debt, this country will fall. Harry Browne is the only one that supports the Constitution as it was intended. Only he will return us our freedom and destroy the IRS and other criminally insane government organizations. Bob Dole because of his character and trust in the people. Harry Browne - He will return us to the U. s. Constitution as our forefathers wrote it. Ralph Nader. Has lived awhile. Has contributed much to the country. B.Dole Has a new view of how the American people should be treated Bill Clinton. He has been an effective leader thus far in protecting the rights of middle class Americans. He will not sell his soul for the benefit of the powerful. bob dole. his experience and integrity are leadership qualities that are imperitive for the office of president. Harry Browne: re H.D.Thoreau - That government is best which governs least. Bill Clinton because the world needs a leader with vision for the future, not the past. his second term will be his last so clinton may be able to do more of the things he had hoped to do first time around. Harry Browne because we need to return to our constitutional rights which are slowing being taken away from us by the present government system. Harry Browne. All other candidates want to control the way I live my life. Harry Browne & the Libertarians are the only party with principles and integrity... who really WOULD abolish IRS... who really WOULD balance the budget in 3 months and eradicate the national debt in one year --- all without collecting any additional taxes. Ralph Nader running on the Democratic ticket with Gen. Colin Powell as VP running mate Bob Dole...This country deserves better than Bill Clinton Bob Dole. He is honest, dedicated to serving his country . Great American. A person that will be fair to all concerned but keep the federal government at bay. Clinton--he's at least realistic in his views and doesn't make a habit of bashing Dole Harry Browne, because he support less government Bob Dole - Defense spending and tax cut plan Jack Kemp Is great The only person already in political power that I would trust as president is Barbara Boxer. I have become completely disillusioned with Clinton since he bambed Iraq. I had always blamed overt aggression for political or material gain on the Republicans, but now I know that the Democrats are not immune. It's a sad realization for me. Bill Clinton. Although he has capitulated to political pressure on some issues, he is more concerned about the environment and education than his opponnent. He is less concerned about the wealthy and big business than about the needs of the American people. Harry Browne becuase I want our governmen to end and he is the closest candidate towarded leading us to anarchy BILL CLINTON, BECAUSE HE'S THE MOST QUALIFIED TO SERVE. President Clinton has done a great job. No, I don't agree with each and every thing he has done or view he has but I certainly think no one is running who could do better, but could do much worse. Bill Clinton, because he is leading the coutry in the right direction. Bob Dole because he is honest bill clinton is a dishonest man with no morals HARRY BROWNE I would like to see Bill Clinton as president for 1996 because I think he is the only presidential candidate that supports any of my interests, such as the pro-choice movement. I don't think I can morally allow myself to vote for anyone else, including Dole, who is the shiftiest, most idiotic candidate there has been in a presidential election for years. bob dole we need a leader we can trust and respect. Bob Dole - One word - Character Bob Dole Clinton. He is the president who has changed so much in our society thus far. And about the marijuana issue...hell LEGALIZE IT! It would save us tax payers a lot more money. We are putting away these petty criminals for somthing everyone has easy access to regardless of if they are incarcerated or not. It would also be a way to put America on top of the world in economics and potentally save the rain forest...Clinton needs to stress more on this, I believe the votes would not dramatically change becase it is as common a alcohol in todays society. With the baby boomers children now growing and much of that pop. still smoking the herbs...their children are too. Wake up Dole...This could be our number one cash crop! Bill Clinton - he's doing a good job, he's made some progress in important areas, the economy is doing very well, he is in touch with the needs of the U.S. Bob Dole - He has integrity and proven leadership ability. Bob Dole ... I want a man (or woman) who has integrity, is not afraid to stand up for what he/she believes in, doesn't lie, doesn't fool around on his/her spouse, etc. In general, this individual should be a "good" person and work hard for the people of the US. This individual should not be wishy-washy. Harry Browne...he is the only viable candidate with real solutions, and he has a real party behind him. The LP has access in all 50 states. There is an active effort to keep Perot out of the debates because otherwise, they'd HAVE to let Browne in...and then, there goes any hope of Clinton or Dole to win the election! Bill Clinton Bill Clinton-because he cares Harry Browne. I want government out of my bedroom, out of my office, and out of my wallet. Harry Browne - He's the only candidate that has a plan that isn't clouded in a lot of "smoke and mirrors". Dole: He shows leadership and the charter to lead this country 5,000,000,000,000 I will vote for PEROT don't waste your vote on billybob I would like to see Harry Browne as president because I feel he is the one candidate that has the best interest of the american people in mind as it relates to the u.s. constitution and our rights guarenteed there in. Pat Buchannon, because he most closely emulates the values that I find to be the most important. Harry Browne. The number 1 problem in America is the corruption of the judicial branch of the federal government. This lack of courage by judges to set limits on the power of the federal government and to preserve constitutional limits on federal police Bob Dole I would like to see Harry Browne in the white house due to his beliefs, which I believe are more in conjunction with the true meaning of the Constitution than any other candidates. End the income tax!! Vote Harry Browne!! Bob Dole because he has integrity Bob Dole, for real leadership and character OF THE ONES THAT HAVE A POSSIBLE CHANCE(NONE OF THE ABOVE) WE WOULD BE BETTER WITHOUT ONE Bill Clinton because in his 4 years as president, he has done more for students, middle-class families,minorities and Americans as a whole,than any of the other candidates can door want to do. Also Clinton is much much more preferrable to DOLE! Bob Dole because he is trustworthy, honost, fiscally conservative and morally straight. Bill Clinton is a liar and a criminal with no beliefs and waivers with every new public opinion. Bob Dole, we need a moral principled person as President. More than anything we need someone who will reduce government, cut the deficit, and reduce taxes.... Ross Perot.... The Republicans blame the Democrats.. The Democrats blame the Republicans? When will we learn ... They are the only 2 parties that have been in got the last 100 yrs.. Its a no brainer to me.. Abe Lincoln. Sure, he's dead, but what the hell, he was for equal rights and he was a REPUBLICAN! Clinton. Check and balance. Bill. Less munski for the rich. Ralph Nader, because of his pledge to lessen corporate control of government Ralph Nader NO ONE SHOULD BE PRESIDENT! THE PRESIDENCY IS IRRELAVENT!!! BOB DOLE. Of the candidates on the ballot, he is the one who is most likely to win who best fits my idea who our next President should be. Either Ralph Nadar or John Hagelin. Both are fine intelligent men. They have good hearts and really care about ordinary people. Dr. Hagelin has some very interesting and worthwhile ideas about problem-solving in our country. Browne - limit government again to constitutional limits and minimal responsibilities (courts and national DEFENCE) Robert Dole..a man of character,integrity and vision Dole, to support the Republican congress. Dole. he seems to be the one most concerned with our ballooning finances. Though I do not agree with cutting taxes, I do believe we need to make drastic spending cuts and save money where we can. Jack Kemp, because he is a moderate conservative, with realistic approach to todays problems, and he acts according to what is good for the people and the contry, NOT what is party politics Bob Dole because he has more vision for the country, understands economic policy, shows more leadership, and exhibits higher ethical standards. clinton Bob Dole is tooooo old Harry Browne - The only REAL change in FED Government Ralph Nader Harry Browne. The only canadate that will tell the truth and stand on principle. Dole. Lower taxes less government. Harry Browne for President. He make sense. I beleive he really does want to reduce the size of government. I also believe that he wants to end the war on drugs. Clinton deserves re-election. Bob Dole , He believes in tax cuts, welfare reform, tax reform, less government, and more responsible government spending. He will also bring back some dignity to the White House. Harry Browne is the only candidate who will actually reduce the intrusiveness of the federal government. Bob Dole - 15 % tax cut and balancing the budget can be done if unnecessary wasteful government spending is reduced Clinton is open minded, fair and has been a good leader for the past four years. The republican nominee should not be considered for several reasons, the two most important, his age and NEWT! Questions, comments, suggestions? Contact us. Return to theHome Page. Copyright ©1996, /InterCommerceCorporation, All rights reserved worldwide Send comments to Webmaster@Survey.net WT02-B22-8IA060-000333-B022-237http://www.survey.net:80/rlg1r.html 204.107.221.240 19970115054705 text/html 9098HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 15 Jan 1997 05:40:53 GMTServer: Apache-SSL-US/1.0.3+1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 8916Last-modified: Wed, 15 Jan 1997 04:09:03 GMT SURVEY.NET Poll Results Your source for information, opinions & demographics from the Net Community! Survey Results Survey started: August 11, 1995 Total Respondents: 5169 Do you believe in a supreme being? [ 3315]  64.1% - Yes[ 1034]  20.0% - No[  684]  13.2% - Do not know for sure[  100]   1.9% - No Answer Among the options below, what best describes your religious beliefs? [ 2067]  40.0% - Christianity[  588]  11.4% - Athiesm[  525]  10.2% - Agnosticism[  380]   7.4% - Scientology[  279]   5.4% - OTHER[  270]   5.2% - Islam[  165]   3.2% - No Answer[  139]   2.7% - Judaism[   95]   1.8% - Wicca/Witchcraft[   75]   1.5% - Buddhism[   75]   1.5% - Muslim[   67]   1.3% - New Age Spirituality[   66]   1.3% - Unitarian-Universalist[   54]   1.0% - Druidry/Faerie/Old Gods[   42]   0.8% - Taoism[   40]   0.8% - Goddess Worship[   39]   0.8% - Native Spirituality[   30]   0.6% - Baha'i[   24]   0.5% - Zen[   24]   0.5% - Hinduism[   20]   0.4% - Ceremonial magick (Kabbala, OTO, etc.)[   16]   0.3% - Shinto[   16]   0.3% - Satanism[   15]   0.3% - Hedonism[    7]   0.1% - Santeria[    5]   0.1% - Aboriginal[    5]   0.1% - Confucianism[    3]   0.1% - Universal Life Church[    3]   0.1% - Black Muslim[    3]   0.1% - Zoroastrianism[    1]   0.0% - Sikhism[    1]   0.0% - Hainism If you are Christian, what sect/church do you belong to? [ 2342]  45.3% - No Answer[  604]  11.7% - Non-Christian[  542]  10.5% - Roman Catholic[  488]   9.4% - OTHER - not listed[  305]   5.9% - Baptist[  151]   2.9% - Methodist[  142]   2.7% - Lutheran[  123]   2.4% - Latter-Day-Saints/Mormon[  121]   2.3% - Presbyterian[  121]   2.3% - Episcopalian[  107]   2.1% - Pentecostal[   52]   1.0% - Church of Christ[   35]   0.7% - Anglican[   28]   0.5% - Eastern Orthadox[    0]   0.0% - Discordian Do you believe in the concept of heaven and hell in one form or another? [ 2761]  53.4% - Yes[ 2031]  39.3% - No[  371]   7.2% - No Answer Regarding an 'afterlife', do you believe in: [ 1689]  32.7% - Eternal life on another level[  978]  18.9% - When you die, that's it[  884]  17.1% - Reincarnation[  767]  14.8% - Resurrection[  704]  13.6% - I don't know what to believe[  141]   2.7% - No Answer What percentage of the time do you follow/adhere to your religious guidelines? [ 1217]  23.5% - My beliefs do not impose strict guidelines[  958]  18.5% - 100%[  811]  15.7% - 90%[  470]   9.1% - 80%[  380]   7.4% - No Answer[  311]   6.0% - 70%[  305]   5.9% - None[  228]   4.4% - 50%[  128]   2.5% - 60%[  126]   2.4% - 10%[   79]   1.5% - 30%[   76]   1.5% - 20%[   72]   1.4% - 40% How often do you attend communal religious ceremonies & functions? [ 1506]  29.1% - Weekly[ 1106]  21.4% - Rarely[  924]  17.9% - Never[  635]  12.3% - Several times a year[  342]   6.6% - Daily[  301]   5.8% - Monthly[  225]   4.4% - No Answer[  117]   2.3% - Annually Are your religious beliefs the same as those of your family or cultural tradition? [ 2646]  51.2% - No[ 2231]  43.2% - Yes[  286]   5.5% - No Answer Are your beliefs at this time different than what they were in your youth? [ 2245]  43.4% - No - I've always believed in the same principals[ 1318]  25.5% - Yes - I have changed religious beliefs from one ideology to another[  868]  16.8% - Yes - I was previously religious and now am not.[  469]   9.1% - Yes - I was previously not religious and "found" religion[  262]   5.1% - No Answer Would you say that the passage of time has made you: [ 2326]  45.0% - More religious[ 1474]  28.5% - Less religious[ 1053]  20.4% - About the same[  307]   5.9% - No Answer In your opinion, how significant is religion to our society? [ 1863]  36.0% - Extremely constructive[ 1244]  24.1% - Somewhat constructive[  944]  18.3% - Somewhat destructive[  591]  11.4% - Extremely destructive[  320]   6.2% - Not very important[  198]   3.8% - No Answer Indicate what principals/ideals/entities you believe in: [ 4442]  85.9% - Repect for those who believe differently[ 3407]  65.9% - Eating any meat[ 3334]  64.5% - Family planning/birth control[ 3328]  64.4% - The Golden Rule[ 3144]  60.8% - Sex education in schools[ 2845]  55.0% - Evolution[ 2651]  51.3% - Homosexuality (tolerance)[ 2611]  50.5% - Pro-Choice[ 2525]  48.8% - Eating pork[ 2380]  46.0% - Jesus[ 2043]  39.5% - Bible - New Testament[ 1960]  37.9% - Bible - Old Testament[ 1716]  33.2% - The 'Devil'[ 1562]  30.2% - Pro-Life[ 1526]  29.5% - The Trinity[ 1359]  26.3% - Creationism[ 1063]  20.6% - Tithe[  507]   9.8% - Poligamy[  468]   9.1% - Torah[  182]   3.5% - Book of Mormon What best describes, in general, your attitude towards religion? [ 1966]  38.0% - Religion is personal.[ 1214]  23.5% - Religion is the key to happiness and eternal peace.[  501]   9.7% - Religion is a concept used to maintain control.[  393]   7.6% - Religion is the opiate of the masses.[  366]   7.1% - Religion is a concept necessary to maintain values.[  363]   7.0% - If you do not believe, you are lost.[  180]   3.5% - Religion is communal psychotherapy.[  177]   3.4% - No Answer There are also User Specified Comments on this survey available Questions, comments, spelling corrections? Contact webmaster@survey.net. Return to theHome Page. Copyright ©1996, /InterCommerceCorporation, All rights reserved worldwide Send comments to Webmaster@Survey.net WT02-B22-9IA060-000333-B019-297http://www.survey.net:80/sv-ce1.htm 204.107.221.240 19970115053551 text/html 6022HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 15 Jan 1997 05:29:38 GMTServer: Apache-SSL-US/1.0.3+1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 5840Last-modified: Tue, 26 Nov 1996 00:26:59 GMT SURVEY.NET - American Current Events #1 Your source for information, opinions & demographics from the Net Community! American Current Events Survey #1 Now that the elections are over, let's focus on the issues.What is important to YOU and how do you stand on some of thesecontroversial items? Did you vote in the 1996 Presidential election? No AnswerYesNoI was ineligible (too young)I was ineligible (not registered)I was ineligible (convicted felon)I was ineligible (not a US Citizen) Generally speaking, do you feel your vote is important? No AnswerYesNo Do you feel the US has a responsibility to provide humanitarian aid to other nations in need when possible? No AnswerNoYesOnly if there is an economic interest for us involved Do you feel the US has a responsibility to provide military aid to other nations in need when possible? No AnswerNoYesOnly if there is an economic interest for us involved Which nation/area do you feel represents the biggest threat to the US? No AnswerChinaKoreaIranCubaInternational terroristsLocal terrorists/extremists/militiaOther How do you feel about same-sex marriages? No AnswerThey should be allowedThey should not be allowed To deal with drug problems, what would you suggest? (Select your BEST answerof what's available) No AnswerLegalization & government regulation of all drugsLegalization & government regulation of some drugsHarsher penalties; more compliance with zero tolerance idealsMore emphasis on treatment programsMore emphasis on educationMore emphasis on programs addressing poverty, unemployment & social decayMore religious influence throughout society Are you Pro-Life or Pro-Choice? No AnswerPro-LifePro-Choice Generally speaking, how do you feel about affirmative action programs? No AnswerThey should be abolishedThey should be maintained for the time beingThey should be maintained until minorities are elevated to equal stature in employmentThey should be promptly phased out How do you feel about US Immigration policies? No AnswerOur borders should be open to allOur borders should be completely closed to all immigrationWe should reject immigrants from third world countriesImmigration should be phased outThe US should be more selective in determining who can immigrateImmigration should be easier to obtain Of the items listed, what would you most want to see happen (to society) in your lifetime? No AnswerInvention of cold fusion/a clean power sourceElimination of all nuclear weaponsA cure for AIDSA cure for cancerAn end to world hungerA united planet EarthContact with extraterrestrialsMovement to a less industrial economic base (such as Agrarian)Global acceptance of my religionRegular space travel/expansion into the Universe S O U N D - O F F - Your opinion matters! What do you think is the most important issue or currentevent? What do we need to do about it and why?(Limit this to one or two sentences) Thanks very much for participating in thesurvey! To submit your survey choices, select: or You can view the latest survey results after you submit your answers. We hope you will also participate in other surveys online as well. Please note that you shouldonly complete each survey once. Copyright ©1996, /InterCommerceCorporation, All rights reserved worldwide Send comments to Webmaster@Survey.net WT02-B22-10IA060-000333-B022-162http://www.survey.net:80/sex1c.html 204.107.221.240 19970115054627 text/html 47017HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 15 Jan 1997 05:40:09 GMTServer: Apache-SSL-US/1.0.3+1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 46834Last-modified: Wed, 15 Jan 1997 05:06:05 GMT SURVEY-NET - SEX Survey User Responses (Part I) Your source for information, opinions & demographics from the NetCommunity! ANNOUNCING: The Internet's finest interactive, totally-automated,immediate survey system. We can take any form and instantly create adynamic demographic database and show you the results as soon as youcomplete the survey! User comments There have been so many comments, previous ones are now archived: Part 1 Part 2 Part 3 Part 4 Part 5 Part 6 Part 7 Part 8 Part 9 Part 10 What do YOU think about Sex & the Internet? Good, but should be limited in access to consenting adults only INTERESTING! I believe that censorship should be a joint colaboration between the parents/guardians and the ISP. This should be in the form of parental certification of certain sites and the ISP giving parents the information to do so. This will still not stop net searces like piercing returning pictures of pierced nipples and clits! I am a single Christian, so I am committed to sexual purity/abstinence. The internet could be tempting for people like me. Unfortunately, integrity has no privacy, there is no safe sin, and God's Grace motivates me to please Him. fun!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!! I'm all for it. It's a healthy way to let out sexual frustrations, learn new things, and become more open about human sexuality! I do feel that minors should have absolutly no access to this stuff though and I wish there was some way to completely monitor that. Its a good thing It's amazing that all technology somehow gets to sex or becomes sex related. It amazing that all technology somehow gets to sex or becomes sex related. It is a wonderful experience and it is the only way I will continue to have intercourse. Sex on the net should remain and if people don't like it then don't search for it!!! The Internet provides adults with access to materials that could only be purchased previously through the mail or through seedy little shops. While I do not support minors' access to adult sites, I do believe that regulation should be up to parents. I do not ever want to see the government deciding what I can do, say, or look at on the Internet. I enjoy reading about sex and viewing pictures on the internet. I feel that sex should be open for people to talk about and to view, as long as they are ready and willing to. It is great! More info on getting laid! It is not the business of any governing body, federal, state, or international, to dictate what content is available on the net, or to whom content is available. its just for fun I feel that it should not be completely banned but that it has to be some what regulated. Parents need to be more involved with what their children are doing. Web page owner should be more responsible and use lock outs, and parental control programs, they should not allow just anyone access. Internet has at least made stop buying Hustler, Swank, etc... I am not paying for pornography so I'm not supporting it, I think. I think sex on the 'Net should be upgraded to interactive, 4-Dimensional virtual reality sex with add-ons to improve size and endurance. This should be available to all people over the elderly age of 4. I think sex is good and all should be able to enhance life by enjoying sex in its bountiful pleasure. I didn't believe in censorship until my students told me what they came across on the Internet. Now, I've changed my mind. it:s ok if you don"t like it do not browse for it I think it is used in a way that is described as easy to control if you wanted It's fine with me as long as it doesn't get seen by children. It should be in the bedroom, not on the computer! I believe it is a forum that is overwhelmingly used by men. Withour women it is not sex on the internet rather masturbation on the internet. often very good! often very dirty!! some of it is quite educational What Diss All Be Like ? It's obviously a vocal minority that opposes (publically) sexual materiel on the net. Compare the # of "hits" on sex-related sites compared to other sites; human beings love (and crave) sex! And PARENTS should take care of their children, not leave it to the government!!!!! no comment I think that sex on the Internet is completely harmless, though I do think that children should not be allowed access to certain materials. Aside from that, I don't see a problem with it. I like sex on Internet!1 Sex is a private matter between husband and wife - NOT for public consumption! keep clean sex on the internet Its Great! You really have to be LOOKING for sexual content on the Net. Also, any idea of regulating or censoring material on the Internet as a whole is rather farfetched -- it simply cannot be effectively regulated I think some of the stuff that is out there is just completly for sick, messed-up individuals while the majority of the sites are good in other giving facts and advice or helping to open up communication. It is interesting better gate-keeping is essential . . . or the appropriate authorities WILL shut it down It should be left alone. We have programs that limit what they can see (if we wish to use them). Closing internet would be like closing the phone line down because of 976 numbers. If it's to control it, it may an entirely new way to meet and encounter different people....the ultimate safe sex !! I would like to find someone ( a woman that I could get off with on the net and then meet and do it in person, I am very good. The openness is the best. I would like the prices to be cheaper I think as in real life sex has it's place on the net. I do however think that child porn should not be allowed and when found it should be deleted one way or another.. I think all sex on the net should be free. But I'll never pay for an Adult Check, let the parents of minors take the responsibility to get Net Nanny or some such software !!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!! like it very much..... You gotta get a cam, that's the best for encountering sexual materails I think it's wounderful. I think it's helped out marriage. It's hepled my wife and I talk more about it. I enjoy talking to my friends about it. It's good fun. Sex on the net is great the more the better and make it FREE! I think the internet should be completely free. If some of the content offends some people, then don't look there! If a group of people find something offensive on the net and request regulation on it, then there would be regulations on everything. It would never end. And besides, do they really think that a few policies and blocks are going to stop people? its cold and robotic..a sign of the times no problem, as long as it's goverened by a responsible adult with in the receiving household its useless I currently own a site and I really enjoy the research and time I put into it. I always wanted to be in the sex industry and now I can be without having the feeling of humalilty. If you would like to see my site here's my adress www.cmebbad.com. I hope no comment Dangerous to society i've enjoyed the access i've had though i suspect that i've picked up viruses by so doing. good I think it's just another form like adult videos, or magazines, just a lot more interactive and convienent I am totally opposed to any form of censorship, and i am copletely fascinated by the range of sexual activity, interest, energy I find on the net. My only problem is with the commercialisation of sex on the net which is fostered by political interference. Sex has turned in to something selfish-people do it because "it feels good." it is said to see National Morale on such a low level. i'm really confounded about online morality, censorship issues. The net does not show you what any Texas cornerstore can't. Smut rules and anyone denying that has never learned how fun it can be Sex is what I really want now! I think it should be free and unrestricted. It is up to the parents to keep their kid's away from adult material. I want to play in an Animalporno ithink this survey is stuid it helps I think its a way to waste time, get your partner into a sex mood, remember that were all still horny individuals underneath I like sex, not over a computer. Its one of the easiest forums of safe sex the world will ever know.. I am now hooked on the net for xxx only. My way out. excellent, open forum for exploration and formation of communities with common interests. I enjoy erotic/adult pictures and stories on the net, and enjoy the open, evolving, convenient medium for borwsing, I haven't had too much... but it is nice to know that I can turn others on in few words!! Sex on the Internet is like Times Square. Do we wreck NYC to 'clean up' Times Square? Times Square? Very nice! I think sex and sexual related subjects should be alowed to be discovered through the net by whoever wants the info. No censorship! entices but does not satisfy A little is okay but I think it is obsessvie & too much It's no different from buying a mag at the store only you can access live people if you wish. It will be available no matter what barriers are erected (no pun intended). Whatever block man can devise, man can devise a way to break it. The liberals are absolutely wiping out any and all measure of morality with their self centered, deceptive promotions I think it's great. It's private, healthy and a good time. Its ok by me,why not,can't see no harm,its part of ones life I think that a rating system would be good. good Sex on the net is highly available and I say, all the better. Information should be free and I despise the amount of censorship there is already. Give me more SEX!! If I want it, that is. The internet is a tremendous scource of knowledge for all age groups; sex is just one branch of the available information on the net.. No individual or authorative body has the moral right to dictate to any ADULT what he or she can or cannot access on the net; each ADULT individual is responsible for their own moral as well as physical wellbeing. i think, just as in real life, parents should be responsble for what thier children use the internet for. i think the wab should be completly unristricted. i also think the libral government thinks were not responsible enough to thinkfor ourselves.i DISAGREE with any notion that the web should be restricted Since i am a sexual open minded person it doesn't bother me I think the Internet is a good outlet for one's sexual desires. sex on the net teaches kids about puberty and their bodys and safe sex. and it teaches them about how to have sex It tends to be very individual & allows for freedom of expression I feel I should have full control over my own interests and how i pursue these interests...be it in real life or in cyberlife! FANTASTIC It's an easy way to get cheap thrills. I don't think it is anyone's responsibility but the parent to control what their children have access to. sex companies(comercials) should be separate area(gouped all together), so I have the opyion ob passing them. Much ado about nothing. Most of the material is inferior, immature, and mercenary in nature. If I were looking for "sex" I could find a lot of better places than the Net. I think it is too easy to get. My daughter was on a chat line when someone posted a picture of a woman having sex with a Great Dane! Disgusting! too long!!!! Sex is in the internet as it is in any place else. It is a reality and part of our day to day life. Internet is only tool, like , for instance knife, which can be used for cooking and for killing. It is not wise to impose goverment regulations on ising knives, but it is reasonable, when parents keep their knives avay from children. I don't understand how people can meet somebody online & leave their partners for them or fall in love with somebody they've never even met face to face! That's crazy!!!!Are these people starved for affection or what? I find that sex is a wonderful act, and sex on the net does not exist so much as pornography on the net. Children should learn about sex, but not necessarily have free access to pornography or sexually explicit material. sex on the internet is very good. Without it I wouldn't know what to do when I wasn't have real sex i don't think it hurts anyone bend over and give me more... yahoooooooo sex and the internet are a great combination ok i like the adult check, wish it could be done with out having to pay for it It teaches kids about sex, so parents who do not discuss sex with their kids, it wouldn't really matter because they are learneing off the net Where are the half-naked guy's pictures? very nice sex on the net is for fun and fantasy... there is alot of bad but that can apply to all areas... I find that SEX on the net is a wonderful thing. It has opened many of sexual door for myself. Sex kicks fucking ass,I think children should see all of it at the age of 10.The net sucks except for the pictures. its not what its made out to be tired of having to pay upfront, should get previews is ok I think that it is wonderful. I get to see all kinds of sexual preferences and learn a lot about sex. It provides an outlet for sexual questions i think its a good thing going on here! its helped my sex life!!! i've learned new things to make bed time more fun!!! I THINK SEX ON THE INTERNET SHOULD NOT BE CENSOED, IT'S UP TO THE PARENTS TO KEEP AN EYE ON THEIR OWN KIDS , NOT THE GOVERMENT it doesn't interest me very open minded to each his/her own! i bumped into it.(sex on iternet)i wasn't even looking for it but i was pleased to find it . You have to define sex and pornography before you can restrict it and that is very difficult also who should and who shouldn't have acess is another contraversial topic. i think there should be an awareness and acknowledgement that it is outhere but there shouldn't be a total ban on it. That would just be pleasing the narrow minded conservitive people out there who want to protect there cottonwool exesistances f you ban sex in the internet you will be sebding a message that sex is "bad" and seen as naughty and that masturbation is an evil wicked and perverted thing to do when it is not! Many sites seem to offer "blocking" software but are linked to other pornographic material. Perhaps if an internet related "committee" were established the said group could monitor for truth in promotion and censor servers who are dishonest. I think that freedom of speech and the lack of censorship is something we should be proud of 142 GGGGGGGGGGRRRRRRRRRRRRRRRRREAT Masturbatory for kids very like Sex on the net as it is everywhere else. Couldn't be stopped out there, can't stop it on-line either. Embrace sub-cultures or force them to be counter-culture. it's a lot easier to access than i originally thought sex and the internet are two great tastes thet taste great together expensive Sex in internet should be absolutely free. It saves buying it from the newsagents There's nothing wrong with it I think it should be allowed. tis good! it's not safe, anyone can get it. I think, if you desire to participate, you should be allowed to. It has helped my wife and Hard to find good cheap stuff. They keep you going in loops. access must be provided by parents It�s a good thing!!! its ok All pornography tells us the lie that it's okay to behave in any way we feel we get the most pleasure while roaming this planet - a terrible lie many have believed and now suffer for having done that. sex on the internet can be helpful to someone like me who has never had sex but often dreams of it. It provides pictures for curious like me Sex on the internet for me has been a great experience. I have become more open to new things and understand others fetishes far better. Great for adults. Safe love it- its totally safe I think the net could provide some spiceyt material for couples to use to spice up their sexual experiences I thing it is bad for real contacts sex and the internet are cool. sex should be left within the boundaries of marrige of a male and female. it should NOT be accsessable to children. pornography is sick (its also a sin) and should be TERMINATED! homosexuallity is a sin and also sick and also should be TERMINATED! mo answer Good outlet to explore The Internet is global, crossing political, geographic, racial, religious and ethical boundaries. It can not and should not be restricted. Individuals should make their own decisions, and parents should accept responsibility for THEIR children. The net is a great sexual outlet I have been able to find some good material on foot fetishes, as I have a big female dirty sock fetish and female foot fetish. Great to have easy access to many databases and information otherwise hard to find, i.e. film reviews or discussions on specific topics I AM NOT SURE YET--I HAVENT SEEN TOO MUCH 1. All cecorship does is promote burocracy, 2. censorship perpetuates the stigmatization of anything with sexual content, when people (children) should be taught to feel free to discuss with their loved ones, something that could really be bothering them. 3. I wonder if letting children freely use "pornography", or even developing special sexual material for kids, would break the tradition of thinking they have to hide things from their parents. It�s ok fdsg hfdgh fd I enjoy perusing the various aspects of it and occasionally engaging in private conversations on the net. I Dont Find A Lot Of Pictures Very Useful Too new for me to say. perfectly portrays human depravity Taken outside of my subjective experience, I think that in general, sex on the internet allows a great deal more openness which is lacking in 'rl' society, and can help to clear up ambiguities. But, not for children!!!!!! It is fine for adults... GROSS! People see what people want to see. Children should be kept from this though. Untill they are old enough to understand. no differant then buying it in mag. or film illustration of sex allows a person to privately answer question they are too shy or embarrassed to ask or view in zine shops hard to find the good stuff. too much like real sex it get boring after only a few minutes. At least with this there is no wet spot. Sex is just one aspect of the Net; it is wonderful source of information of all kinds; it helps overcome taboos and illiteracy. cool!!!!!!!!!!!!! SEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEX Highly overrated i believe in the 1st amendment. parents are responsible for making sure that their kids know the facts and what they will tolerate. Love sex, love the internet--life is better with BOTH The internet is a safe place for sex and can be fun if it's not used improperly. What adults choose to do with each other is totally up to them! There needs to be more ways to pay for sex services on the Net. Makes it easier to put your toes in the virtual water without having real-life complications. Easy to try out different virtual gender-oriented experiences. I think there is too much unregulated hard core on the net that anyone, children included can access. Some form of identification should be provided by the service providers to identify who is using that service and their age. The provider could pass out Handles with passwords for each member of a household subscribing to the service. This way only children (under 21) who were given their parents logon info could access restricted sites. The government can't regulate morality. I think that it is a safe and healthy way to enjoy sex, provided that the extra precautions with younger people are identified. I think eveyone should post naked pictures of themselves on the net. Everybody should just get buck naked and fuck!!!!!!! I am still relitively new on the net and have not foundor even know what I am looking for yet, still curious, and want to meet simmilar folks in or close to the area in which I live. Where are the naked men? it's irritating to read the stupid coverage it gets in the newspapers. most people who discuss this issue have obviously never even sat down and checked it out. it takes about 30 seconds to use altavista or hotbot to search for "suck my dick" and see for yourself what there is - duhh interesting Masturbation is great. It's a way people can have fun so just leave them alone SEX ON THE INTERNET IS UP TO THE INDIVIDUAL NOT THE GOVERMENT. i love it...well sex in general, it adds to my sexual curiosity, and lets me be myself and yet who i'm not at the same time...the women i've on the web love it....and that's what makes me love it more.... VERY OPEN AND INFORMATIVE People who write murder-mystery novels aren't murderers, so I feel that people who write "questionable" material are not "questionable". I think that the way most sites are set up on the internet is good. My biggest problem is censorship! I am a 29yr old male in the military, and apparently I am not old enough to decide what I want to look at. It may just be me, but I think thats bullshit! Where's the free stuff? Morality is not the for the government to dictate. They have divorced themselves from the relgious heritage that built this contry now they tell us they are going to tell us what is moral. I don't think so. Sex can be an embarrassing topic for someone to bring up, the internet simply allows one to explore one's curiosities... Sex on the internet is windespread from the WWW, to IRC, and Newsgroups... My name is Gary Ryno and I'm totally celibate; I don't have sex and I don't masturbate. i'M AMBIVELANT Sex on the Internet is a valuable sexual outlet for many including myself. No regulation should be imposed other than by concerned parents. exellent I love sex, I cant get enough of it and sex on the internet is great!. I enjoy it. I am a college student and it makes a nice study break. As I mentioned, there is lots of weird stuff out there. Very weird. I belive that s on the net is another form of detachment in which we are all falling prey. I feel that sex is both expressive and transendent; I fell that the casual peronalization of fantacy is healthy and typically encourages proper attitude about sex. I belive that censoring ones personal fanatcy leads to violent outcome (no pun intended) and will often result in rage or fustration that leads to violence. Censorship is too suppressive and the net may be the last frontire for free expression. I hope nd think that this is not the case, but we would all be fools to take the chance. As an internet virgin my sexual encounter with the net was untraumatic. I think there should be more of it. It�s good for looking Pictures, readding sex-stories and so on. It�s like an adventure, surfing in the internet. i love sex on the internet. it makes me more openminded. i never would have tried doing a guy without the internet. plus it's fun to masterbate while talking online. it's a real turn-on! no response No good material found that is not charging you spam There's a lot of hot air in the media and a lot of lying concernng "free" stuff when it comes to sex, be it either "free" pictures or whatever. Because that business is still considered "underground" today, it sometimes looks very "cheap". I say it's about time that real bisness' sort of naturally "impose" standards on the Net and everywhere else... Well, I've had one "sexual" partner on the Net, and he and I are now engaged. We met on the Net 4 years ago, have been living together 2 years, and will be married in March. I'm in favor of Net love, and whatever it leads to. Still a novice at this IT RULES!!!!!! I think it can be addictive and harmful for some, for others harmless clean fun. The possibility of some inappropriate people, such as children, viewing sexual material should NOT mean the end of the Internet as an area for adults to engage in whatever type of free speech they desire. have found nothing available to children, unless they have a credit card. parents are responsable for their children, not the government, or net access providers. I got a vibrator you should be able to GET SOME from the net I don't think that people should be penalized for parents inability to pay attention to what their children are doing. Don't let the children have access to the internet, or just get AOL or something like that. That is certainly easy to limit children's behaviour, and anyway, computers and television should not be used as babysitters too easy very good very interesting i think sex on the internet is a safe and private way to have involvment at whatever level you wish. I think as long as the adult members of a household take resposibility it can keep the access to minors under control. it is needed I like finding a little something when I am in the mood, and my girlfriend is busy or tired. I think the info is good for people but the porn and nasty talk is wrong and should be stoped I think that as a sociaty we place to much =value on apperence and this kind of pornography encourages it more. It's orgasmic!!! I personally think that sex on the internet is good because I'd rather do it over the computer than get my dick dirty for real and catch a disease from it. Once you can stick your dick in a computer and catch one of their viruses, then I'll stop doing it. It is very educating I believe it should continue to be an open forum. If people do not want to view this type of material, then they should not access these sites. Let the overly righteous watch network t.v.! that's great!! It is great. I love getting off on the internet Generally speaking, I find a lot that I do not especially agree with. However, sex on the net - and by virtue of its readily-accesible nature - has made me more aware of people's sexual behaviour. It's also made me more open minded and has piqued curiosity in areas which I had never before considered (S&M, light bondage). I believe that the Net should be open allowing "a place for everything" but should also be self-regulating; we as netizens should watch for those individuals who are too weak/naiv of young to make their own decisions about formulting their own perceptions of ethical sexula practices. A self-rating system on the net, adhering to democratically decided standards should exist. I'm all for it Overblown by an 'innocent' media leave it alone. user choice I think that sites should be able to post whatever they want to. Their are plenty of blocks that parents can put on their own systems. kwijibo no censorship...if you don't like it, don't look at it! but don't tell me that i can't look at it because of your beliefs! we love your web site, it is very open minded and neat. Thanks. i love porno!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!! Yea 69 Fantastic!!!! I really like the idea of being abel to find out anything on the net, including sex topics. It is a shame that this country is so embarrased about who they really are and wht they like to do! The internet is and should remain a persona of the people who use it and sex is part of that. I totally encourage non censorship and the exchange of materieals or ideas between any consenting adults. If you're into it, and you're not hurting anyone, have fun. Censorship of any kind is never a good thing. Pedophilia is the only thing I believe should be banned from the net due to the nonconsentual and harmful nature of it. Consentual adult sex of all kinds should be freely available for whatever purposes peop i think there should be a way for parents to limit the amount of access their children have...such as aol. they have the right idea, children's access, teen access, & adult access. Sex is everywhere on the Net. I do a channel listing on IRC and at least 75% of the chat rooms are about sex or mention it in their topics. I'm not overly concerned about it all but would just like for you too know how it exists. I make a nice profit selling pics on disk or zip drives to classmates at school for about $0.50 per pic! :) The Internet Lets People open up their mind to thing they would not have possibly thought of otherwise. Good or Bad...Censorship should be done on an indivuadal basis, by parents and such. Not anyone else. I really like it and lets me know what is new as far as sexual information goes Sex on the net is like sex on TV or video: not very interesting, just because nothing is real (and honest) Where is all this sex in the Internet?!?! I want to find some!!!!!! Harmless, there is more porn available at the local supermarket. No big deal I don't mind sexual site on the Internet but I do belive some of the non-concentual material and pedafile stuff should be dealt with as soon as it is spotted. Sometimes access to these types of sights is sometimes easier than it should be. But then again where do we draw the line between art and porn? Net sex is rather dull and porn is a real yawn after 30 seconds. The moral uptight need to find another social laxative and leave net fucking alone. Perverts need an outlet so they don't commit sex crimes. cyber clubs allow for those afraid of being sigmatized by participating in red light districts the ability to have similar experiences to those who are not afraid of being labeled. It can have long-run damaging effects, however; from the objectification o Like many outlets for sex information in the media, video seems to be male oriented and text seems to be female oriented. I think people should be held responsible for their own actions; parents should be able to guide and discipline their own children without someone telling them to. I think it is a great opportunity to explore sex in all its forms without hurting anyone else. if it feels good do it I'm not too totally interested in it..Actually, I'm amused by people who are aborbed by it..But I see no reason why it should looked at as such a big deal. Come on, people, it's a body. We all have one. lots of porn on the internet, but no one can do anything about it.... I think it is just another topic that people want to find out about and it provides them an open opportunity too - I do think there should be like an adult check service or some age verification to prevent children getting on in SOME/MOST cases without the supervision of the adult whoopee! The questions about what to do about sex on the net is far too limited for an accurate reply, I think. One option, for example is something similar to a "V" chip, where sex material can only be accessed if you have this device which will allow you to decode, or perhaps work it the other way around, a chip to censor it out so parents have control. People get too worked up about sex and the internet and everything. There's way too much hype. If you don't want to see it, then don't look at it. Censorship is a stupid concept. The problem with defining "sex on the net" is where do you draw the line? The main reason I think it should be open is for the sake of under-18 friends of mine who realize they are gay or bisexual -- many "sexually oriented material" filters filter supportive information for these people too and this is NOT fair. Furthermore, you do generally have to look for it to find anything *truly* offensive, and kids who are looking will find some way to get it anyhow -- I always did *grin* I dont think gratuitous images of scantily clad women should be on the internet. Read and see what you like but make SURE kids cant get to it sex on the internet for me is good because of my bisexuality i can go online and have cyber sex with another women and it is better then me going out and cheating on my husband. I would let my child go online and find sexually orientated material. it would be better then him having sex in real life and getting vd or getting a girl pregnant. Some of it can be pretty sexy to read, lots of it is just boring and repetitive. (Course, sex can get that way too!) Certainly I would hate to see a govt related regulatory body regulating what I and other adults can or cannot look at. Creepy and a new and safe outlet-all at once! Could be better, i want to find pedophilia picture, but didn' find any! Puke puke puke, oh excuse me I was throwing up. I think it stinks you perverted freaks. I am telling your mother. Those who would force their views on what's available are the worst form of censor. It only promotes further ignorance. Censorship OF ANY FORM sux the max. It is not as important as always in the papers. I hardly know anybody who actually knows how to access hardcore nsites or even to enter news groups. I feel it is acceptable for sex tro be on the internet providing that children do not have access to it. also that all Child pronography should be kept off the internet by some legal / protection groups . I believe that child pronography is sick!! it's a free country. we should be able to access sex on the net Not as good as real life. I love it. My boy-girl friend thinks it is great after a long day at the fish plant. WELL, WHEN I GO ON LINE, I"M LIKE A CAR. I GRIP MY 17INCH COCK AND START TO SHIFT MY GEARS. BOY, I DON'T KNOW WHAT I WOULD DO WITHOUT MY NUDDIE TV. IT'S EITHER THIS OR KOJAK. W Sex is one of the most exciting human activities but it has many risks, specially for health both phisical and psicological. Safe sex is a must. This means people need information about sex, and that learning should be done before having to make any decision about their own sexual acts. People should know about responsibility, for their own, and for the others. I think that they need alot more about sex and tell more about it. also let someone who had it many times tell about there wonderful time and how it felt!! It will regulate itself in time. Those sites that are not desireable will not survive. It doesnt really bother me. I take the opinion of, if you dont like it dont look at it. The Internet has nothing to do with sex unless you want it to. I THINK IT,S OK I can't say I find computers very sexy but I suppose for some people an innocent e-mail could be the start of a red hot electro-sexual relationship (oo-er). fun It serves as some sort of entertainment after a long working hours and I think it is something all guys will have and it can never be stoped completely. Good but it could be better. helps ;elleviate frustration it's a candy store ! Sex is a participation sport, not a spectator sport. ???????????????/ Was checking sex just for curiosity Keep up the good work , how ever I do wish more erotica was free! I think that ther needs to be a switch in the serch engines to prevent sex site response unless prompted. This would prevent the kids from even seeing that there are sights available to click on. It is just too easy to take a wrong turn when in search engines and get a sexually explicit image! as long as there are rating systems and ways children are unable to see it, then go ahead I think its great. You can be yourself in every way. I am all fro sex on the net. We just need an regulation to rate it and thats all and a standard put into HTML code to tell browsers the rate for this type of document. I think that there should be a rating system, but no censorship. Tame mosst of the time, with way to much sex for sale crap It`s great! It`s freedom. I don't see how the Internet can be "policed". It should be open to all. Parents who have no supervision over their children deserve the children they end up with! I think pornography on the net is awesome. The net is one of the last almost totally uncensored areas in the world, where a free exchange of information takes place and it is simply amazing!!!!!!!! It should be there for those who want to view it There's nothing wrong with sex on the internet. Sex is the ultimate act while the internet is the ultimate free speech medium they go hand in hand! kunda I think if that is what someone wants to look at, who am I to say they can not! In Sweden, where I'm from, there are very few regulations about pornography. I think it should be that way on the net to. The Communication decency act stinks!!! It's just another proof of that wierd moral ruling America. America worries more about forbidding pornography on the net, than doing something about the fact that thousands of people get killed every year by handguns. it should stay on the internet It may honestly be the revolutionary way for sharing sex and intimacy without the adverse consequences of unwanted pregnancy and disease. It also provides a media for the races to get together without prejudices of sight. I think its okay if its not real accessible to children. Adults have to take responsibility for their children. If you cant keep it away from them than get rid of the net. Its is wondeful - epecialy CUSeeme It is on there enough for IF you want to find it, it's there... but if you have no desire, it stays out of your way.. it's how it should be.. censors are a bunch of crap trying to take away rights. yum We are sexual. Sex is good thing. Researchers have clearly demonstrated that children have sexual "urges." The concern is not sex, it's power-relationships and health in the context of sexual activity. Would like to see more exciting stuff. :) SEX Need more of it fantastic, glad we have coding +decoding devices for newsgroups I enjoy having the opportunity to view sexually explicit material at my home! Parents should be responsible for what their children see. Yet, some parents are not caring parents and will not supervise their children, therefore, some type of regulations are needed. we should have more access to everything! It is a good thing! Sex is great. The internet is great. I see no problum with them together. I feel that it is there and should be. It's just like any other information and should be available to those who chose to view it. How would you deal with the issue of regulating sexual/offensive content? Completely open to adults easier monitoring for children child pornography should be forbidden the current practice of limiting access with age verification seems adequate if extended to all with erotic content parental responsibility Blow the suckas to hell have parents have control of their children Mind your OWN business, take care of your OWN kids, and don't negatively judge others, publically, for what YOU yourself do privately! >:-( ;o) individuals should monitor content of materials, within their own computer....and limit access to minors.... America needs to grow up and realize that what is open to the puplic can help a national situation rectify it's self in such problems as rape and insest. The Net SHOULD NOT BE REGULATED it is an adults duty to monitor their own and childrens access to the net. promote use of adult-verification services and use secured pages with access denied to those without proof of legal age.. People should learn that if they dont want to look they shouldn't! Monitoring system that notifies parents of child's activity let it b make it available only by free or paid subscription make porn legal be aware myself of what my child is involved in on the net kill those people I really feel like if you don't like what your looking at then mind somebody elses business. There are many options to keep our children off of these sights. And who are all of these people that think that they can decide what is moral for the world. Last time I checked, even before the contrversy of the internet, the world was anything but moral. What may be right for somebody is not always right for someone else. Pay for view If you dont like it dont go there(get cyber nany) Parents must monitor their kids. provide easy and honest means to block offensive material at the browser end make ways for parents to censor what comes into their homes Nuke the bastards The Parents Should Check Their Kids Better Existing laws should be applied to the net encourage others to mind their own fucking business Fuck the morality of the human race!!! We want titties and butts!!! Adults over 18 should have access to or post any sexual info or talk they want no restrictions Parental Control should be more stronger in homes fuck the gov. keep the standards to where they should not be held liable and make it your choice to block certain sites for children. Just as anti-racists cruise the 'net and directly attack racist web-sites via email, links and info proving the falseness of the extremists' claims, so could Internet sex warriors cruise the info highway providing warnings regarding really perverse stuff. by the way, I have seen really perverse stuff on the net - fisting, coprophilia (shit eating, for the less informed), kiddie porn, bestiliaty, the whole gamut. Most extreme porn filth is not located in sex websites but in "gross" sites such as alt. tateless. my advise is start drinking heavily shag!!! let it be like it is Up to the discretion of the users Continued use of sites such as "Cyber-Patrol" to restrict access by children - otherwise, a completly open net. fuck censoring let adult members of household take responsibility for controlling what minors have access to. it should be left alone before you get into the sight, have a little sign that says"17 or under prohibited" rating system that can be blocked by adults if that is what thay CHOOSE. complete availability should be available to all... those who are offended should just block it out of their own system set up ways to have parents choose the amount of access their children have parent's have the responsability for teaching and educating their own kids, leave it to them Provide ways for in family controls to be used. I think you are sick and perverted you sickos. PS I think you all should be fixed ensure children are not viewing FUCK ALL THOSE WHO ARE NOT IN FAVOR. Parents should monitor their kids In the privacy of one's home you have a right to view it Let parents baby sit their own kids Should not Censor the net If you don't like it, don't look at it!! If you don't like it, dont look at it! let us see what we whant to see!!!!! Questions, comments, suggestions? Contact us. Return to theHome Page. Copyright ©1996, /InterCommerceCorporation, All rights reserved worldwide Send comments to Webmaster@Survey.net WT02-B22-11IA060-000333-B022-272http://www.survey.net:80/rlg1c.html 204.107.221.240 19970115054717 text/html 45548HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 15 Jan 1997 05:41:02 GMTServer: Apache-SSL-US/1.0.3+1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 45365Last-modified: Wed, 15 Jan 1997 03:40:42 GMT SURVEY.NET - Religion Survey - User comments (latest) Your source for information, opinions & demographics from the NetCommunity! ANNOUNCING: The Internet's finest interactive, totally-automated,immediate survey system. We can take any form and instantly create adynamic demographic database and show you the results as soon as youcomplete the survey! Internet Religion Survey #1 User comments Previous comments archived: Part I Part II Part III Part IV Please describe your religious philosophy: One should live life doing the greatest good for the greatest number of dynamics (dynamics go from one to 8, where one is the self and 8 is an originator or "god" Respect yourself and pass it on God is perhaps the silliest concept man has ever come up with. Each person should endevour to rediscover his spirituality which he/she will do by study, accurate observation, helping others, helping society, leading a highly ethical life and positively enhance him/herself in all areas. The Way, the Truth, and the Life, is the only way to true life--Christ Jesus. One hand He reached out to God, as only God can. The other hand he reached out to man, as only a man can. And He brought the two together. I know that christ lives. I know that the gospel is true. I will follow the teachings of the Lord Jesus Christ Personal religion of Hinduism (Sanatana Dharma) Any individual can improve and be more happy in life if he himself wants to Be able to experience anything, and only cause those effects that others can easily experience. I truly believe and *know* that when you have found the truth in life, and about life, you have achieved a high degree of spiritual level, which can mean immortality. When you are in the right religion, you can make things go right. My religion is very, very practical. It is not esoteric as an "outsider" may believe. Scientology makes one more able. It is observable. We are spiritual beings who never die. We play and have played many games. The main purpose of religion is to help us play a better game. The purpose of religion is the attainment of knowledge and understanding about life A person is completely responsible for his condition and is future existence. This includes his future lives. Living in this way is the only guarantee of a happy future - a goal all have in common. Religion is and should be a means of achieving both spiritual and material fulfillment. It is a constant striving for a higher standard of ethics. Mine is an applied religion which requires no "Faith" or "Belief", just the application and then self observation if the results from that application. People are more powerful than they believe they are. They also tend to forget the importance of the welfare of the other beings on this planet to their own survival and happiness. Man is a spiritual being who can be helped to be more aware and behave better and is basically good. Through careful study and application, I have found that L. Ron Hubbard, the Founder of Scientology, has researched and developed a carefully-mapped route to acheive spiritual enlightenment. I find it very difficult to believe in god. More and more, I find god, and the concept of god, man made. Scientology not only gives me great comfort as a spiritual being, it also gives me the tools to live this life better. I have used it to improve myself, my familial relationships, my marriage, my children, and even my work place. It is an invaluable element of my day-to-day life, as I believe religion should be to every man and woman. A person is a spiritual being, timeless and deathless. A spiritual being is far more able than most of us have been led to believe. Through the application of Scientology there is something an individual can do to increase his own awareness of and willingness to demonstrate these abilities. Religion is shit!! There is no evidence, concrete or otherwise, supporting the existence of God, an afterlife, heaven, hell, or reincarnation. Therefore, everyone is welcome to believe whatever they like or are convinced of. However, religion is self-deluding and destructive of self and society. What I do is what works. I chose a religion that is useful in life, not just after death. Man is corrupt deserving separation from Yahwah, but he loves us so much he sent a sacrefice to atone for our corruption. You need only to accept the massiah as your Lord (his athority to rule your life) submit and seek him and you shall find him. Yashua is the only way to regain comunion with the allmighty creator. May I not misslead a sole, Amen. Man is a spiritual being with potentialities vastly greater than we are led to believe Abandoning religious values has contributed to a decline in the stability of our society. I don't think question 7 is well phrased. My religious guidelines could be the doctrine of my church, it could be what I ahve found to be true through my own study and questioning. The question doesn't allow for the possibility that part of the religious doctrine is forgiveness from those wanderings. I think religion is something people need to have, otherwise we'd all be a mess without something to believe in. Although some religions are better than others, I believe that most tend to promote judgemental or hostile attitudes towards people who hold different beliefs, and that they generally do more harm than good. We allways talk about tah THERE IS ONLY ONE GOD, ALLAH, AND MUHAMMOD IS THE MESSENGER OF ALLAH Jesus Christ - Crucified, died, buried, resurrected, eternal life! I am a MUSLIM and ISLAM is my religion. There is no God but ALLAH, and MOHAMMAD was His last Prophet. Before Mohammad, there were JESUS, MOSES, ABRAHAM ....... ADAM (the First Prophet). WHY AM I SO SURE THAT ISLAM IS THE RIGHT PATH? Because the Ultimate PROOF is here for all to see! It is in the Holy QUR'AN. Read it with an open mind...Compare it with any other scripture. YOU TOO WILL SEE THE TRUTH! Baha'i - focused on esoteric aspects Mormonism is not a sect of Chrisitianity, no matter how much they want us to believe. They are a cult, along the lines of Jehovah's Witnesses and Christian Science. Belief in GOD and following the principals that he teaches is necessary for a peaceful life on earth. If everyone on earth followed his teachings there would be peace and not war! All organized religions are derived from the one and same spiritual principle, which resides in the very essence of all beings. Religion is inextricably tied to philosophy and science. The answers to what is life, who we are, where we are etc. are the truths every being is ultimately looking for. A true religion must contain this information and not simply "beliefs". I am disappointed that in Qustion #13, you do not list the Quran (which gives guidance to >1 billion people! Islam-Shi'sm is the only true faith because it emanates from Imfallible vicegerents of Allah SWT and they preached The TRUTH. Live and Let Live Everyone on the planet is agnostic but may not be out of the closet. That man IS his own immortal soul, (as opposed to having a soul) and that he is capable of far greater acheivements and much higher understanding of himself and his fellows than he has ever dreamed of. go with the flow I BELIEVE THE TOTAL BIBLE AND WHAT IT TEACHES AS MAN HAS NOT COME UP WITH A VIABLE ALTERNATIVE THAT MAKES ANY SENSE NOR HAVE THEY BEAT THE SYSTEM. Man is basically good and can be totally free if he learns how the mind works and life works. He is trapped by his reactive mind content and by getting rid of that content, he can regain his freedom to be himself and know life. The truth of the past will set you free. We are all basically good, immortal spiritual beings, who, because of making incorrect decisions lifetime after lifetime, have deteriorated down to an almost degraded state, having lost our full potentials. Now relying stictly on the physical body, we have lost sight of the fact that with our full potential restored, through appying the truth of natual spiritual laws, we are capable of regaining all the abilities we once had and more, and thus attaining total spiritual freedom. Also ridding the worl of Psychiatry and its harm to mankind. We are all basically good and immortal spiritual beings, but are greatly deteriorated from our original selves and from our full potential and have thus become dependent on the physical body. We are thus stuck in an endless cycle of life after life. But through the application of the truth of natural spiritual laws are capable of re-attaining our original selves and our full potential and thus freedom from the endless cycle of lives. In this way we can attain total spiritual freedom. one must tolerate all religions-and coincide to try and maintain a healthy living enviroment if you know man, you can solve most of this civilization's problems There is only One God, and Prophet Mohammed was the final messenger of God. I believe in the Oneness of God and all of the Prophets of God, and make no distictions between any of the Prophets (from Adam, Ibrahim, Moses, Noah, John, Jesus, Muhammed) peace be upon them all. We each have a responsibility to learn to live our lives, moment by moment, in the way God would have us live them. Religion is a historical construct by a hierarchical male dominant society to control the masses, and women in particular, by denying them their inherent, ancient, direct access to Spirit. I am a firm believer in Jesus, however I think that there are other ways to find the Lord. As long as you are searching for a being of True Love and Trust and Peace and other such virtues, you have found the Lord. THERE IS NO SUCH THING AS RELIGION, THERE IS NO PROOF OF ANY KIND! www.geocities.com/Athens/Acropolis/2319 will explain further. Worship God, IF that is your choice, but to kill another for thier religious beliefs is ludicrous. INNAS-SALATI WA NUSUKI WA MAHYAYA WA MAMATI LILLAHIR-RABBIL 'ALAMINN Jesus Christ lives and established his gospel. The same gospel that my religion teaches and believes in. Everyone should have some moral code as a basis for the way they live their lives. They should never impose it on others. Love (to God and the men), tolerance and respect (towards those who not share the same principals I have), peace. Men are basically good, they are spiritual beings and need tools for life to survive better and be happy. Tolerence, concern for and respect for others That Man is a spiritual being and can do something about changing the condition he finds himself in I am an atheist and have no doubts about religion; ie, I am not an agnostic. I do believe it serves some people well to believe. If we all went to church a little more this world would be a much better place! Man is a spirit. He does not "have" a soul - he IS a soul. And as a spirit, man is eternal. He has lived many lives and will live many more. Unity of all things on a foundation of "love" as the guiding priciples Scientology is an APPLIED religious philosophy. When learned and USED, it creates a better life for one and one's fellows. I believe that man is a spiritual being capable of attaining a better existence for himself and for others. religion is some language, which allows to describe SOME aspects of human being better than other languages (for instance science). It also the best way for SOME people to survive in open (in terms of K.Popper) society. I refer to the writings of L. Ron Hubbard. We all are spiritual beings who are basically good, that we are much more able than we believe, and can rehabilitate ourselves to become eternally free. Scientology isn't easy, but it is very workable and useful. Looking at your interesting survey I would say that religions are generally potentially helpful but that prerequisites are good intentions, tolerance and at least a fair understanding of life. That man is a spirit, timeless and deathless. By his own destructive acts, he limits his future power and abilities. To really understand God, one must come to know oneself and one's fellows first. Man is a spiritual being and is basically good, but can act badly. What is true for you, is true for you. Religion is personal, and as long as it forwards the betterment of mankind and the individual, its fine with me. Scientology is a non-denominational applied religious philosophy and is open to all creeds. It helps one to become cause over one's life and destiny. DO THE BEST FOR AS MANY PEOPLE ,ANIMALS, ETC. To achieve greater self-confidence and personal integrity thus enabling my to really trust and respect myself and my fellow man. Man is not an animal or a mind or a body. Man HAS a mind and HAS a body. Religion is what you make it. there is no heaven or hell after death. we experience it here right now. ALLAHU AKBAR !! (GOD IS GREAT) I believer the KJV1611 bible to be the infallible word of God for us today. Treat everyone the best way you possibly can. TO LOVE THE LORD THY GOD WITH ALL THY HEART, MIND, BODY, AND SOUL AND THY NEIGBER AS THY SELF AND SALFATION THROUGH CHRIST OWER LORD I know in whom I have believed and am persuaded that HE is able to keep that which I have committed unto HIM against that day. Life is happiest when I feel that I am OK with God and he sees me and approves of the way I am conducting my life. what is lost should be found, what is given should be accepted, that is the key! I believe in love, friendship kindness, happyness, and individalism. Not greed, hate, suffering, & being lead around like a bunch of sheep by con men & coned men, following vague rules that dont come even close to meening what they ment when they were first written for another cause & reson. SNOOK I believe that Religion should not be used to control a person's way of life. It should be used as an enhancement or an avenue towards deepening a person's inner soul. Spiritual principles based on 12 Steps. I was raised as a Catholic, which seems more about control than anything else. I believe honor is its own reward. I believe human warmth is the only real thing there is. There is more to this earth than can be described in words. Neither nor anyone else knows the answers. It is our duty to be respectiful of life and of others. The one rule I try to live by is "Do unto others as you would have done unto you" Be harmonious with and respect your surroundings I don't believe in the Roman Catholic God as male.. my beliefs are a mixture of Catholic and Witchcraft/New Age. I hold only some things of Catholisism with me and most of the Wicca/New Age beliefs. I believe in the oneness of God, His Prophets, his Holy Books and that Mohammad is his last Messanger Objectivism, The Philosophy of Ayn Rand I believe in Karma. Karma dictates a person's "Heaven" and "Hell." If there is no God, then nothing here matters. No achievement you will ever make will matter if it's all over when you die. "Then you should feel JOY because you are SAVED!!! " - Gayle D. Erwin In the process of believing in one God, one achieves greatness and finess one would expect in life. As a scientist, it is very hard to balance facts with theology. I believe we all possess 'religion' genes - it gave believers a survival advantage - and now we have little choice to believe or not!s i do not consider Christianity just some ordinary 'religon'. 'religon is just some set of rules, but JESUS is The Savior and He is all that matters! Jesus is Lord. He will judge. He has all authority. Salvation thru faith in Jesus, not works. Humanism with a mishmash of many religious and secular beliefs stirred in. Religion totally ruined a previous relationship of mine. I had a girlfriend that was a christian and myself being an athiest, it was kind of like an oil/water type of thing. I think that religion is a very destructive force in the world. Look at the number of people who lose their lives because of this!! There are two paths that we are constantly at the fork, we choose the correct path by our own free will. pantheist None Each of us possesses a different mental disposition, and therefor cannot be satisfied spiritually/emotionally by one dominant religion. Religion can be an extremely positive force in society, but only if founded upon the principles of diversity, acceptance of others and love; otherwise religion can quickly become a tool for those who wish to oppress the masses. Open your heart and give it a try. DESTROY THOSE FUCKING CHRISTIAN BASTARDS !!!!!!! GOD. GOD IS EVERYTHING. EVERTHING. There is, and never was, a god... Religion is a crutch which people lean on to avoid thinking logically. Historically religion has been more harmful than helpful in promoting hate, violence and intolerance. People use religion to provide easy answers to complex questions rather than accep Behave in any way you want as long as it harms no-one else and you are prepared to face the consequences of your actions. All talk--No action Cross between a Muslim and Jew. I have a hard time believing in the concept of Jesus as the Son of God. I feel religion should be taught, but not crammed down the throats of those that DON'T want to listen. Religious beliefs (not excessive) and respect for others' individual beliefs help this worl to be a better place. My religion contributes to my inner peace and my outlook on life - be thankful for all that you have, treat others as you would like to be treated, be as good and as kind as you can be. I don't believe that one single person could have created all the world and its creatures. I believe that people use a supreme being to explain what they cannot. I have seen God...and SHE is CHAOS Religion is like chocolate. A little bit is okay, too much makes you sick. La Illaha ill Allah, Muhammad Rasul Allah ( There is no god but Allah, Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah) I believe that everyone is born with the simple knowlege of what's right and what's wrong. If you live your life by simply following a few basic guidelines such as The Ten Commandments, you're going to be OKAY, in this life and any other life that is hereafter. KILL 'EM ALL AND LET GOD SORT 'EM OUT!!!!!!!! Be tolerant of others, do nothing that would hurt others, and take time to frequently reflect on your life and your spirituality. I am Mormon (the true church) There is probably a "psychics" that apply to non-material things: wishes, deeds, etc., and they probably have momentum and eventually causal relationships, but there is no self aware being directly controlling us. And we're probably recycled; at least, I'd hope so. Whatever you do if you find that it brings good, continue it. If you find that it brings about harm to someone or something, stop and find another strategy. You will eventually discover the tactics the Creator wants you to use to manuever in life successf With my religion (Witchcraft/Paganism, I spend more of my time explaining what I am NOT, rather than what I am Strive to love God. Religion, due to its universality, seems to me to provide a strong sense of security for many people. But I also believe that there is a supreme being that created the universe structure in which we live. Who can really say that they know anything for sure? Prech it brother!!!!! I belive that all should worship the almighty bob or die by a thourough spam beating Kill em all, and let god sort them out I read & try to go by the Urantia Book - truth I do not like organized religion, yet it does serve as support for many people. peace of mind, in harmony with myself and the external world, the cause, purpose and destination of my life. o I think the heart of the Torah is YHWH telling Moses, "I AM." Everything else is interpretation. Jesus was the homosexual, poetic, oratorally-gifted son of a jewish carpenter. He was NOT the son of god. to say so is ludicrous and represents a lack of education , intelligence, and imagination. I believe that the Bible is a "Life Guide" and it has answers to every question. It fosters good solid family life and prayer. If you pray your way through the day, you can't go wrong. I think religion is very personal and people should be allowed to believe whtever gets them through the night. Salvation through Jesus Christ, belief in the Holy Trinity, Old & New Testament, Apostolic faith in Apostles and Nicene Creed, Christianity is only true faith, all others are lies Love is what is important. Thank you!! There are answers beyond our understanding, but there are always answers. Life ends, but systems are forever. All actions have consequence, but few are of any importance. Morality is more than a rule. Social contracts are destroyed when they are written. there is no force in/into religion I believe in God who created the universe and Muhammed pb is his messenger. ALLAHU AKBAR There are no gods. only assertions that they exist Love all, tolerate all...Religion is not the same for everyone. To love - to live in peace I haven't learned enough about all religions to commit to any one. I'm a solitary eclectic pagan and recovering Catholic :) Religion is a way of life which guides a person to a goal. That goal is what helps a person strive and struggle to understand life. Could give a shit less what YOU believe; quit forcing onto ME. Do unto others as you would have them do unto you, just about says it all! There is no god but Allah and Muhammad (peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) is His last and final messanger. religion and enlightened humanism is the key to personal and communal happiness Eight words the Wiccan Rede fulfil, and it harm none, do as ye will. I really believe in sprititually not religion. because religion tells you what you must believe, an sprituallty is your own believe in a god or a higher power. I believe there is more to life than what we each experience, but no individual can claim to know the answers. Anyone who does is either being controlled or seeks to control others. Islam is the only answer to todays problems - if Islam was more and more prevalent previously as it is now becoming, we could have avoided a heck of a lot - a prime example being the Rodney King incident.... John 3:16 "For God so loved the world that he gave his only son, that whoever believes in him may not perish but have eternal life." We should kill all o f the muslims becasue they bring so much pain to the rest of the world. We should also kill all of the budhists because they are pagan savages. My infinately living and tolerant God told me these things, I think. I believe that religion should not only be a weekend thing, but that it should be a way of life. Use it for you not someone else. do not commit what Allah had forbidden. Religious philosophy:There are many gods and many "bob" but none are the answer. So its best w/ your ownDIY religion so that way everyone is wrong and you are write NO MATTER WHAT and so you can scam all the humans and make tons of $$$ just as "Bob" intended for you. Or you can make it up as you go along. Its even more complicated than that so just go to http://suncite.unc/subsite and bask in the confusion of "Bob" Why are people so gullible when it comes to this nonsense I am so unsue, that it is frighting Truth is a pathless land...one cannot come to it through any creed, dogma, rituals or holy persons. One has to find it through understanding your own mind. All life is connected, and this connective force animates all life--plants, animals, people, deities--all of it. We're all part of the web, and to damage another is to damage ourselves. Religion is responsible for more deaths than any other cause. You are your *own* controller. religion is for the weak!!! There is one God"ALLAH" and Pophet Muhammad(pbuh) is his last messanger. All churches should be taxed as businesses unless they qualify under standard procedures as social charities. I believe in the duality of existance, that everything has its complement. I beleive that everyone has a right to believe what they choose and that there is no ONE way to reach [salvation, nirvana, enlightenment, god]. We should all respect each other's beliefs and not impinge the freedom of religious choice guaranteed in the Constitution. The New Testament is my creed To believe in a religion is a person's right, but to impose a religion is immoral. Peace with self and with the whole world in this life and hearafter We are Justified by Grace of a loving God who sent his Son so that we might in faith have a new relationship with our Creator. I was born and baptised into the Roman Catholic faith. Throughout school I was herded along with my classmates through ceremonies like first communion, confirmation. I was not permitted to express thoughts, concerns, doubts, etc.. Finally I met a priest who encouraged me to think for myself (not let parental influence be my only guiding factor). I was encouraged to explore and make choices that would spiritually satisfy ME, not anyone else. To this day I remain agnostic (unsure) of the exixtence of a sperior being. I enjoy the freedom to explore a religion, and usually come away with aspects that I can agree with and believe. You could say that my beliefs are a pot pourri of many religions. A person's connection to God is personal. God exists within every human being. Knowledge is born. God is absolutely great, and he cares about everything and everyone. If you truly repent the he will forgive you. Too hypocritical Religion is a natural extension of man's fear of death and the unknown. It can help greatly through positive teachings but can also destroy by being the guise for hatred of "different" people. ex. Spanish Inquisition. I thank Allah for showing us the siratel mustakiym. Our purpose in life is to worship Allah I've got nothing against other people having differing beliefs to myself, but personally find no need to resort to religion in order to control my life or impose "good behaviour" on myself. I don't need a book to tell me what's right and wrong. i know right from wrong, good from bad without ever having had a religious upbringing. i know i am a good person, and i know i am good because i want to be, not because there are rules to obey, and threats of damnation or returning in my next life as a bug...i understand most people need encouragement to be "good", and that's allright with me. i don't need it. just DONT tell me your god is better than his god, or not to use birth control or not to have an abortion...and don't hand me flyers for bibl study or knock on my door to tell me about your religion. i see the negatives of religion as exclusionary, elitest and patriarchal. No one religion can be right and another wrong... my religion consists of many elements of many different religions. Religion is merely eartly traditions, what is really required is a relationship with God. This transcends all cultures and traditions. My beliefs are personal and private. I am somewhat of an agnostic, but I pray anyway because it makes me feel better. I am accepting of everyone else's faiths, but I am very annoyed at people who try to convert me to their 'one true way' I say if you meet god, tell him to prove it. Islam is a continuation to the teachings of all the prophets of God(peace be upon them) It defines our concept of self, purpose and function. It is a basis for support in our lives. Without it we lack the necessary sense of purpose and quality in our lives. Although it exists in many forms, probably the important question is 'How in my life have I used my abilities and efforts to be truly helpful to others in theri life and in their quest to be the kind of person they want to be?'. i think as one grows and experiences life, a person wants that freedom to do what s/he believes to be right and will not truely believe a religion until s/he truely loves it themselves. One cannot be forced into believeing a certain belief- s/he has to choose it himself! Religion is a manner in which to control the weak. Those who are incapable of adhereing to a positive moral philosophy need it. Love all, understand nothing tangible, but weed. Do unto others... be honest, be kind, try to leave the planet a better place than when you arrived, try to do the right thing. I don't believe morality is God-given, each society re-invents it but that doesn't make it unimportant or mean that without it, we wouldn't live in less happy communities. I think that there is too much to know to be concerned with answers to ultimate questions. I am satisfied with the wonders of the natural world. "Fuck 'em if they can't take a joke" --Jr. "BOB" DOBBS Respect towards everybody regardless of religion. live and let live Slack - 'frop - Noise - Dad (11 11) Frog Croaked For Your Sins! Take A Leap Of Faith! (Humor is a great spiritual force!) Gott ist tott There is no Jesus only "Bob" Jesus Christ is my personal Savior, since I have given my life to Him and He has forgiven all my sins, I will spend eternity with Him in heaven. Anyone who does not believe in Christ will go to hell for the punishment of their sins. God does not send people to hell, He loves them, People choose not to accept Christ and send themselves to hell. I'm very much unsure at this time, but I think I'm being brainwashed. Traditional Christian religion is bad...they said to love everybody, yet burned witches at stake...as if! I feel religion is very important, but it is a personal decision. If you decide that you don't believe in God, then thats fine, because thats your decision. I believe that God will base it on what you did during life, and not what others did. Religion is an often usefull source of hope and belief for those that lack it. It provides a sense of guidance and belonging. It is, especially in the case of Christianity, an outdated and restrictive control that is based on the opinions and beliefs of another millenium. Christianity is responsible for the perversion and destruction of many beoples live by imposing upon them a false feeling of guilt for "offenses before God". There is no offese before God, only before yourself. When I die, time will stop. My body is an extention of my mind, and my mind is an extention of the universe. Jesus said in John 14:6, I am The Way, The Truth and The Life: no one comes unto The Father, but by Me. The basic tenets of Christianity are founded on John 3:16, For God so loved the world, that He gave His only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in Him should not perish, but have everlasting life. That life is abundant, eternal Life that starts now, lasts throughout eternity, and is available to any who will ask. Religion is like food, to eat only apples is unhealthy and uninteresting. (1) Universe = God; (2) God isn't human, don't pretend to understand; (3) all religions, including atheism, are FALSE, but you can't avoid believing... just keep that in mind; (4) you'll stop laughing when the Saucers come. People made up religion because they did not know what to beleive. There is a scientific explination for everything except religion...think about that. Although I believe strongly in God, I believe that every other person has the right to their own choices and I do not ha ve the right to impose my values on them. WITHOUT GOD I WOULD BE LOST Walt Whitman writes: ...I find no sweeter fat than sticks to my own bones. That seems closest to the truth. Live and let live--everyone has a choice. http://sunsite.unc.edu/subgenius/ Religion is a personal thing. I believe that religion should be a one-on-one relationship with God. You do not necessarily have to 'fit' into a major sect of religion to be with God. I've never met any gods. God wants us all with Him in heaven. The truest path to Heaven is provided by the 2,000 year old Roma Catholic Church. The self is the highest being in the world. `There is one God, He sent His son to die on the cross so that the people of the world could be saved from sin and be born again. If you do not believe, you are lost, and will go to hell when you die. There is a supreme being who is the same God all religions pray to. Adhereing to one dogma is not required. Religion and/or a belief in a supreme being is a key aspect of a strong mental stability as well as a strong societal stability. It can be shown "Statistically" that since the decline of the religious society in America, there has been a significant increase in catagories such as teen pregnancy, violent crime, etc. . If we have no one to answer to other than man and we have no regard for our fellow man, then what is to keep us from the desicration of man in whatever fashion desired? I believe that Jesus of Nazareth is the Son of God and brings us a message of Love and salvation. Love God with all your mind, heart, and strength and love your neighbor. materialist and existentialist, but I distrust the strict dualisms that are sometimes associated with these: mind/brain and tool/free being I believe in tolerance for those who believe diferrently, and respect their right to choose, until they start trying to foist their crap onto me. e.g. Jehovah's Witness knocking on my door at 7am and barging right in while I'm still in my underwear. Damn safe storage gun laws. SITUATIONAL ETHICS. Lack of faith in God is the reason Bubba is the President and the reason for the moral decline in this country. Morality is not relative; it is defined by God and is absolute. Denial of this does not change the truth of it. Religion makes me peaceful, it's ggood to have someone to trust. Religion like other social institutions is in constant danger of being corrupted. Faith should be sought avidly and humbly and sincerely. To the extent that the church is considered a community of individuals seeking to love God, each other and their enemies, growth occures. The institutional church must be constantly questioned. I am not religious and do not expect others to follow my beliefs Millions of people have died in the name of "religion" there is no God, forsay, he is the great spirit we will all go meet in the afterlife. We have also been doing this life thing for a very long time. why do you think they've found life on Mars? someone folowed the right path and pushed the button to stop life there and send the seed of life to Earth. There is only one God and Mohammad PBUH is his last massenger comprehensive way of life. It has a little buddhism, a little hinduism, a little islam, a little confusciousism, a little native american, all wrapped up with alot my own beliefs. It is right to me because it is the core of my own beliefs. God is as much of me as I am of him. I don't pray, just wonder and observe the beautiful and distructive forces of nature that can't ultimately be labeled by the scientific community as something fully explainable or predicted. I am fully at peace with myself and with what ever is coming. Jesus is Lord Religion made more dammages to the society than good things. All religions have the same theme- LOVE I think that religion destroys and creates but I could not enter that in the field above. I think that extremists of any kind are a little odd and worrying. Any person who attempts to force their own opinion on others, whether right or wrong, is an asshole and deserves contempt. I realize that some 'religious' people would not approve of my use of swearing but it hurts no-one and allows me to express myself. All forms of life should be respected. One should act in a truthful, ethical manner, to the greatest benefit of all one's areas of living. Religion is extremely unimportant. What is important is spirituallity. They are different and until we realize that will not have the tolerance to live together peacefully. Religion is different than spirituality--a religious person may not necessarily be spiritual. TIME IS SHORT,TRUST IN GOD--HE'S COMING BACK!! keep looking Way of life religion creates connection and disipline Be of service Love the Lord your God with all your soul, all your heart and all your mind and your neighbor as yourself Reconstructionist Judaism Religion is a difficult concept to grasp, but essentially it is a slave morality. It states that sufferring is an acceptable means for life; dignity and its pursuit are the only activities of life and to suggest otherwise is to limit the will of a human being which is intolerable. Scientologists believe that most human problems can be traced to lingering spirits of an extraterrestrial people massacred by their ruler, Xenu, over 75 million years ago. These spirits attach themselves by clusters to individuals in the contemporary world, causing spiritual harm and negatively influencing the lives of their hosts. --Judge Leonie Brinkema, opinion in RTC v. Lerma. (RTC , a scientology front group, so disliked the above quote that they attempted to the opinion) (*The Oregon Ghost *) Religion evolves as people understand the world around them. Religious groups need to accept this. We should practice tolerance and acceptance of differences. Becoming a Christian has turned my life completey in a whole differen't direction. Now I live my life life for him and carry out his word. I believe God loves us all and showed His love by sending His son Jesus Christ to be the final sacrifices for ours transgressions. If we believe in Him he will forgive us of our sins no matter what they are or how many. We have no objective proof of anything, however some things are much less likely than others to be true. Born Catholic with strong interest in Busshism That God loves and cares for all people no matter what their view of him is My religious philosophy is that Jesus Christ died and rose again to give eternal life to those who believe in Him Religion was and is something that people made up to comfort them when they couldn't answer the question, "What else is there?" Personally, I am athiest, but I firmly believe in a person's right to worship however they chose as long as it doesn't infringe on anyone else's rights. Polyglot including Zen as a base, but including elements of Ceremonial Magick (Golden Dawn), Christianity (NOT Christianism), Kabbalah,... kinda complex, actually :-) I think it rather odd that "atheist" and "Scientologist" are listed as religions--- they are not. Asking atheists and Scientologists about religious beliefs is like asking bald people how they comb their hair--- N/A! Scientology is nothing more than a corrupt business out to victimize as many suckers as they can, for the almighty dollar--- any examination of the nefarious business will show that fact! One's spirituality is as important to one's as identity as sexuality or physicality. the Golden rule is the most important thing. I have never had a religious belief. Anything but Scientology. Are you aware that the staff overlords are ordering the benighted scientologists to answer this survey? Takes some of the fun out of it? And all of the information? Narconon is a front. Travolta and Cruise are afraid to speak out because Scinentology's very first step is worming secrets out of you and keeping them forever. Scientology lies. Xenu is good. L. Ron is the Antichrist. Scientology is the thriving cult of greed and power. Murder, torture, child abuse, treason, espionage, all Fair Game for the destroyers of the lonely and unwary. Organized Religion is leading to the downfall of our society. Spirituality is more important than Religion. Xenu is coming. Scientologists eat their young. Scientologists drain blood to feed the Hive Queen. L. Ron Hubbard was a shoggoth in human guise. Satanism is warmer and fuzzier than Scientology. When life sucks, come in its mouth. Modern culture should have no need for superstitious beliefs. The religions of the world have been responsible for untold suffereing and inhuman treatment of one human by another. Brainless stupidities like creationism threaten to undermine the continued development of science and technology, the real avenues to a better future. What religion do you believe in (that is not listed in the survey)? Scientology Latter Day Saint (Mormon) n/a Nothing Latter Day Saint Universalism/Non-denominational Catholic raised selfist none Christian + Islam Each of us as inherent Spirit Beings i do not follow a paticular religion at present KINDNESS Also like "Macumba" Asatru Humanism anti-religion (not satanist), nihilist Catholic vague Anglican wondering Devil Warship mormon Deist Bobisim some unformed vague idea Moral Athiest Catholicism mixture of most major religions Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints (Mormon) Unitarian-Universalist Odinist I do not label them. Non Religous Roman Catholic Methodist mormon Subgeinus none Rastafarian Church of the SubGenius BUD-ism,I don't mean buddhism humanism Subgenius Humanism SubGenius Subgenius SubGenius SubGenius SubGenius Church of the SubGenius Catholic humanism SubGenius Teutonic uu not sure my own religion none Mix of many religions, personal truths n/a I am a part of it as it is a part of me (it meaning everything in life) I dont have any religion Personal philosophisings on the nature of God. xenuist Science of Mind,(Religious Science) shia Chaoism Other Individualized spirituality Born-again My own thoughts Christianity/Buddhism/Zen Christian with Buddhist influences xenuology Xenuology Xenologist Xenuology I do not believe in religion Xenuology Return to theHome Page. Copyright ©1996, /InterCommerceCorporation, All rights reserved worldwide Send comments to Webmaster@Survey.net WT02-B22-12IA060-000333-B026-255http://www.survey.net:80/rlg1c0.html 204.107.221.240 19970115060316 text/html 4167HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 15 Jan 1997 05:57:01 GMTServer: Apache-SSL-US/1.0.3+1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 3985Last-modified: Mon, 25 Nov 1996 20:26:46 GMT SURVEY.NET - Religion Survey - User comments (ARCHIVE I) Your source for information, opinions & demographics from the NetCommunity! ANNOUNCING: The Internet's finest interactive, totally-automated,immediate survey system. We can take any form and instantly create adynamic demographic database and show you the results as soon as youcomplete the survey! Internet Religion Survey #1 User comments [ARCHIVE I] What religion do you believe in (that is not listed in the survey)? Discordianism Vedantism Catholicism a wonderful mixture of the above NECROMANCY non-Islamic sufism Ecological Humanism my own Scientology Lutheran my own beliefs I read and choose what makes sense mormon agnosticism/hedonism searching Deism Edgar Cayce style Christian Asatru Tantric Deist Secular Humanism My own beliefs something between taoism, zen anf fatalism Rasta (Jah Love!) The universe is a large computer. Jewish JW Seicho-No-Ie Has no name mormon ALL OF THE ABOVE Modified Christianity Agnostic Pagan Quaker Messianic Judaism Agnostic with discordian/pagan leanings mormon ROMAN CATHOLIC Jehovah's Witness Atheism - note spelling no specific group wicca/godess/ceremonial also d metal Ethical Culture Islam AGNOSTIC ATHEISM (BTW, you spell it atheism, not athiesm not sure what I believe New Thought Esoteric Christianity Humanism Quaker pentecostal holiness Liberal Catholic/Theosophy/Ancient Wisdom MSIA TBD christian Warriorship Unitarian-Universalist My religion is @$%#@% NO CARRIER Return to theHome Page. Copyright ©1996, /InterCommerceCorporation, All rights reserved worldwide Send comments to Webmaster@Survey.net WT02-B22-13IA060-000333-B026-299http://www.survey.net:80/rlg1c1.html 204.107.221.240 19970115060338 text/html 67220HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 15 Jan 1997 05:57:14 GMTServer: Apache-SSL-US/1.0.3+1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 67037Last-modified: Mon, 25 Nov 1996 20:26:46 GMT SURVEY.NET - Religion Survey - User comments (ARCHIVE II) Your source for information, opinions & demographics from the NetCommunity! ANNOUNCING: The Internet's finest interactive, totally-automated,immediate survey system. We can take any form and instantly create adynamic demographic database and show you the results as soon as youcomplete the survey! Internet Religion Survey #1 User comments [ARCHIVE II] What religion do you believe in (that is not listed in the survey)? Even though I am agnostic, I "lean" heavily towards atheism. Anyone can say "I am angostic," but you have to work off of some type of paradigm.digm. I believe in Jesus Christ and his death & resurrection, but I do not believe in those hypocrites such as Pat Robertson and crew. Follow the teachings of the Saviour Jesus Christ and your life will be blessed. God, who created everything, created everyone with free will and the option of refusing to love and obey his Creator. When the first people sinned, they created a "paradox" situation, where our infinitely loving but also infinitely fair Creator (who can do anything *but* act against His eternal and unchanging character) had to simultaneously "forgive" and "punish" mankind. The only Being in the universe capable of solving this "paradox" was Jehovah, Himself and He did it by coming in human form to tae our punishment and bring forgiveness for our sins - all at the same time! Mankind is fallen,following Jesus is the ONLY way to God and salvation. religion is important Life hurts, but you can change this. love and respect for all. I believe that religion is a way for people to feel somewhat better about themselves. I don't think religion is bad. I believe in God, but I respect others who have different beliefs, and ultimately having LOVE for one anotheris what matters. The question of an alleged "after-life" is a non-sequitur -- We will all KNOW soon enough. As far as a "supreme being" goes, it can neither be proven, nor disproven; therefore it is ridiculous to take a stand either way. Article of FAITH cannot be PROVEN. I find it very difficult to reconcile the difference between what the Bible teaches and what I believe to be truth from what the churches tout as what should be done. Because of this, I rarely attend church. Jesus Christ is the only way!!! Love, devotion and surrender I have a spiritual teacher--a Guru. His name is Da Avabhasa. His teachings are a fusion of Hinduism and Buddhism. It helps solidify good morals Be nice! It's not about religion, it's about a relationship. God came to earth as man to redeem us back to himself - that man is the Jesus Christ. There are 10 rules. Obey them and you will be rewarded! Religion means "way of life" and though personal and individual, cannot be considered separate form the rest of the community. 1)tolerance 2)walk lightly 3)imagination Laa illaha illallah I am a Muslim, i.e. I submit myself willingly to the Creator of the Heavens and the Earth: Allah The bible does not "tolerate" homosexuality, & I can't comprehend why certain religions would even debate on it. Hardly any religion tells their followers what the Kingdom on God is. It is a government that will be set up by Christ (when he returns) to rule mankind for a thousand years, as it's quite obvious we can't manage on our own. Although I don't belong to any one faith, & feel that there is no "one true religion", I think that the Church of God International and Jehovah's Witnesses are about theclosest. If I am to believe in any religion it must be consentrated upon this life religion is just a sense of "MORALS", nothing more, nothing less Religion is Psychological. Spiritual beliefs are good, but don't impose them! will self religion is mind control I must believe that there is a purpose or guiding force to all things to avoid the logical nihilism of a purely rational belief system. We need to work towards progressing humanity so as to seek closeness to Allah SWT. I believe that Jesus Christ died for the sins of humanity. It is our decision to accept Jesus as our atonement for sins. Afterwards, we will spend eternity with Him or away from Him based on our decision. To live in every aspect of life acc.the will of the Almighty G'd People who kill in the name of Religion are very frightening and distrurbed. The fact that this has been going on for centuries, makes me somewhat biased against "religous" people. I do not accept the existance of any deity. I wasn't very religious, then I bought a Jesus statue, hung it on my car mirror and then found a $20 bill on the sidewalk! Hallejulah! But seriously, the question of religion is an enigma; delving into peoples' beliefs says nothing about the viability or reality of related concepts - it's a statement on society, on psychology about which of us are logically-motivated or emotionally-motivated in our thinking. If some religions didn't feel obligated to propogate their philosophies among people unintereted, there wouldn't be so much bad talk about it, but there is because many religions consider themselves mutually-exclusive of the others and therefore intolerant. This is the big hypocrisy of religion - a guiding light, an instruction manual for life with a bunch of fine print which disclaims any sins that are perpetrated in the name of preserving your beliefs and communal structure. You may do anything you want - as long as you are prepared to accept the conseques of your actions Look at society, they've taken out religion and look No Morals nowadays. Religion is a crutch for the mentally weak. believe yourself Science might give us the answar if there is one. Politics are of little use when it comes to guide peobles life. Religion give peoble identity - few are actually strong believers, though. While I would say I believe in an afterlife, I think that Hell is death and the grave. It isn't as simple as a either or arguement, and I don't pretend to have the answer, but I believe Christ is my savior, my friend and Lord. We are all on a journey to the same destination; the roads are many, but the destination is the same. I feel that religion can be useful for some people who are unable to fully deal with reality, but it is an immature response to the pressures of existence. I do believe that everyone has a right to be immature though! :-) Religion should be individual, and not based on someone else's values or beliefs Choose wisely and pray fervently in the name of Jesus Christ -- you will receive the direction that you need from the Holy Ghost. I believe in God and am a Christian. I may not always follow the right path but when I do it's worth it. Every one needs to believe in something and for me Jesus is the way. Ride the energy of lifen negotiate when necessary God created everything and creation is basically good. Christianity and its principles if lived fully would bring heaven on earth. Let the life energy flow only to negotiate when necessary. I believe everything you do will come back to you Jesus Christ died for our sins and rose after his crucifixion so that we might be able to enter the kingdom of heaven and live for eternity when we die. Religion can be a guideline to a better understaning of your purpose in this world God is good Religion is a man made concept. A relationship with the Creator of the universe is what is more important. Organized religion is nothing but a man-made method of limiting God. Karma is the basis of my belief system...could also be termed "Do unto others..." Be happy and content now There is no God. When you die, you rot. People want desperately to believe that there is something higher in the universe, but there isn't. All you see around you is all there is. We are just bags of skin containing chemicals. Religion, in general, has done far more harm than good for society. Really don't know what to believe anymore! Live and let live. But I feel that religion is a crutch to many people who lack an acceptance of death. Under the "What is your religion?" question, there is no difference between Islam and Muslim, I don't understand why you gave two options there. Allah knows all and the only path to success is through His guidance be nice to one another and wait to see what happens Religion can teach us the principles to live a happy life and have peace in the life after. Religion can be the "user's manual" to this life. Strive to live in peace and to respect all life Religion is very important in helping to develop morals in kids as long as it's not forced on them. They need to know that there is some hope in this world. what poor gods we do make. Seventh-Day Adventist, if you know anything about them, than that is how I believe! Do what you want, but harm none. I believe that the most important function of any religion is to teach and promote love, understanding, and acceptance of everyone. everyone is entitled to their own beliefs I believe in God, the father, Jesus, the son, and the Holy Spirit. Religion has been used extensively to control and as an opiate of the masses, but religion can and could better be used as a tool to self-realization, awareness, and tolerance. Religion is too often used as a weapon to defend ill-meant ideals and policies, especially in America. This, more than anything, keeps me away. I am not religious; I am spiritual- there is a difference I believe there is a supreme being of some sort. I just don't know if it is GOD, JESUS or a superior being from another place, like PLanet 12. there is no god but god and mohammed is the last messenger of god. "god is the greatest" Religion is only for the insecure I am Catholic but have a problem with the intolerance within the church...I basically feel people should be who they want... religeon is used when ppl fear, i have nothing to fear We exist to Glorify God and enjoy Him forever ! Culturally, I am Jewish. Spiritually, I believe more in some Eastern philosophical tenants. Humanist - must place hope in people, not God Love God and love the other as you love yourself. Everything else is details. Believe what you believe, as long as it helps us to get along. Moderation...tolerance...postitive progress.... I am a Celtic Wiccan, however I practiced Christianity for 18 years. I belive that everyone should be free to make their own decisions and everyone else should respect that freedom. Jesus Christ is the Savior of the world. Read some Nietzsche. Organized religion is wonderful for people who need it. There is no ultimate "truth", different organized religions were created by god/godess to help people. When religion is used aws an exuse for not being responsible, for not considering issues and options, it is destructive. No minister, priest or other religious leader is God. Spirituality means you must respect yourself, others and the world around you. You must know your own mind and heart; the choices you make are yours alone. "An it harm none, do what ye will" We all have and must find our own way. I belive that Jesus Christ is the only way to salvation, and He is my savior, Father, and Lord! I am an observent Jew. It works for me. Extremely disillusioned, worshipping alone, possiby becoming agnostic/atheist Submit fully to the one who created you. Humbly, and obediently, for the Creator is All Powerful over the created. My heart would like some definite answers, but my head won't allow such certainty and finality. This is it. Better be as good as you can--you don't get a second chance, you don't get "forgiven", you don't get 'eternal peace' or 'eternal damnation'. This is it. Enjoy yourself responsibly. anyone can beleive in anything As long as you don't hurt someone it will probably be OK I am not religious, however this does not mean that I do not have morals. An' it harm none, do what thou wilt. If you take a little bit of all religions and things like astrology and psychic phenomenons then you find the truth. God is the Creator of all. Jesus Christ is God in the flesh, who died on a cross a perfect man. He rose again in 3 days and has forgiven all humanity of their sins. Someday he will come back and reclaim all who accept him. I am god I believe in one God who is both good and evil. He exists in neither chaos or perfection but in a balance of energy. I have just currently became interested in religion. I found that witchcraft seems to fit my personality. I do not know my religion. Organized religion is very dangerous and should be watched very carefully; however, as most people feel they "need" it, it cannot be eliminated in fairness to them I believe in the cross and the ressurection of Jesus Christ amd being born again Do unto others... Religion is a dead set of rules. I believe in an experience with Jesus Christ. Accepting Him as Lord and Savior of your life, is the key to joy and fulfillment in life. This is the just the beginning of Life. I believe in Resurrection to Eternal Life if you are saved, or eternal damnation if you don't accept Jesus Christ as your personal Lord and Savior. I also believe in the fullness of The Holy Spirit and the gifts and offices appointed by The Holy Spirit. The Holy Spirit is the Power that God ill give you to enable you to live in this world for His purpose and His Glory. To be able to grasp the concept of Christianity leads to living an abundant life in all aspects of this life and in the one to come. I do not beleive in religion I beleive in God There is no one true way. I believe in God, but not necessarily in how He is described in Church doctorate. God gave us brains. Use them to earnestly seek the truth. Remember, to seek the truth necessarily means you are not arrogant but humble. I think that the reason most people are religious is that they need something to belive in, andthat crappy things happen to them for a reason. Strong ethical beliefs but unsure of religious beliefs. Christ gives me strengh to go through life. If it wasn't for the lord, I would have killed myself. God is Love. To know Christ and make him known - No Christ No Peace, Know Christ Know Peace If religion is supposed to benefit the human race then someone with a really sick mind has determined what's beneficial to us...just take a look at the history of religious strife... I believe in a moral code, completely separate from any religious coercion. I don't need to fear a god or gods to know what's right and wrong! Live and Let Live I believe that Jesus Christ died for my sins on the cross, and that by believing in him, I will gain eternal life. I am by no means perfect, but am sanctified by Christ. religion has spawned from ignorance and maintains it's destiny We are here on earth to follow the commandments of our Savior so we can live eternally with our family. There is no God but Allah; He is the One, the Eternal I struggle between the strict heaven/hell, God/Devil view of my upbringing, and a more holistic, evolving concept of God and Spiritualism I will simply calrify answer 14. Spirituality is personal, while organized religion is... unproductive/destructive/delusional/etc. The universe is divine and it is not personified. It is in all of us and all things and we must respect it and one another. Without religion, where is hope? Cannot fathom how some people believe in an all powerful supreme being. There is absolutely no evidence and never will be. "I (Jesus) am the way, the truth and the life. No one comes to the Father except through me". (John 14:6 ). Christ died for our sins & to give us eternal life. Nietzsche is God - The Dead Your purpose in life is to give all glory and honor to God. This is best accomplished by living as Jesus showed us. Live and let live Amen To each there own. As above, so below. One cannot discover new lands without first loosing sight of that familiar shore. God is One...One is All...All is everything Don't pass your judgement on someone else. In other words, don't make laws that outlaw abortions/anything just because YOU think it's wrong/right. Let people take care of themselves. i am not capable of creating myself. whatever did (not meaning parents) is "god", sentient or otherwise. Atheism but I am inspired by the ideals of Zen insofar as I understand them. As a former Catholic priest, I am convinced that doctrinal religion is almost always destructive of individual rationality and ethics. religion is good if you are happy. If it oppresses you, then trash it- just believe whatever you want. Radical christian, informed by the revolutionary teaching of Jesus Religion is a mental cop-out for people who cannot face up to reality My faith is a somewhat weak one due to my skeptical nature, but I have seen too much goodness in the teachings of Christ to feel that it is simply an "option." It is rather, a spiritual guide. Don't push your values on others (laws etc.) i do not attend church or have a religon but i believe in god I'm not a very religious person but it does serve some useful socialization functions. Overall, though, we need to be tolerant of other people's values. That's why I don't go in for all this pro-life, anti-homosexual, fundamentalist shit. I'm not a very religious person but it does serve some useful socialization functions. Overall, though, we need to be tolerant of other people's values. That's why I don't go in for all this pro-life, anti-homosexual, fundamentalist shit. God sent His only Son JESUS CHRIST to die for our sins and bring us eternal life. Repent and receive Him as Lord and Savior. It's quite simple. Jesus Christ is the only way to God. Jesus died for our sins The concept of 'god' is so extreme that it would take positive proof for me to believe in it. Since all proof is unfalsifiable that has been presented to me so far, I cannot possibly believe in a god at this time, and do not plan on believing in one in th I think it's arrogant to assume that without religion there is no 'morality' unless you what to define morality as something that religion imposes, otherwise I think the idea of treating others the way you'd like to be treated can address 99.9% of all the important humanitarian and family issues that religion is supposed to be the ultimate cure for. As far as Christianity, I have a very difficult time believing that I'm somehow responsible for events which [supposedly] happened millenia ago - that I cary around some original sin [original guilt]. If this is true; if we are responsible for the actions of our ancestors, we should be praying to the Native Americans whose world we destroyed, the Africans and all other indigineous cultures we decimated in the name of "progress" and "morality". But the BIGGEST PROBLEM with religion is its inconsistency and hypocrisy - which explains why their leaders have historically chosen the sword over the pen. What ever happens Happens I align with Catholocism, but I want control over my own body! I am an Independent Baptist, KJV1611 believing, premillenial, pretribulational. Many of our actions and all post-mortem beliefs are controlled by a higher state of our own consciousnesses. What one truly believes will happen to them after death is what really will happen. I am kind of a Baptist who doesn't think that God cares if I get up at 7am on Sunday morning.... I believe in a loving Higher Power who graciously gave us the wonder of life to share and enjoy Christ is the Way, the Truth, the Light and the only way unto salvation. Who created you? why? Will and can "he" create me again after death? Why is it impossible or possible? Which is the true religion now? How to find it? One criteria:To which religion people from all the world from all countries(nearly) are converting by studying it, not for worldly money or benefits. I am not going to convert, so if you hit me with religious bullshit, then FUCK YOU. I tend not to look at myself in terms of rligion but in terms of belief When Religion fails in this country, what will be used to control the masses? As religion becomes more distant to the individual and more driven by false phrophets interested in only money; then one must look closely at the Book of Revelation and the writings of Nostraedomus. Love God with my whole heart & soul, and my neighbor has myself. Live the Golden Rule and do the job God sent me to do. Fundamntalist, evangelical, christian Each one of us is a child of God. Treat each person with that in mind. God is the creator of all things, he sent his only Son, Jesus, to pay the price for our sins, a price which we could not possibly pay. You cannot possibly seperate your beliefs from your everyday life, as many people would have us do. Would Jesus? Orthodox Evangelical Christianity: Jesus is the only way to God, and he is in fact God (part of the trinity) I am answerable to a just God. I have not met his moral requirements. He gave his son, Jesus, to receive the punishment I deserve, and to give me the life I need. God loves me. I trust in Christ for salvation and seek to serve him because I am grateful. Good for goodness sake. The detail are not important. If religion is basically a joke, then it only follows that the ULTIMATE RELIGION must be the ULTIMATE JOKE. And as a keeper of the Joke, I demand to be taken very seriously. Our whole purpose on this Earth is to do what G-d wants and to reveal G-dliness on Earth The Golden Rule Everyone practices his/her REAL religion, whether or not it is formally named as such. I believe in the Golden Rule, and would not coerce anyone. EVERYONE has some portion of Truth. Faith is more than just a set of beliefs. These beliefs should lead us to a personal relationship with God, our heavenly Father. Submit to the Will of God I am strong enough to believe in myself. I do not need others, whether mortal, deities, etc., to control my destiny. God exists, God is love, God loves me Regardless of what faith you are, the most important thing is not your religion. Its your belief in Jesus Christ, your salvation. I don not consider Christianity to be a religion. A religion a set of rules to gain God's favor. Christianity is based on what God has done to restore our relationship with Him. All we have to do is accept his gift of forgiveness. I consider "religion" to be a political system as opposed to "spirituality". My answers reflect this. Jesus Christ is Lord and Creator of all and receiving His sacrafice for sins and inviting Him to live in your spirit is the only way to come to God and enter into Heaven both now and when you die. I believe that religion is intensely personal, but we need community (the communion of saints) to assist us in maintaining a balance. Even though I have very strong beliefs, I do not believe that my way is the only path to salvation and/or peace and happiness. Jesus Christ, son of the one true God, paid a price no one else could pay, thus giving those who believe in Him, eternal life with God in Heaven (a very nice place). Shit happens, and in general, it's not too bad. Love for God and Race, and Nation. Jesus said, "Without me, you can do nothing." Jesus came to give us life now and forever John 3:16. For God so loved. . .Beliving this it is not an act of love to hide the Good News, but an act of selfiness & cowardice. Humans search relentlessly and frantically to find what God offers free of charge to all, through the love, grace and mercy of His Son, Jesus Christ. My hope is that each one who reads this can find what I have found in Christ. god is a tree god is a dog god is a sunset god is a little old lady god is flower god is .... Humans search relentlessly and frantically to find what God offers free of charge to all, through the love, grace and mercy of His Son, Jesus Christ. My hope is that each one who reads this can find what I have found in Christ. Heaven is more important than anything else God the Creator of all things became a Man in Jesus Christ. He died for my sins (and the sin of the whole world), was raised from the dead for our justification, and will soon come again to judge the world. Jesus said, I am the Way the Truth and The Life, No man cometh to the Father but by me. Basically, I believe in the golden rule: He who has the gold, rules. Not really, but I wish less people believed that. A person's belief system is what helps him cope with life on a spiritial psychological and physical level and the way to truth is a personnal experience and cannot be dictated through narrow minded approaches dictated by current popular groups. The definition of an organized religious is a cult that has gained creditability by its members getting into a position of power. I HAVE MY OWN SET OF MORALS AND VALUES, WHICH I INOUT INTO MY DAILY BEING. I AM NOT AT ALL RELIGIOUS. Religion is another way for people to release themselves from the unhappiness of the world. When people say "God will judge" or "God will do what has to be done" or something like that, its BULLSH*T. God does nothing for us, we have to do what we have to to have a good life and improve that of society. God doesn't help nor make harder our lives so people should accept god as nothing more than a force who observes us, without any real input. All religious experience originates in the psyche It is far more important to not include premises in my philosophy which I cannot possibly know for sure, than it is to convince myself I've gotten it "right." My life is devoted to follow God's Will. I do not believe in god, but I cannot guarantee he/she does not exist. God is love. To love others is to love God and vice versa. Christianity is stupid and evil. Islam. And I do feel that a few items on #13 need to be explained further, I most likely don't profess the same beliefe as others... I believe in Jesus Christ as our savior and to live your as close as possible to the standards set forth in the Holy Bible I believe that every person is capable of choosing what is right for them to believe in and follow. Religion is a personal path to those truths not accessable by rationalism. It deals with the constant struggle to understand our relationship to God. Polyamourous Pan-theistic pagan Islam - Peace & Submission to Allah's Will There is no life after death and you have to make the best out of your life here on Earth. I am tired of the many that want to put all of their frustrations of religion onto Christians. It seems these are always the ppl that are always stating that Christians need to be "more open minded." Religion has always been a way of life for me, and I also know that others do not feel the same as I. I respect that, as I would hope all others would respect me. I love being a Christian and my walk with God has nothing to do with how anyone else sees that. It is my walk and my belief in God makes mestronger every day. When in need it is always a blessing to know that I have Him no matter...hopefully we all have someone in our lives we can feel that way about. I have three, God, my husband and my best friend. Religion Sucks The sooner human society can grow up & dispense w/religon, the greater the odds there will continue to be human civilization. as the wiccan rede says, "do what thou wilt, an' it harm none." strong sense of self and innate goodness Love the Lord with all your heart, soul, and mind. You are what you make of yourself and religion shouldn't be a part of developing it I really don't care for the word "religion". That is a very action-oriented word. My "religion" as stated above, is more like a personal relationship with God. God is NOT Hate! Those who twist the word of the Bible to promote hate towrds gay, etc. are the ones who will suffer God's wrath in the end. religion is for those to weak to live on their own Jesus Christ is the way, the truth, and the life. Jesus Christ was sent by God the Father to shed His blood for the salvation of the world. There's no supreme being to bail us out, so we must do all we can to help one another, to follow our innate sense of ethics, and to advance human knowledge. I don't believe in god, but I do believe that the Christian value systen is a positive influence in the world and should be suported. The Golden Rule says all you need to know. THE MAINSTREAM WILL EVENTUALLY CRUSH THE RELIGIOUS RIGHT. I AM VERY COMFORTABLE WITH NO DIETY, RELIGION IN MY LIFE. THE KINGDOM IS THE MAIN THEME OF THE BIBLE. THE GOOD NEWS DESCRIBED AT MATH.24:14 IS IMPORTANT FOR ALL PROFESSED CHRISTIANS TO PREACH. THAT JEHOVAH IS THE MOST HIGH GOD(PSALMS83:18) Jesus is the way, the truth and the life. Whosoever beleives in him will have eternal life I believe the nature of the univearsal mind is uncomprehensible to us(humans). So you might as well take a serious look at any religion you come in contact with to get chance at a glimpse of the universal mind. Religion is a system of beliefs, sacred artifacts and actions. The religion is not important, the beliefs are. there is something bigger than human, somewhere some place Since god(or whatver you choose to call him/her/it) is divine he/she/it is above human undertstanding, for thsi reaosn I belive that my religion may be right, and it may be wrong to say that THIS is the way I allow otehrsto belive what tehy will and hold no gurge for it and to keep my life simple I belive what I was raised with, but no rleigon made by an can hope to udnertand something like god I FEEL THAT IHAVE AN OBLIGATION TO GOD/SELF/SOCIETY love for all, hatred for none Non-selfishness. Respect for others. Religious Studies Major Progressive Revelation: Newer revelations confirm previous spiritual verities and sensibilities while updating social teachings I use religion as a guiding force to help me in my life decisions. Allah is the only God, and Mohammed is his prophit. I am a spiritual being living a human expierience Religion provides a background to make desisions. Since the people who run this country have seen fit to concider all social training 'religon', schools can not provide the moral training required in society. Thus, organized religons have a vital role in today's lifestyle, especially for children. However, since many of the writings and teachings of the more formal and accepted faiths are dragged down with custom and tradition, it is tough to accept many of the ideals. Just because a certain food was dangerous 1000 years ago, doesn't mean it is so oday. Just because large families were desired when the world was expanding and life expectancy was short, doesn't mean that this is required today. Just because the local church supplied much of the community unity and protection (generally under a king's rule) in the past, doesn't mean that tithe is required today. Life is very easy. Live as best you can, and be there to help others. Treat each person and thing as you would like yourself treated. It really all comes down to simple respect and undertanding. I live my life my way, imposing noting on another, and providing any assistance I can. Its simple, honest, and allows me the freedom to choose. There is no reality other then God(ALlah) so submit to what is real, leave what is not real, love what is real, do not love illusion. This world is the seed bed of the hearafter; all must die so seek God, seek the truth before you die, and the worms get y Islam is my gate to self-confidence Religion is the foundation that society is built. All human misery stems ultimately from humanity's sins, and in particular from the Fall, which sundered God's relationship with Man. We are unable to bridge that gap by good works, philosophy, science, even by religion. God, seeing our empty and lost condition, loved us even though we were sinners, rebels and opposed to His kind will and just law. Out of His great love for us, he sent us a Savior, Jesus Christ His own Son, to empty Himself of his divinity and glory and be born as a simple human baby inBethlehem. By His sinless life and death on the Cross, Jesus took our place, satisfying the righteous demands of God's law so that we, the guilty, could go free. This freedom is freely available to all who will accept it, by simply accepting Jesus Christ into their heart, taking Him as their Lord and Savior, confessing and repenting of their sins and receiving complete redemption in Him. I believe in the wonderful anticipation of Heaven and the fearful reality of Hell, and that there will be a Day of Jugement when God will decide the eternal destinies of all men. At that day, all who will have accepted Jesus Christ as their Lord and Savior and have been born again, born from above, will be seen by God as having not ever sinned at all, but God will instead see the sinless record of Jesus in their place. But all who have not become covered by Jesus' sacrifice will be judged strictly according to what they have done, and Hell is the terrible and agonizing result. But no one need end there, for Christ is reely available to ALL. He paid the price so we don't have to. The search for something to believe in. Without something to believe in I feel the world we live in would be pointless. Might as well be a supreme being that watches and cares over us whenever we need Him. There is a God. I am not Him. Yeshua (Jesus) is. Without faith in Yeshua, you will not be able to fulfil the Law (Torah) of G-d Everyone should find THEIR way Religion is a means to an end -- personal faith is where it's at! regardless of what you believe, only god should judge I am a Taoist in religious philosophy. All holy books are man-made, but the Tao te Ching is the best compendium of wisdom. Do what thou wilt is the whole of the law. Love under will, Love is the law. Homosexuals are to be put to death. It is Gods law! Your life is judged by how you treat others. God is a power and therefore does not have a human-like ego that humans need to "worship". I BELIEVE THAT YOU MUST RESPECT PEOPLES INDIVIDUALITY UNLESS IT IS HARMFUL TO OTHERS. mine is not a religion it is a faith. Anyone can be religious and nothing changes. I believe in the power of positive thinking through the father, son and holy ghost. Religious dogma is a pain in the ass. Christian Adamic. I Beleive White People are true Israelites and Jews are Kazars not God's chosen people. I believe that the most important thing in life is to have a personal relationship with God through the Lord Jesus. Only through belief in him and his death on the cross can we have forgiveness for sins and assurance of Eternal Life It is not religion but a daily personal relationship with the Creator of everything Abba Father. This relationship is only obtained through acceptance of atonement for sin through Jesus Christ the Father's only Son. Christ taught love, all else is false religion It's there for people that want it I believe that everyone has a right to believe what he/she wants to believe.. and that is what makes America such a great country--FREEDOM OF SPEECH AND RELIGION and THE KNOWLEDGE THAT EVERYONE CAN HOLD HIS/HER OWN beliefs and still be friends with those Reformed Calvinist IF one hasn't got any good to add, let him/her shutup! We all have individual beleif, but the fact is that we come to a mutaul understanding between science and religion wich we'll be the philosophy of our future evolution. La ilahe illallah Religion is the message from the world beyond all humans will at last move to Religion developed historically to explain that which man did not understand. God doesn't care what you think; only how you behave. I cannot accept any infinites - No all-powerful or all-knowing entities or forces, no forever. I tend to believe in free will, but not strongly. do what thou will,lest ye harm none Christianity is a pagan apostasy of the New Testament. Jesus was not Messiah's Name, it is Latin (Shining Swine) and Satanic. Christians have the prophecy backwards, "Jesus" and "Christ" are both perfect 666 in Chaldean/Hebrew numerology. life is an interconnected web, Golden Rule I believe religion is generally good, but the fanatics who have become so rigid and intollerable have almost made religion a farce supreme being is not active, but curious. curiosity drives the universe. Youre born, you die. The End Almost every wars in earth's history have been started by one religion or another. Have you heard the saying "God is on our side."? The European "Dark Ages" were caused by religious intolerance. I try to avoid anything that smacks of religion. I belive in some kind of GOD, but my way of life is from the Jewish tradition that is respect a lot. Humanism Religion was made to guide us through a rough time. We're above that now; it's holding us back from advancing further. Believe in Jesus,confess your sins to HIM and you will have eternal life. It is that simple. Everyone should try it! Everyone is different, so religion has a different purpose for each individual. But no one should force there beliefs on another unless it would cause that person non-"spiritual" harm. Forget the truth, I'm looking for a soothing lie if you live a good life and help others, you do not need fanatical rteligious beliefs to be "saved" O.J.Simpson is guilty as sin of murder We came from nothing we'll go back to nothing Don't preach at me. and I won't preach at you. I believe that the most important thing is to indeed do unto others as you would have them do unto you (even though I'm no longer a Christian; I'm an atheist.) I feel we cannot possibly KNOW there is a god, heaven or hell, or what happens to us after death; most pick a belief to comfort them rather than thinking we simply cease to be. I do hope, and usually believe, in a soul or spirit that goes on, but if there is none then we should let our deeds and for some our children go on for us. My personal philosophy is something that I have not yet entirely defined. It does include a belief in a "higher power" (or whatever you want to call it), reincarnation, karma, etc. From my perspective, the main purpose of "religion" is to be of service to others in the best way you can. Jesus is Lord, He provided the way for a relationship with God and He will return to judge us all. Religion is a tool we use to explain life to ourselves. A tool is not good or evil, constructive or destructive, in and of itself, but in how it is used. On the other hand, there is a limit to how many homes you can build with a sword. Each tool has an inherent purpose which may be difficult to overcome. All I know is that I don't know. It's not part of my life I believe that one must find God in oneself, not "out there". It is the greatest happiness to find Him. Quit looking to death to get to heaven, try to create it here on earth you religious hypocrites. An it harm none, do as you will I am a devout Catholic and believe in Papal infalliabity Biblical Christianity is based only on belief that we are helpless to save ourselves through our own goodness; Christ died and rose again as the ultimate sacrifice and supreme gift of salvation to us; we must individually accept the gift by receiving him as savior and Lord; we will grow in good works because our salvation is secure when we believe. Love one another and grow in Christ together. Mind your own problems and let other people deal with their own. I don't believe that religion perse is the important thing ...JESUS CHRIST is God has set me free, who in the hell are you telling me what I can and cannot do. Belief in the Lord Jesus, not works, is the only way. Only God can judge the heart of others. A christian must be an example by our actions, respecting all people. True religion (truth) is the key to happiness and eternal peace. Christianity is POPULAR MYTHOLOGY--I believe in it because I was raised to do so, not because I want to. I have no choice. live right and you will be rewarded later. God answers all prayers; trust in Him and He will pull through religion is a snare and a racket To leave the world better than you found it. As a Christian, I believe God is a loving God but also a just God. There is only one way to heaven and that is through Jesus Christ. All other paths lead to hell and eternal separation from God. There's nothing out there ...relax, ...get the best out of myself, enjoy and experience all life has to offer Jesus is not so much a religion as He is a reality. All I believe is that if you accept Christ in your heart God will forgive you for your sins and you will be saved thats all. An' it harm none, do what you will. I believe strongly in my particular theology, but probably more strongly that I should not judge the beliefs of others! be good as you see fit, that is what god does Introspection is the key to enlightenment. In the beginning, man created GOD. Everyone believes in something. Respect for the other person's belief is important, no matter how much it differs from yours. We are part of a whole greater than everything combined. Group worship can destroy the necessary, personal relationships with the Supreme Being. Religious Fanatics are either naive or hypocrites Live and let live Atheism towards Jud/Xian; Skeptic towards ALL Nothing has ever been proven, and I refuse to believe nearly impossibe fables to base my life on. Christian, Agnostic, Pagan, and completely open. Believe in and read the Bible, pray to God, ask for forgiveness for we all sin daily. Do unto others and respect all religions! God does not play dice .... Organized religion throughout history has proven to be more of a destructive and devisive force than a positive. It breeds intolerance and divisiveness. If we, as humans, were to be tolerant of all religions and to not feel driven to force our own particular religious beliefs on others, the world would be a far happier and peaceful place for all mankind. If we all were to treat each other with kindness and respect, there truely would be a heaven on earth. allow for gray areas in understanding, identify moral principles to live by, respect others in their beliefs Love the Lord your God with your whole heart and with your whole mind and love your neighbor as yourself. I was raised Russian Orthodox; I am now an agnostic, but I do have an interest in Buddhism I believe aliens may have had some role in our evolution, but i am not waiting around for them or god! If we all followed the principles of religions, Earth would be no different than heaven. Belief in various religions can result in behavior that is either incredibly altruistic or incredible destructive but either way its just not true! I just hope its used for good since it doesnt look like its going away any time soon. Organized religion has generally played a very positive role in society, with a few obvious exceptions - the Inquistion and Jerry F. i believe in god, but think that organized religion is unnecessary and does more harm than good., John 3:16 I feel closest to God when I see the beauty of nature - sunrise, sunsets, trees, flowers, etc. Religion should elevate, not deviate, mankind. Accurate Knowledge Leads to eternal life here on Earth Ps 37:29 There is one god. There is more to life than this. Jesus is Savior and Lord. I believe that that people use religion to explain the unknown. I also think that people should trust in themselves first, then find their God. "I believe Christianity like I believe in the sun. Not only because I see it, but because by it I see everything else." CS Lewis Without religion there are no values and without values we'd be a jungle Love God with all your heart, soul & mind, keep His commandments. Love your neighbor as your self. ALL PEOPLE ARE EQUAL AND SOULD BE TREATED AS SUCH. WHATEVER ONE BELIEVES IT SHOULD BE TOLERATED BY THE REST. Jesus saves... Gretzky gets the rebound and SCORES! God is everybody and everybody is God I believe that Jesus Christ died buried and was resurrected for our sins. As believers, we can ask Jesus to come into our hearts and will live in us through the Holy Spirit. The Ten Commandments Do as you will as long as it harms no one. God made evrything, so we should respect and honor Him. Any religion is a self-perpetuating myth. If something feels right, and it is legal, do it. It's all mumbo jumbo guess work. I'd be an Atheist if I wasn't so scared of being nothing -- one can always hope, but I'm pretty pessimistic. Without a revelation from God we could know nothing. I believe the Bible is God's revelation which teaches that Jesus, the Jew's Messiah, came into the world to pay the eternal penalty for sin, and save those who will respond to God in faith, and not try to come by works of merit which are worthless before the throne of God. He is coming soon to judge the unbelieving world and set up His Kingdom on earth. In the meantime we are to glorify Him in ALL of life, and minister His grace to others as we have pportunity. Jesus died to save sinners, of which I am the worst. I'd love to see that one continues to exist after death, but unfortunately it seems as if everyone eventually disappears *forever*. I can not denigh what I know to be trueth god-good satan-bad To keep my eyes on christ not people. BOYCOTT AOL...END CENSORSHIP! BOYCOTT AOL. If anyone follows the teachings of the quran, the prophet, and the ahlul bayt then he will have a peaceful life in this world and in the next world. To treat others the same way you'd like to be treated. separation of church and state Religion is normally constructive; if not for beliefs society will be more immoral than it is at present. There are no bad religions except those that are against societal norm. Praying to an entity comes in many forms but hopefully people will realize soon that there is only one right way. I am a Seventh-day Adventist Religious liberal I don't belive in reincarnation persay, but i don't think i completely die, part of me lives on but not he 'soul' Your questions are worded in a way which is difficult to express my real feelings. Jesus is God (2nd in trinity) and loved the world enough to die to forgive sin. Accepting Christ's gift is necessary for eternal life. Jesus is the truth that can set yo We belong to Allah and only to Him shall we return A (without) theos (god) = Atheist I'm not a very firm believer in my faith, but i do believe that everyone has to be true to what they believe, and not harass others because of differing views Institutionalization tends to devolve the spiritual aspects of religion into mere social control. There's a tendancy torwards extremism and fascism. The NAZI's after all were good christians. I believe that there is a supreme being and an absolute morality, but not in any specific religious doctrine. Accept Jesus and be saved! life, love, compassion, human potential I'm agnostic and leave open the possibility of some type of supreme being. However, I have never seen or heard anything that could possibly be construed as "proof." I remain open-minded and have absolutely no problem with anyone's beliefs given that those beliefs do no harm. Unfortunately, religious beliefs quite often cause great harm. There's something out there, Idon't know what it is yet, some call it GOD. "When you are in the service of your fellow beings, you are only in the service of your God." (Book of Mormon, Mosiah 2:17) To know, love and serve God. Love the sinner, but hate the sin I tend to try to shy away from the term "religion" as it has negative connotations. I do not believe in a list of do's and don'ts, but in a way of life that results from an understanding of who I am... that being an individual who is loved and cared for by a personal God. You must be born again. All else is deception. Do no Harm!!!! I believe in a spiritual way of life, which isn't necessarily religious (as dictated by doctrine), rather by community conscience as a way that a "Higher Power" would express itself. Fnord "BoB" in the living universe now. Religion could be much simpler if we chose to follow two rules: judge not that you will be judged and Love one another as you love yourself and love God above all others. Simple but so many horrible things have been done by creating more rules which then must be followed. That we each contain a lifeforce (spirit) that continues on after death. Perhaps we reincarnate, or continue possibly as a spirit entity devoid of any physical self. A communal "life-force" in where all things belong. Man's selfish desires has told God to leave us alone, and made the earth violent. Jesus sacrificed himself to pay for our crimes so we could know and love our creator. If we accept His gift we can experience the love of God. If we don't we choose to li Religion is about laws (check the etymology), Christianity is about freedom in Jesus. We are all interconnected and what goes around comes around. If it feels right and it does not hurt you or others in any way then do it There is a common bridge that links our faiths together. It is God, no matter what He is called. His attributes are the same across all faiths. Though I share beliefs with many cnservative Christians, I beleive that many fundementalists are more pharisaical than Christ-like. Believe what you want to, but do not force your beliefs on others. Jesus died for my sings, rose again, and will return one day to take all those who have believed back to heaven with him. religion: your approach to life, your values, morals, what you base your decisions on I feel that no one has all the answers and that it has to be a personal choice. I dont' practice religion I have a personal relationship with Jesus Christ. I am a born-again believer in Jesus Christ. Eternal life is found only in Him. If there is a higher power, it is within ourselves. Most wars and distress are religion based Don't believe anything. Experience. Jesus Christ is the Truth, the Way, and the Life. Selah. Religion is the cause of all world problems. The second coming of Christ Since I am a Christian I believe that Christ lets us make our choices. If we make the right ones then we will be rewarded for them. If we make the wrong ones then we have to pay the penalty if God so demands. I do believe that no one should force their belliefs on others in the name of Christianity as in the case of the Prayer in Schoolers and the Right to Lifers. I am a materialist in the philosophical sense of one who denies everything supernatural or transcendant. God is one. Names and forms are relative truths only. God alone exists. The innermost essence of mankind and nature is God or the Supreme Self. Through the attonement if Jesus Christ I may reconcil myself with my Heavenly Father and return to Him by following the guidance of The Holy Ghost. Helping others is the key to others and "this is life eternal that they might know thee the only true God and Jesus Christ whom thou hast sent"St. John 17:3 "The world might be just one big soul..." Woody Guthrie, The Ballad of Tom Joad (Grapes of Wrath) I beleive as long as we treat each other equally and fairly the world will be a batter place. here is a thought... The bible is true. Who says so? GOD! where? IN THE BIBLE! hmmm, whats wrong with that!? Unable to be reflected in this survey.I respect people who believe differently, but not different beliefs. I am friends with homosexuals, but believe homosexuality is wrong. We are created, but what is today described in detail as "creationism", is not essential. Jesus is the key to happiness and eternal peace. Jesus is the ONLY Way. He said so. THE MOST IMPORTANT thing in this life is to come to know Jesus Christ personally. He came to earth that all people might be saved through him, and He is the only door to salvation/heaven (His claims, not mine). God exists, and that fact is the most important thing in life. Jesus is Lord and Savior and was crucified and is risen for the sins of the world. Live, love, and learn; God is love, God is Truth God so loved the world that He sent His only begotten son that whosoever believes in Him shall not perish but have eternal life. Christianity is a personal relationship with Jesus Christ, who died, was buried, and resurrected from the dead. He is the only path to Heaven. Religion on a personal level is beneficial. On a societal level it is detremental. The questions in #13 are a little vague. (Not my philosphy) ;-) all your gods are childish, tempermental children. Your idea of heaven is my idea of hell. Since the beginning of time the "Church" whichever that may be, has murdered more people than any other single entity. Hey man, remember the Force from Star Wars, the power (energy) that binds all of us (the universe) together...stuff like that. Being catholic is how I am most comfortable worshipping God. It has been a great comfort to me in troubled times, but I know that there are many paths to salvation and happiness, so I would not begrudge anyone their beliefs. I believe that only one reality can be true and I believe that I am honestly seeking that which is true. Jesus Christ, our Lord and savior came to earth as a man, died on a cross for our sins and went to be with the Father. I am a saved sinner, imperfect, but loved by God. I do it for me, not for a God. jesu shed his blood and died for my sins In regard to the societal significance of religion: I think it depends on the religion, some are constructive, some destructive. We are subject to spiritual laws that we are still discovering. As human beings we have free will to make choices about our lives. Our belief and faith helps us to make those choices. I don't believe our lives are 'mapped' out for us, we are agents of free will. I am created by God. From dust to dust. Love God and he help you. the universe is the highest divinity, a cosmic balance we are all a part (small) of All have sinned and fall short of the glory of God, but through his son, Jesus Christ, we can have eternal life. Without him, we are lost. Maybe there's a god. More likely there's one in each of us. Organized religion is ALWAYS bad in some way, even if the church in question doesn't happen to be killing anyone in the name of its central structure of lies. Long before Christianity was brought into western culture, there was no word "religion" because what you believed in you lived every day. Each person lives according to their own beliefs and because each person is unique they will have different beliefs. This is necessary because it is not possible for one single belief system to encompass all of what creation is. There is no wrong religion, there is no one true religion. Each individual is merely a reflection of what God is, therefore that person' beliefs are what is true. Maybe there's a god. More likely there's one in each of us. Organized religion is ALWAYS bad in some way, even if the church in question doesn't happen to be killing anyone in the name of its central structure of lies. Religion has maintained order in society for Millenium, though not religious, I feel religion prevents some culture from fall into total chaos. I am a rather liberal-thinking priest in a rather liberal-thinking church: the American Catholic Church, an Old Catholic body. I'm Christian, and I try (unsuccessfully) to folow Jesus' example. jesus christ is the truth the way and the light All people all valuable and we should live and let live. Religion is nothing; knowing Jesus Christ is everything. We are not saved by works, but by faith in Jesus and His death and resurrection, by which we can receive eternal life as a free gift (not by any of our works!). Life is the result of random chance in a universe that has no creator. Self-consciousness is a product of natural selection. I believe in rational self-interest. I have no morality but what I impose on myself, and I live (and will die) by my morality. Islam is the religion of peace and total submission to the commandments of God. I think all religions are cults, and as such they can be either great or horrible or neutral. Religion is the result of the masses' search for meaning. Religion is a concept used to control the massses God is in a form that is hard for us to understand. Most Religions come from the same core, which is love God, love your neighbor, and love yourself. Believe in god for he will save you from all evils. A wooded forest is equivalent to a cathedral, feminine symbols are prevalent in nature. To treat every person the way you would want be treated Do unto others.... Islamic philosophy screw off Be good, do good, live & let live if not hurting others Scientology is a practical, daily applicable, effective applied religion. I believe somewhat in the alien theory. That we possibly could be an offspring of a prior civilization. Although creationism isn't totally out of the question. Neither is evolution for that matter. Even someone as smart as einstein could not possibly know until you die and to believe otherwise is just stupidity. I do not dicount the posability of their being a god but I have seen no evidence to that fact and I do not actively persue religion. I do however beleve that the ten commandments are great "guidelines" for a happy life. I wouldnt slam a person with opposing views but I would try to quietly change them. FUCK JESEUS AND THE ASS HE RODE IN ON!!!!!!!! Different relgions came only from different isolated tribes many years ago to fill the gaps in their knowledge. The Mind is God. There is no death, only life. I don't mind religious people if they stay the fuck out of my face Religion is a personal thing for me. I don't follow specified religious guidlines, only my personal ones. Religion seems to be an easy place to turn for those who cant decide on morals, values and opions for themselves. You should incorporate values that you respect into your belief system, and not be afraid to wonder about those that don't convince you. Man created God in his own image. I'll find out when I'm dead. No point in worrying about it now. Most important, it is personal. Anyone who tries to impose their religon on me should be shot, drawn, quartered, burnned, and then really hurt. Christianity is one of several religions and by no means is there a right or supreme religion. With the Christian Coalition, they are messing with the first amendment rights given to people who practice other religions. If the bible were truly the work of an omnipotend creator, she would have done a better job of warning us of hazzards. None of this mumb-jumbo about the number of the beast, no contraditins, but clear indications that killing cats increases Plague, hating thise who are idfferent is dangerous. Much miserey has been caused by religion. as man is God once was, as God is man may become Humanism, respect for life and property Religion is the opiate of the masses -- but, hey, that's cool, I could use some opiate, and if you want to believe something too, great! Religion (IMHO) should be a way of helping you to understand the world and be happy in it. Sharing similar beliefs w/other people makes it more so, but everyone necessarily has different beliefs. Organized religion is a crutch for the feeble-minded. The word religion has such conotations attached to it that I choose not to use it when describing my beliefs. My beliefs are my personal attempt to understand my universe/reality. I can't say if the My philosophy is that there is someone that created everything and that he was probably good. I believe in karma. Try to be nice and others will be nice to you (simplified), but I think people should live and let live. If they aren't hurting me (or anyone else) through their beliefs, they should be free to do as they please. live life the best you can without expecting a reward. anyone who says he knows "the truth" is a liar. I was baptized Catholic but have long believed that all religions are both right and wrong. They come close but miss the mark. Being a free spirit, I could never kneel in front of something I can't conceive. Nobody has ever emitated the Quran, So I cannot disbelief it. You are a part of the whole Universal Energy Seek to please your creator/parents If "god" requires worship (not just good morals) is he worthy of worship? I believe that Earth as we know it is the Christian form of "hell", how we live here determines if we return here after we die. What religion do you believe in (that is not listed in the survey)? Pagan My own personal one Statistical Polytheist Christian (Ukrainian Catholic) ecclecticism Mormon Free-lance Monotheist Krishna Consciousness personal religion Christian Pagan individualist none Swedenborgian syncretic mix of Chri.& Buddhism, etc. Humanism, though it's not really a"religion", but a set of ethical beliefs. Vedanta a combination of Christianity and personal beliefs Paganism Order of the Grey Mist none Catholic TRUE Christianity Roman Catholic None Buddhist/Taoist/Pagan non demonational Dreamtime Zero-Point Radical christian The Golden Rule JEHOVAH'S WITNESS Quaker Christian Identity paganism none Pantheist-pagan Catholic JEHOVAH'S WITNESS Universal Inquirey Pantheism CHRISTIANITY/ BUDDHISM N/A Unitarian my own QUESTIONING CATHOLIC lutheran Secular Humanist not Churchianity Pagan Apatheistic Antichrist (Yahveh's Messiah) christian universalist over-conceptual omninegligience Catholic catholic Church Of Jesus Christ Of Latter Day Saints live correc Jehovah's witness Deist Have not made decision Catholic God was a bunch of aliens My own personal life experiences Can't explain Transcendentalist A mix betwen Zen & Taoism Seventh-day Adventist no religion Roman Catholic Subgenius Tao/Buddhist Humanism Eclectic spirituality (universal beliefs) Pagan-Shaman-Taoist eclectic pagan the correct spelling is Atheism None free life mixture of Western & Eastern ideas catholic deism BORN AGAIN CHRISTIAN mormonism Polymorphous -- I believe lots of things which add up to my own religion. Personal philosophy of life my own Energy Mormon Warriorship Unitarian-Universalist My religion is @$%#@% NO CARRIER Return to theHome Page. Copyright ©1996, /InterCommerceCorporation, All rights reserved worldwide Send comments to Webmaster@Survey.net WT02-B22-14IA060-000333-B026-346http://www.survey.net:80/rlg1c2.html 204.107.221.240 19970115060358 text/html 92101HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 15 Jan 1997 05:57:40 GMTServer: Apache-SSL-US/1.0.3+1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 91918Last-modified: Mon, 25 Nov 1996 20:26:46 GMT SURVEY.NET - Religion Survey - User comments (ARCHIVE III) Your source for information, opinions & demographics from the NetCommunity! ANNOUNCING: The Internet's finest interactive, totally-automated,immediate survey system. We can take any form and instantly create adynamic demographic database and show you the results as soon as youcomplete the survey! Internet Religion Survey #1 User comments [ARCHIVE III] What religion do you believe in (that is not listed in the survey)? Live and let live, If I am interested in your beliefs I will ask, otherwise I dont' care to know. We are eternal beings capable of far more than anyone ever imagined. Scientology holds the keys to the universe and beyond! Do effect others in a negative manner... & Be Happy. We all have tremendous potential within us. The truth will set you free. Do on to others as you would want done to you. The past of man influence on him today. Read "Fundamentals of Thought" by L. Ron Hubbard! Great book! I believe we are here for a reason...to learn and grow and to be tested. We do have a father in heaven who loves us and will forgive us for our faults but we need to live as best we can and follow his teachings if we really want to learn something. Every living thing has spirituallity. It is healthy to explore and grasp this portion of our exsitence. We connect to everything through our spirituallity. Religions are manmade structures to interpret and express our spirtuallity. However, man is a greedy and power hungry creature that has turned religion into control, for better or worst. I am a practicing Jew, and very proud of it. Life is an adventure and my relgion gives me tools to make it better. Religion is the key to a successful,happy life,which is in harmony to the world we live in. Without religion, there is no purpose to living. Governments role is to provide a construct in which people can practice their religion any way they see fit. Nothing more. Keep religion and specific religious beliefs/practices out of government. The Trinity,Christ,God,the Holy Spirit,& the Holy Church of Rome Living the laws of God is the only way to find true happiness in this life and the life to come. there is only one God, Allah, and Muhammad is his last and final messenger For humans to think they know how and why the universe was created is absurd, self-centered, and delusional. We're only one of billions of planets--we DON'T have all the answers. What is true for an individual, is true for them. There is only one diety worthy of worship:Allah, the Almighty and He has no parents and no offspring.Muhammad(p.b.u.h.) is His messenger.We must totally submit to the will of Allah and we Humans/ Jinn have been created by Allah only to worship Him, alone. I believe in islamic sufism I am a muslim trying to follow the Quran & sunnah of the Prophet Mohamed (saw). I believe that God helps those who help themselves and each individual person has the responsibility to become more like God. I believe that man is basically good and that goodness can be recovered through religion. Men is essentially good, the spirit is the cause of all things Former Christian who appreciates the base stories of exile, liberation and the model of Jesus. At the same time growing to affirm the insights of many other disciplines besides theology. Finds solace in moving away from shame/guilt based church religion To reach total spiritual freedom through the use of Scientology I think religion can and does serve as control for the masses, but is not only that, but is more. Life is our oppourtunity to learn needed leasons until full enlightenment is achieved and we can move on to the next spiritual level. There is one God, and Mohammed (PBUH) is his last messanger(prophet). Believe in whatever makes to a better person and provides strength and guidence Christ is the way to eternal salvation! To apply basic living concepts everyday that improve and enhance your life and those around you. I have been a Scientologist for many years and have found that the tools available in this philosophy constant assist me in life No East. no West. Islam is the Best. My philosophy as a teenager and one that I am not proud of is experience things while you are young - I have plenty of time to follow the commandments when I grow up. If your at peace with oneself your at peace with God. We are beings, not bodies. We live across many lifetimes. How we act toward others determines how able we are. Abilities can be improved. The ablilites to communicate and perceive are the most important. Stay positive and focus on helping others Knowing God is a life-long experience. It's hard and there are no easy answers. There is no god but Allah and society must adhere to His will or perish! God loves us all It is my aim to achieve total freedom for myself and for each of my fellow men in the world. I am an immortal spiritual being. My religion has actually helped me discover more about who I really am! Knowledge and understanding are vital to Life The power that made life can heal it and destroy it. You have direct contact with that power and can be it. Man is not an animal. Man is basically good. Man is an immortal, spiritual entity and has created our universe. He needs an applicable religious philosophy that can be followed, in order to ascend to a greater, more meaningful existence. Man is basically good, when he does bad he tries to prove that it isn't bad by doing it again and again and again. Being a Muslim who follows Islam, I believe in the One God, Allah, and that the Prophet Muhammad was his Messenger (not founder of Islam). Islam is the key to happiness and self-control in this life, but is very stereotyped by the West. All men have the right to believe in whatsoever they want, without fear of prejudice. A philosophy which emphasizes personal development; unworkable if imposed by others. God will always come through in the end. I belive in the Lord Jesus Christ, the infilling of the Holy Spirit, and the Word of God. When we have these we have all the tools we need to make the right choices in our life. Without them life is full of chaos and strife. Jesus came and died for us. He is the only way to eternal joy and peace. That we are all spiritual beings and it is important how we live life because we will return to what we have created. We are eternal spiritual beings caught in a downward spiral. The road out is in the teachings of L.Ron Hubbard. Jesus Christ is the Son of the Almighty, Everlasting God who was given to us as a gift from Him. He has made a way of escape for us since no one can live a sinless life. Jesus is the perfect lamb who was slain to pay for our sins. being spiritual, not hurting other people and having a system of faith and belief are more important than fighting over differences We are spiritual beings in a degraded condition inhabiting meat bodies. My religious philosophy is that by becoming more spiritually aware, I regain more of myself. There are much larger and much more fun games to be played than the one we are playing out on this planet and I intend to become a player in a larger game. I believe Man is basically spiritual in nature, but who has through a long series of misadventures come to think he is material. Restoring his sense of spirituality and disabusing him of materialistic identities is the major purpose of an applied religious philosophy. Man is a spiritual being who is basically good. Given the truth and workable tools man is able to free himself and his fellows from evil. I believe that various religions are different views/angles of the same thing, and that even though we often cannot see the connection between them in our world, they are all part of one. Man is most basically an immortal spiritual being. I believe man in a spiritual being. I believe each person should strive to make the world a better place for himself, his/her family, the future. Man is a spiritual being capable of infinite creation. Religion is about helping the being achieve rediscovery of his origins and the true nature of existence, greater ability to change conditions for himself and those around him, and true freedom itself. Everyone should be entitled to their own beliefs. Submision to will ALLAH and Accountability. We are responsible for creating the life we experience. It doesn't just "happen" to us. We CAN change our future. It is not preordained. there is no god but Allah, and Muhammed is His messanger Man is a spirit. The purpose of religion is to enhance a person by approaching him in a spiritual basis. Man has a great deal more potential and ability than he has ever been led to believe. The striving to reach this potential is a striving for freedom, and toward knowledge of God. Jesus said "I am the way, the truth and the life" I believe he is. He provided the perfect sacrifice to attone for the sins of all who believe in him. The more I learn from Scientology, the more I realize about myself and life There is a chaotic pattern inherent in the universe. By becoming aware of an in tune with this pattern one can be happier and more fulfilled. Man is a spiritual being, basically good and his abberations can be eradicated with the correct religious technology. We are spiritual beings, our bodies are the tools we use to manipulate physical objects. The Spirit is Senior to all else. Scientology has enhanced my beliefs as a Roman Catholic as it gave me better understanding as to how things are the way they are. I feel good being who I am. If it works use it. Be able to experience anything while causing only those things which others can experience easily. Man is basically good. Only when we learn to trust each other will we have peace on Earth. everyone is a spiritual being, immortal, even if they know it not. This single fact aligns and opens the door to handling life. Beings are spiritual of nature, and not just bodies as we have been led to believe in this age of "science" and materialism. It is knowledge of the mind and man's spiritual nature which will solve man's problems. Living things are animated by a life force. I believe that all men are equal on a spiritual level and that man is basically good. I also believe that he can attain higher states of awareness and ability through spiritual study and endeavor. Man is a spiritual being, and the spirit can be addressed, helped and improved. Religion is a comfort in a time of need if it works use it. the golden rule Believe that man lives life after life and that his survival is directional proportional to his ethicalness. Truth is what is true for you, not what you are told is true. man is spiritual in nature and will attain freedom via the spirit. I believe I am an immortal spiritual being; I believe that man is basically good. It's an applied Religious Philosophy Man is a spiritual being and basically good. He can attain higher levels of spiritual freedom. His foundation for freeing himself is honesty and an ability to take responsibility for himself and those around him. I have a great respect for all the religions described by Houston Smith's Religions of Man Islam has the answer to everything!!!!!! homo saipiens spend entirerly too much time worrying about what happens post mortem. Through knowledge of oneself as a human spirit one can obtain a rejuvenation of ones native abilities, and through the aplication of this knowledge to the society around us, it would be possible to have a society without insanity, criminality and war, where the able can prosper and man can rise be free to greater heights. People are immortal and basically good. That basic goodness can become aberrated, twisted, even nullified by mental and spiritual conflicts, which can be found and relieved. Man is basically good and is seperate from his body and is a spiritual being. The purpose of all humanity is to worship the creator. Religion outlines methods of worship that are the best. Religion is also the creator,s of encouraging all of us to be responsible, mature, compassionate, and to use good judgement. Following religion (I believe a monotheistic one) reminds us of where we came from, where we are going, and that following religious precepts make for the best, both in this life and the next. The devine essence can be experienced directly as inner Light and Sound and through dreams, inner guidance and soul travel. I believe the basic fundamental elements of Christianity. I do not believe the Bible should be read literally and in small portions. I believe in a loving God who cares for His/Her creation. Religion is the search for Truth outside of physical, mathematical laws. Ones beliefs are based on the weight of evidence of witnesses and experiences, whether personal or reported by others. I believe that salvation is through Jesus Christ, God very Son of God. Much is mystery. We can lose anything and anyone in this life. Jesus and God are the only ones who will never leave us. Religions are symbolic ideas of how life began and how we should live it. It doesn't matter which religion you believe in--just treat the world and those in it with kindess. Man is a spirtual being. Thomastic Catholic and Scientology what you believe in is right for you and you alone. No one faith is better than another- there is something that binds us all as humas- as that matters is that one loves God (or a loving higher power) We are eternal spirits; we'll be back again. It behooves us to improve ourselves and our lot--since we WILL be back! i believe that religion is the power source for any one ,if u shut the power off nothing works Scientology is an Applied Religious Philosophy which has its focus increasing abilities. The individual is cause&responsible for existence Increased affinity, reality and communication results in greater understanding of self and others. Man is basically good and seeking to survive. All men have the right to religious beliefs of their own choice. A man without an abiding faith is somewhat less than a man. We are all striving for enlightenment & freedom. Man is a spiritual being, is basically good and is totally responsible for his own condition and his own actions. I believe that a relationship with Jesus Christ is essential to meaning and purpose in this life and beyond. Without religion(Islam) one is lost in this world. Religion comes from within oneself, morals are defined by survival on its various levels, Man is basically good and is (not has) a soul You are worshipping whatever you act on with reverence, love/admiration, or fear/hate. You heal whatever you fully confront with full understanding and lovingkindness. Ed.Note: Principle and polygamy are the spellings you need. I believe in the old axiom, "Live and let live" unless your are doing harm to others directly and deliberately. The spirit is the being, the mind and body only trappings. Only the spirit can progress. none I am very much an individualist. I believe in the morals of Christianity, but not the religion. Where I am going I am unsure. We are spirital beings. Human beings now can know, and ARE learning, the answers to all the questions and mysteries of life, eliminating insanity & war, and finding their own immortality and spiritual freedom. Making one more able The science of knowing how to know people need a religious technology to become more causative and effective in life Man is basically good and needs to learn to get along with the rest of mankind. Man is a spiritual being, seeking to understand himself better and also the Supreme Being. To know and to understand and to be free are everything. Devotion Allah by obeying his orders and do good deeds in this life. My religion is aimed at increasing one's awareness and personal responsibility and integrity; thereby enabling the spirit, which is oneself, to be free of the self-imposed barriers to Total Understanding. The future of the West turns on the conflict between the soul-less "religion" of Science and re-discovery of religion. Religion is the cause of all wars and oppression, especially as it applies to the status of women. Man is basically good. That man is basically good and that he is striving to survive as the basic dynamic principle. Any religion is better than no religion Religion is 'nice', but a 'PERSONAL RELATIONSHIP' with THE ONE & ONLY GOD is the only way to find happiness and peace in this life. Religious 'Works' can't erase the sins you've committed, big or small, "only by being Born Again can you be forgiven" quote Jesus in John 3:3. Man is basically good and it is possible to have total freedom, hope, health and much happiness. But one needs to take responsibility for one's actions and also one needs to eget rid of his reactive mind. It takes study to become free and through Scientology one can find truth for oneself. It's awsome! Religious philosophy should enable an individual to become truely self-determined and yet operate on the ideal of "the greatest good for the greatest number." Life and hope is to follow Jesus daily I believe I am a spiritual being here to unravel the mysteries of life so that I may understand them and know who I am.I believe life is an unending adventure to discover ourselves and become more aware of our spiritual side and become more powerful and able. there is no power greater then God i waorship him only Acquire wisdom to create the most benefit for all parts of life. What is true for you, is true One should be endeavoring to improve himself and others and to take on more responsiblity for themselves and others I believe that as long as one believes that Jesus is the Son of God and that He came to earth and voluntarily sacrificed himself for the eternal life of others, that all the rest of the stuff (ie. what heaven or hell is, literal interpretation of the bible, speaking in tongues, etc) is just stuff for christians to entertain themselves with until they die! What someone beleives, or even IF they beleive, is their business & their choice. No one should try to force their religious opinions on others in the name of "saving" them when they may possibly have never been in danger to begin with. Too bad America is so Christian. It makes it an intolerant place to live. Man is a spiritual Being who is only vaguely aware of his true potential, but who is capable of rising to a greater understanding of himself and his spirituality, given some real answers to life. I believe that a person can find these answers within himself. In general (though there are exceptions) religion provides a tool for answers to difficult ethical questions. Unfortunately, the fact that these questions are difficult implies that thought, not dogma should be the method of approaching the issue. Man is basically a good spiritual being, but has become confused over the millenia. 1.) Create only effects that others can easily have 2.) Be willing to experience anything. Man is basically good. He is not an animal, he is an immortal spiritual being. My philosophy is be a good person. That's it. I think organized religion is the worst thing that's ever happened to humankind. It has bred intollerance, hatred, and caused the death of too many. Believe what you will but don't force your beliefs on me. A person is capable of anything but due to his own past mis-deeds and ignorance, restrains himself. Through re-familiarization with his own past and education in the laws of life and the universe, one can regain abilities and achieve one's own goals. Each of us is a being with rights to happiness and has the ability to prosper as a spiritual being. Be good, be beautiful and be ? Religion is what takes man out of the animal family and lifts him to the heights of spirituality and immortality Our life is purely what we make it to be; Scientology gives me the ability to handle my life and make my life fullfilling and happy. sometimes you feel like a nut, sometimes you don't You Are Cause There is an exact technical route to higher spiritual awareness- Scientology has this technology. It is not simply something you believe in, it is something you DO. Man is comprised of a body and a spirit; the spirit is eternal and basically good. Scientology helps the spirit understand its existence and purpose in this universe and how that spirit can grow in a positive and unencumbered fashion. Religion is something to be used to improve the condition of the world around you. A religion's worth is measured by how well it does that. You're on the threshhold of your next trillion years. It will be good for you or bad for you. Scientology religious philosophy can help make it good for you. I was raised Roman Catholic. I lost that faith (if I ever had it) in HS> In college, experiences with several Hindu friends rekindled a sort of faith in me. I would say I am still Catholic, but I have significant reliance on Hindu beliefs/principles also. I have read the Bible once and the Gita several times. That man has brought about his own individual condition in life and that it is up to him through education and soul searching enlightenment to bring himself to a better state of being. People are spiritual beings and are responsible for their conditions. God is everywhere. You do not need to go to church to worship him! What is true for you is true for you. Man is basically good and he is seeking to survive. He should be helped. There is no god but Allah and Muhammad is his last Apostle Our actions in this life determine our salvation. Religion should be practical, and satisfy intellectual as well as emotional questions. Faith should not comprise as Mark Twain said, "Faith is believing what you *know* ain't true." I believe Christ died for our sins and opened the gates of hell. We will live eternally with Heavenly Father because of the atonement humans are spirits that have a body Each individual is an immortal spiritual being capable of vast improvement. SURVIVAL! PAN-DETERMINISM! THETA! What is true for you is true for you. And according to your own observation it is true. (Similar to what LRH said) That man is basically good, that he is seeking to survive and that his survival depends upon himself and upon his fellows and upon his attainment of brotherhood with the universe. (From the Scientology Creed). Everyone is basically good -- some of them have got confused Search out and find truth. Verify it as true and USE IT. The 10 Commandments One's value as a being is the sum of one's value to others. This universe is a universe of force and is designed in such a way as to require that one live a life of service to live a happy and productive life. Only by living such a life does one develope an understanding of life and the spirit. Additionally, one must renounce the use of force to be able to handle force. He who fully renounces the use of force may indeed walk on the waters and part the seas. You must discover for yourself what is true for you, and then follow that path. What is true for you, is true for you! my philosophy is islam, it is submission to God that brings peace. Many of the statements in 14. are true Religion is many things to many people. If a religion helps a person to live a better life, that's a good thing. Man is basically good and is seeking to survive. It makes the able more able. I have become extremely happy. That people are actually spiritual beings, that they CAN get better, and that Scientology greatly assists them in doing so. Man is a composit being, primarily an immortial being wearing the body of this earth Help others to find freedom. Religion should be helping people to live more successful and satisfied lives. That man is responsible for his own condition. man is a being of limitless potential, totally responsible for his own condition and basically good by nature That man is an immortal being striving to survive. He should understand as much about himself as he can. Knowledge is power. We're spiritual beings able to attain grtr heights I believe that all people can come together in realization that there is a creator and that we are all responsible to that creator. Our creator loves us and we should live in that same love. Scientology gives me the tools in life to survive at a level far higher than I could ever possibly attain without it. Man is a spiritual being, basically good, who has the inherent ability to be free and able. This planets', this country's, and the neighborhoods' problems are more dangerous than at any time in history. Religions must put aside differences and pull together to solve these while there are still some threads we can weave back together. Read Bertrand Russell -- Religion, for the most part, is not only proabaly untrue, but manifestly destructive on humanity. Or something to that effect. Responsibility for and care of, self, others, and all areas of life, is the keynote of happiness. Believe that man is basically good, and that everyone can be better, That is the goal for the church for everyone working towards being the best they can be. contained in the works of L. Ron Hubbard Religion is about the relationship of the spirit to the rest of the universe. There is true knowledge to be found. Be willing to experience any effect; cause only those effects that others can easily experience. Everyone has a right to a relationship of their choosing to the God of their choosing. Far from being an illusion, religion is the single most civilizing influence in the world for the reason that it teaches us immutable truths about the way we ought to conduct ourselves. The fact remains, when all is said and done, the basic values espoused by mostly all religions are basically the same. As a Scientologist I believe that man is basically good; that he is a spiritual being; that his main purpose in life is to survive. Scientology is an applied religious philosophy that contains methods of counselling that help a person gain spiritual freedom. It has helped me make major We are immortal spiritual beings, are basically good, and are seeking to survive at an optimum level. We are all immortal spirits seeking freedom from matter, energy, space and time. Man is a spiritual being and is basically good. Maintain personal integrity and keep my own counsel. It is only true, what you realize is true. Man is a basically good. Man is a composite being. The game is to separate self (the spirit) from the composite which is composed of body, mental image pictures, false data, and past experiences. All the freedom one can ever know is within oneself. I believe Jesus died for my sins so that I could have eternal life. I believe it's a relationship not a religion. It is a way of life, a good one. Spiritual freedom is the most important thing to me True happiness can only be achieved by defining and upholding personal and group ethics. Do what I can to improve conditions. Jesus Christ is the son of God and is God. Only through belief in Him can one be saved. We are all immortal spiritual beings and we are much more able than we have been taught. The basic urge of existence is to survive as oneself, your family, groups, mankind, with plants and animals, the physical universe, spiritual beings and God. I find that which is workable (i.e., can be *applied*), and use it! We are spiritual beings in bodies. Spirituality can be "acquired" through hard work and specific spiritual training and enlightment through self knowledge using Scientology techniques. These techniques and higher spiritual states using Scientology can be applied to anybody who is reasonably literate and willing to "take a look" within themselves at themselves, their past, and their relation to others and the world around them. Ethical naturalism and respect for human reason leads naturally to atheism. Religion should lead to spiritual enlightenment, increased knowledge of oneself in relation to the others and the universe and a better life. I have found that in Scientology. Ethics is reason. Full acknowledgement of other people is the greatest virtue. First, the questions above load the results. Few of the available answers accurately reflect my beliefs. That said, I believe that we are immortal beings and that we are totally responsible for whatever condition we are in, and that therein lies the key. We created this life, it is ours to save. That man IS a spiritual being that HAS a body. Not the other way around. The individual spirit that is man never dies, but loses consciousness when he is "reborn", thus forgetting his prior existences. That's a sentence or two and is wholly inadequate. Go to http://www.scientology.org for further information Most religions have similar traits. I believe there is a single life force energy which we all interpret differentlyy- and we a re all a part of. Just Islam Jesus is alive, and in His Spirit, offers to become one with us; His perfect sinlessness becomes our as well as His abundant life.; His perfect sinlessness becomes mine episcopal church My basic philosophy is "an it harm none, do as ye will". I believe in love, compassion, and tolerance. It can't be done in a sentence or two. I was raised to attend church every Sunday. Since college, tho, I've not participated in group worship nearly as often. I've found worship to be a personal experience, and is what you make of it. Jesus is the son of God Was Born of Mary.He was Crucified,died & was buried.On the 3rd day he rose again,decended into Hell,and acended into Heven God has always been and will always be of prime importance in my life. Kuran And Sunna I have none. Seeker of increased spiritual awareness and tolerance for individual beliefs God is our father, and he knows and loves each one of us individually. God hates no man, only the sins that men commit. Live and ley live, shit happens... Believe what you want, but be tolerant of others. Seek and ye shall find... (if you're really looking) Mind your own business and stay out of others. Do what you can to make the place better than when you got here. No matter what a person's formal affiliation, conscience is all-important. I believe that conscience is synonymous with the promptings of the HOLY SPIRIT as defined in the New Testament. Thus, no matter what one's profession of faith, or denial of faith, his or her conscience provides an avenue with which to apprehend God...... It is impossible to know of anything through written works, so a religion must be found in the self. Acceptence and trust try to eleminate all beliefs in dieties Live and let others live, ignore adversity. Try to follow my heart and do what is right. Try my best to follow the ways i interpret the bible for myself in todays society. Religion is a crutch for those too weak or cowardly to take responsibility for their own actions. It's much too convenient to say "It's God's {sic} will," or "The Devil made me do it." We exist within God. God speaks to us through the circumstances of our lives. Every thought is a prayer. Jesus was a wise teacher, but the Bible was written by men and is flawed. I believe God put us on earth to learn to live and love one another. Everyone has the right to believe anything they wish to. I draw the line when anyone feels it is their "right" or mission to force their religeous beliefs on someone who does not have the same beliefs. God is love and we are to reflect His love to all people I think that there is a driving force to the universe and whether that form takes one god or many, it is all the same. emotional honesty live and let live. I cant see why people should want to spend time praying to something that cna be proved to exist, but its their time !!!! So whay should I worry, unless they try pushing it on me, as many faaiths try to do ! Take care of all living and the earth I am seeking, experiencing, and sometimes finding. No god, heaven/hell. ReligiousNESS, not a religion. The whole sky is mine. I don't worship a Buddha. I am a buddha in my own right and authority. God loves us and wants what is best for us, furthermore, He knows all things so He knows what is best for us. If we obey His will and guidance we will find true hapiness in our lives. You must accept Jesus as your personal savior. To do the "right thing" to ensure personal happiness while respecting others and society, a vaule system is important. If that includes religion, great. I believe most Christian religions are too intrusive. believe in one god and be straight in your life Spiritual/religious beliefs are complex. Organized religion can be constructive, or destructive depending on the situation. I believe we are essentially good without needing to be Christian. Its more important to treat your fellow man well than to 'have religion'. How do you account for wars with religious excuses? Live and let live. Life is what you make it. Religion is the second most destructive idea in the history of humankind. I do not believe in god and religion is a waste of time. It is how we commune with our infinite source. I believe the Jesus is the savior oft he world, and that we all need to accept Him as our Lord and Savior. I used to be into the New Age movement, and was possesed by a demon. That taught me that it does matter what to believe. I believe in God, what more is there ? Believe what you like, but, don't force your beliefs onto others. The Gods and the ancestors, and ancestral thew's are the center of my people, our world and me. The Gods create and sustain the worlds, the love of the Gods is forever, we must all remember this. God, who created everything, controls all at all times and we will one day have to answer to him. Religious Extremism is responsible for the major problems of our society. Everyone controls their own actions. There is no influence in anyones life by a "higher being" There is no God, and those scary Christian groups are trying to make the state and church into one!!! As a Unitarian Christian, I advocate religious tolerance, follow the teachings of Jesus, and believe that true Christianity requires compassion, self-sacrifice, social activism, and a good deal of reasoned skepticism. All beings are interconnected. This connection brings responsibility to do good and honor the divine within all things. I beleive in God, NOT religion. I beleive that everyone has a purpose in life. As soon as you understand your personal mission, your life will have meaning. What lies behind us and what lies before us are tiny matters compared to what lies within us. We are all part of the whole, whatever that is, and beyond that, most religions use symbols to help us grasp the ineffable. Jesus Christ is the Light of the world, he came to save the lost. I believe that if a person does not accept theLord, he is doomed. always do the right thing. Religion is a basis for moral/ethical standards - taught by the religion, but interpreted by the individual god is seeing us from a very lon distance Such a hard subject to sum up briefly.I think I belive but have had doubts,I dislike others belives(what ever they are), being pushed on me.I wish I had the answers. There is one god; should follow religious guidlines... There is only this world and this life,and the purpose of life is ensure the best possible conditions for your offspring.While we are here,we must live rationally and morally. God has created us for His workmanship. We need to be conformed into the image (nature) of His Son. We must love each other. Reffering question #12, I don't believe that christianity is a religion;however, I do believe that christianity is a way of life. Live for today as if you were to die tommorrow plan for tommorrow as if your life is eternal Soul exists because GOD loves it. Jesus is the Son of God! Repent and be baptized. AL-Kitaab Was-Sunnah Ala Faham us-Sahaabah. I don't believe in life after death; I believe in life BEFORE death. Stay away from the stuff . . . it could become an adiction . . . just like drugs . . . Live & let live John 3:16 A combination creation/evolution, god in everything, natural world revered. I just believe in me,screw yoko Animals and humans are equal. Only God has dominionover us. respect must be earned, even if you are god Jesus is the Lord. confused lapsed believing Catholic no organized religion fits my needs Love thy neighbor, by which I mean truly caring for his or her well-being. Belief in Jesus Christ as the Son of God is our only salvation and means of eternal life. Religion is a personal thing, and you should be tolerant of others beliefs. God is the king of the playground, we are children learning to share the sand and tools in the sandbox. God couldn't give a rat's ass about our organized belief systems. God only cares that we try to treat each other as brothers & sisters of the same parent. that which is hurtful to you, do not do it to your neighbor. don't make to the others what you don't want it's made to you. I have a real problem with organized religion because they never are content to worship as they see fit and leave others alone. I think tht one must believe in something for true happiness. I believe Jesus Christ is the savior of the world. He died for us and atoned for our sins. I am so grateful for him. He has called prophets in our day just as he did in ancient days. My philosophy regarding religion is that it is a way of life. God created me, so if I did not follow His teachings, that would be the height of ingratitude and arrogance. All praise is due to Allah (swt), the Lord of the Worlds. Saved by faith in Jesus Christ. He is the way, the truth, no comes unto the Father except by Him. Zen - Constructive work toward enlightenment. Daoism - acceptance of all thing as being in flux (changing)- avoidence of conflict. The two together result in active resolution of any and all conflicts through acceptance, mediation, arbitration or superior fire power. This is a Martial Arts based philosophy. All is One Life is a beautiful and complex chemical reaction that should be held in awe. I believe if I live according to the 10 commandments life will be bearable. The principles communicated by and adhered to by Jesus are good and right. One cannot go wrong following his teachings. LOVE ONE ANOTHER I rarely give religion a second thought, until it comes to others trying to 'convert' me or 'show me the light'. I don't begrudge anyone their religion. Just don't try to make me wrong because I'm not interested in YOUR beliefs. Quite simply, Harm none. If you do expect it back in fourfold There is a greater being who created something. From that everything evolved. Everything is still evolving and life is just an experiment the being is conducting. Cf. Apostles' Creed Cf. Apostles' Creed There is ONE God (Allah), He does not beget nor is He begotten, He is all-knowing and kind. Ameen. There is a God who simply created us - he does not care what we do with our lives after creation. collectively, there is a divine goal, through which religion expresses "God"; that God does not come down to "tell" man what is His plan, religion fills the void. Generally Christian, with strong influence from Buddhism and the Tao God is more like an overseer but does not get initimately involved in every aspect of our lives. He expects us to function on our own. "True religion" must include tolerance for other views that can be seen as ethical -- even those that seem strange to oneself. There is no God but Allah and Muhammad (P.B.U.H) is Allah's prophet. A relationship with Jesus empowered and anointed with the Holy Ghost and power. No rituals or tradition attached. every one believe in the same god Organized religion is not the key to happiness and peace; a personal relationship with God (Christ) is the key. Because of my faith in & experience of God (that was first initiated by Him) as creator, spiritual father & saviour (not just from sin), I know my intrinsic worth and purpose; I know I have eternal spiritual & physical life (physical, when resurrected by God); I am moraly & behavioral accountable(ultimately to God). This is true of born & unborn, of believer & unbeliever, whether realized & accepted or not. Without such personal knowledge of (or faith in) and a harmonious relation with such a God, socity will increasingly become nihilistic by every definition. I believe that the divine is all around us in nature and that we all have the ability and the need to connect with that in some way. I also believe in respect for all things, including what may be considered as the dark side of our nature. I feel that religion over the ages has been harmful to all societies. Horrendous things are done in the name of religion--forcing women to have as many children as they can pump out, keeping women in their place, killing because "they" are not like you. There is a creation-hense creator ! The only laws we have to obey are the laws of the universe. Jesus is the only way to salvation and eternal life The Universe is more Odd that You can Imagine. Really. Think about it. Almost every war ever fought was because "God is on our side." What about the "Children's Crusade"? Europeans thought the muslims would not kill armed children. What a bad idea. live your bliss to belive in god and follow the principal rules of islam. Religion allows humanity to deny its' animal origins which is very uncomfortable for some. We are then "devine" ourselves and therefore can accommodate our excesses on this planet. One can only be truly saved through a personal relationship with Jesus Christ. Christ consciousness (advancement to the state of) Religion is a danger to mankind. Jesus is the Way, the Truth and the Light. I am essentialy a fideist. "Do unto others as you would have them do unto you." Love one another something created by society to give them hope when there was none. I believe that we each have to decide for ourselves what we believe...once there we can be who we really are... Respect others for their beliefs... My Lord and Savior is Jesus Christ, the risen Son of God, whose completed work at Calvary paid for all our sins. Evolution happened. It's been proven. Deal with it. Do not have one yet but am in the process of searching for something that seems feasable to believe in. Love of life is key to hapiness. There are many ways to the truth, but there is only one truth. Loving the Gods,Folk and family. Troth and Honour religion is whatever you interpet it to be Religion is usually good, if if helps you then good for you but some people just don't need it and that's okay too I believe the Bible to be inspired by God. I believe that Jesus is the only way to God. I beleive that every person is fully accountable for their actions whether they realise it or not. I believe in one all-pervasive "diety" and the equality of all mankind. I believe that this diety sends divine messengers periodically with guidance for mankind Religon was a way for people to try and explain what they do not understand. It serves no purpose now except as a way for others to impose their beliefs on you. We create our own reality 100% ! no fine print. there should be a lot more frolicking. oooh, so many pretty things. don't take yourself so seriously, you'll end up in a little grey box. I ain't no JESUS FREAK, thats for sure. Live and let live. It all works out in the End. i believe every living creature has the same rights and dignity buddhist madhyamika, transcendental nondualism There is no death, and there are no dead. "The key to religious truth is a mathematically perfect survey." If you live a life that makes you happy, and you can honestly say that you don't regret how you have lived that is all that matters I am a sunni muslimah trying to please ALlah swt. Love one another as God loves you. Religion is a useful guide and source for ones values, a way to ground ones moral choices. I believe there is one God, manifest in different ways to different peoples at different times. I feel that the supernatural is very real, and that organized religions are expressions of our relation to the supernatural. Different expressions resonate for different people. no answer was given for church membership mainly because i believe christianity is a lifestyle no matter what your church is called. Because I have values and brains I am an atheist. Heaven & Hell...I'm not sure but I'm not taking any chances! That a supreme force put me on Earth, and my mission is make life easier for my fellow human beings All living things, be they plant, animal, or unclassifiable, have souls and are of similar worth. Religion makes people hate one another. Different religions always fight and cause war. It is my own business, and other people attempting to enforce theirs upon me will suffer for it. An it harm none, do as ye wilt. Some individuals need the structure that religious myths provide to order their lives and provide a moral foundation. Religion is an excuse for developing your own ethics & morality. In the name of religion too many people have suffered. It has started more wars, battles, and fueds than any other belief. unique GOD Obey God Respect thy neighbour. Freedom is the highest value. I beleive that almost every organized religion is complete hypocrisy. I believe in the BASIC principles of Christianity, however the fundamental teachings have become skewed and altered from their original intentions. Religion has been used to control people for a long time. I believe that no one can know what the true nature of a supreme being might be. Perfect religion givesd me a way of looking at the world that is colored by a bleief in a benevolent and caring God. This God does require things of us but , because we are created by this God and this God loves us, there is understanding and forgiveness for our faults. I believe in moral absolutes, but don't believe its necessary (though it may be helpful for some) to rely on a church to define and interpret ethical behavior. Do What Thou Wilt Shall Be The Whole Of The Law! believe in one God, Allah(swt)who is the creator of the world, and prophet Mohammed being His last messenger. Heaven is within. Love is the creative energy. Religion is necessary to comfort and console us. It is very personal and so everyone is entitled to believe whatever he/she wants as long as it does not interfere with anyone elses happiness. Number 14 should have had flags instead of a pull down bar... Jesus answered, I am the way and the truth and the life. No one comes to the Father except through me. John 14:6 And it harm none, do as you will Relationships, not rituals, comprise true religion. Christianity is the greatest disaster to ever befall western civilization Religion has the purpose of teaching values and lessons, but it is completely inadequate and incorrect for anything else. Spirituality actually has very little to do with religion or "God." Not by might and not by power, but by My Spirit says the Lord! Through faith in the precious blood of the Lamb, Jesus Christ, you are saved! Religion is an unfortunate hold-over from mankind's primitive past. The sooner we outgrow it, the better. Religion should be a personal means through which one attains whatever level of metaphysical happiness they need in their lives; however, as history has shown time and time again, religion all too often is only an excuse to slaughter other human beings fo Romans 5:1-11 - Jesus Christ is the ONLY answer for mankind. The world needs to turn to Him for guidance. He desires all men to come to Him. Ask Him to come into you life, change your heart, and guide you forever. There is that of God in each of God...so we must respect each other and each others opinions whether we agree or not Do unto others as you would have them do unto you. When I die my sprit will go to the next level of life to almost as near as heaven. The earth is what I describe to be 'Hell' since we are here to learn and cope with the hatress, etc. JESUS Rules!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!! For me, religion is a quest for meaning. There are institutions which came to have achieved a grasp on meaning and proscribe for their members. These can be useful or not, "by their fruit...." Religion is also practice of orienting rites which are generally useful if the belief behind the rite is positive. That confusing enought? Religion is merely a word. Belief system would more acurately describe what you're talking about here. Religion must not be confused with spirituality. The former is a way to control, manipulate and judge. The latter permits enlightenment. Though one may be both; it is still rather paradoxical to be enlightened while also being controlled. Religion is a good way, however, to teach young children values. A person lacking fundamental religious beliefs, lacks also in moral integrity. Even Buddhists learn basic teachings of Buddha. I think that religion should be up to the person. I can't stand people who push their beliefs on others!! No one can say for sure what's right and wrong. I believe that everyone should be free to believe whatever their soul finds peace with and that they should keep this belief to themselves instead of trying to force it onto other people. When someone is ready to find out who they really are, they will look for answers and the teachers will be there. I feel that developing your spiritual side is important. I used to be Catholic, but have stopped going to church becuase I don't believe in what the Catholic Church stands for; it's much too institutionalized and political. God accepts all who seek him, by whatever path. God being love, the only important thing as far as we are concerned is sorting it all out--the glimpses beyond the veil. Jesus said, "I am the way, the truth, and the life. No one comes to teh FAtaher except by me." Further, forgiveness and eternal life comes only through a personal relationship with Jesus. I believe we are here due to evolution and will eventually evolve into a higher being (if the government will allow it, ha ha). I belong to a cell church. We believe religion is relational, as in based on a relationship with God, and other people. No matter who or what you worship, Do unto others as you would have them do unto you. After that it will all fall into place. Oh, that's deep ain't it? We're here for a reason. We need to find what that reason is. Jesus Christ left his throne in heaven to come to earth to be a living sacrifice for us all, by dying on the cross and accepting the punishment for our sin on himself. And whoever believes in him and asks him to save them from their sins will be saved, an My religion is kindess. Our best goal is harmony with ourselves, others and the universe. Allah (the One God) sent humanity Islam, not to restrict us or make life hard, but to make worshipping Him easy, and to bring about peace within ourselves and throughout society. moslim . We are wonderfully made by God. Our objective on earth is show our love for GOD by feeding the hungry, clothing the naked, and visiting the sick. Pray to find the Truth and you will find Jesus!!! religion is an outlet that is there for you when you need it.. right now i don't need it, but later in life i might, and so then i'll take part in it more. the beauty of it is that it holds no grudge that i wasn't involved for so long. There is a "God" within all of us, but only you can reach him. Live life for yourself, not for some supreme being which may or may not exist. There is no power found in religion that cant be found in yourself. there is not one righteous we all fall short and that we must be born again to have everlasting life. To try to be as close to Jesus as one can, but try HARD! IT IS IMPORTANT FOR EVERY PERSON TO HAVE SOME KIND OF RELIGION OR BELIEF, NO MATTER WHAT IT IS. IF A PERSON BELIEVES IN SOMETHING THAT ENCOURAGES THEM TO DO GOOD THINGS, WHATEVER CELESTIAL ENTITY IS UP THERE WILL REWARD THEM WHEN THEIR LIVE ENDS. I am God (don't ask just accept it) I was raised Catholic, followed stepfather to Baptist and then returned to Catholic when married, I now believe that Christianity, who should be focused on leading lives consistent with the teachings of Jesus, do not. Religion is, instead being used as a lever to control our society and bears little resemblence to what Jesus actually taught. Therefore, I find myself less and less willing to participate in organized religion at all. After all, this is between God and myself... Do what you do to honor yourself and others, love, don't judge, let G*d deal with those who misunderstand. Read Stephen Hawking's books. Everything in the Universe reduces down to wavelengths of light. There is a Force, young Skywalker... I believe that we can find and maintain happiness and meaning in our lives without resorting to ancient myths to help us. "Religious" I'm not -- the better word for my belief system: spiritual. There's a big difference. Jesus died for everyone's sins Religion is not blindness: it is the refusal to see. Always first do what's best for you and the human beings around you. There is no God but Allah, and Muhammad is His messenger. The constant examiniation and evaluation of my life, and of my ideals. The older I get and the more educated I become the less I view religion I believe that all religions are essentially the same in their underlying meaning. The strife between different religions goes against these beliefs, so I believe that the most religious of people are the ones that understand the least. I believe we control ourselves, we are each our own god. I'm a hindu-buddist,atheist unitarian. Social justice, tolerance and non-violence are my most important values RELIGION IS SCARY I do not beleive in the existance of god. I find that science explains all that I need. Religion is a usefull tool to help people cope with life but should not be taken to extreames. Religion is false. Do what thou will Universal life sings all praises to Kali! The original purpose of religions have been lost to the overwhelming act of following others rather than acting toward ones own enhancement. everybody has a personal relationship with God i pray,"God, please be there." Think with your intellect and open your heart We are all one family. We should remember that before we take hateful or simply inconsiderate actions. I will be attending seminary in the Fall of '96. I�m not religious, but I believe in the necessity of common rules such as the 10 commandments. I believe spirituality provides a tolerance and love of our fellow travelers thru time. Religion should remain personal and stay out of politics Believe in yourself. live your life well and be kind and tollerant to others. Respect others and their beliefs. I just believe in God. I dislike every organized religion I have studied and think they are destructive to society and to personal happiness. PRZ?SZLOSC PRZ?SZLOSC PRZ?SZLOSC PRZ?SZLOSC PRZ?SZLOSC PRZ?SZLOSC PRZ?SZLOSC PRZ?SZLOSC PRZ?SZLOSC PRZ?SZLOSC PRZ?SZLOSC PRZ?SZLOSC PRZ?SZLOSC PRZ?SZLOSC PRZ?SZLOSC PRZ?SZLOSC PRZ?SZLOSC PRZ?SZLOSC PRZ?SZLOSC PRZ?SZLOSC PRZ?SZLOSC PRZ?SZLOSC PRZ?SZLOSC PRZ?SZLOSC PRZ?SZLOSC PRZ?SZLOSC PRZ?SZLOSC PRZ?SZLOSC PRZ?SZLOSC PRZ?SZLOSC PRZ?SZLOSC PRZ?SZLOSC PRZ?SZLOSC PRZ?SZLOSC PRZ?SZLOSC PRZ?SZLOSC PRZ?SZLOSC PRZ?SZLOSC PRZ?SZLOSC PRZ?SZLOSC PRZ?SZLOSC PRZ?SZLOSC PRZ?SZLOSC PRZ?SZLOSC We are each a part of the Infinite. We reap what we sow. Each person is different, it depends on what you grew up with in my opinion. Jesus Christ I believe there is a 'force' out there, whether it is physical or spiritual I do not know. Religion is personal no matter what and should never be debased as a means of discrimination against those with different beliefs. The next world is what really counts. I think you have the heaven and the hell and the Devil is more powerfull then your geek god.But everyone can choose in what he whant to beleive.Sorry for my english im from Qu�bec and im a separatist!!! There is a difference between "religion" & spirituality. They are lumped together but often produce diffrent results. Eight words the Wiccan Rede fulfil: an ye harm none, do what ye will. GOD SO LOVED THE WORLD THAT HE GAVE HIS SON! My religion is not just a faith but a way of life which I try to adhere to at all times every day. Islam brings a sense of direction, focus, values, determination and inner peace to my life. Live the best you know how with what you've been given, and don't give in for a lesser prize. my Philosophy is that, do what you want..but use common sence I'm torn between believing in SOMETHING and being very progressive ISLAM - AS A WAY OF LIFE BRINGS COMPLETE HARMONY IF ADHERED TO Make the best of the here and now, becuase there isn't an afterlife or heavenly forgiveness later. At some level or another, all religions are based on blind faith. I find most peoples ablitiy to believe and follow without reason distressing. there is a God, and we can know him We believe in the concept of total material and sesual pleasure. That is the purpose and basis for our religionon souls are reborn over and over again until we live our lives fully by the 10 commandments Believe whatever you want, but don't push it on others. A significant part of "God" is nature. To Belive in One God, Allah and Mohammad His Messanger Jesus loves us so much, He came down in a fleshly form to die for each one of us, so that our sins may be forgiven, that we may live our lives for Him, shine His love unto others, that others may know that He can be a personal friend, and that we can attain eternal life. Believe what you want to believe in; teach your family values to your children, but don't you dare tell me how to raise my kids; don't you judge me! Religion is an outdated cultural myth. I believe if you will put your faith in Jesus you will go to Heaven. No god but Allah, Muhammad is the messenger of Allah God has Given us solutions to our problems no mater how big or small, and that answer is surleu Islam. Religion is philosophy for sheep, wolves, and other non-rational animals. There is the god or light within everyone No one can possibly know for sure what's out there. If it were that concrete it would be science, not religion Any belief system that must resort to "blind faith" is suspect. It is the equivalent of "Just trust me, I know what is best for you." I would say categorically that there is no "Supreme Being". However, I leave open the possibility that a thinking entity may have been responsible for the creation of our universe. For example, the equivalent of a pimply-faced 17-year-old whose inflationary universe project goes awry. Total submission to Allah and followerthe footsteps of Prophet Muhammed (P.B.U.H) (1) There is much truth in ALL religions; (2) logic dictates that reincarnation in all likelihood exits (if you believe in a Spirit); and (3) true spiritual wisdom and KNOWLEDGE arises only through deep meditation -- i.e., by shutting off the mind and contacting your spiritual Self. I feel that religion gives us ways in which to feel connected to others: other people, animals,. parts of the universe... life without religion is like an empty shell Religion is a powerful social phenomenon that serve almost infinite purposes, both helpful and harmful, both personal and communal, depending on the situation. One might as well ask what one's philosophy of philosophy is. We are all part of an interdependant web of life. Jesus is the Rock of all Salvation! Without Him, we would be Nothing. I'm really confused-whether to believe science or religion. Respect all life. Religion, especially Christianity, is to be the downfall of the human race. There is too much predjudice preached, plus hatred. Everyone should love everyone else regardless of their personal beliefs, and everyone should be entitled to ANY beliefs they feel are appropriate! respect for all that is..for all is one.. If you reasonably apply the phrase "Thy will be done" to your life and circumstances, you will experience greater peace. God knows. God will see you through. I take what I like from alot of religions I believe there is one God and that he has revealed himself in many different forms to many different cultures. Therefore, I believe in tolerance for all and their religious beliefs and practices because I don't believe it matters very much to God in which way you choose to worship. I believe that if everyone looks at themselves as important, instead of a god, we would live better. non-denominational. I believe the only purpose for life is to love God and to love each other unconditionally. Religion comes from within each individual, and I think that it is very hard to determine concrete guidelines for the amt. of religion a person "has". Allah Akbar The all-in-one - the way of living&thinking Truth cannot be subjective. There is One true religion and I believe it is Catholocism. WHat exists or doesn't, does or doesn't without our consent. I believe that religion is something insecure people need in order to have something in their lives. I believe that religion can create chaos in any society. Life is the most important dimension. The "soul/spirit" continues in this dimension. To "gamble" otherwise is folly. Ask yourself, what is it that "leaves" the body upon physical death? The body is 100% the same after death as before (chemically), so what is it that has departed? Answer: The soul/spirt! Get it? Try God - now in a convenient six pack. Religous tolerance is necessary, tolerance of evil is not. If we live the "Golden Rule" we will Do okay in the next life. God is incarnate on Earth as Sri Sathya Sai Baba of Puttapharti, India. keep religion at a small amount. too much will drown you. i should know. my relatives are all monks. Religion is a primitive drive, obsolete in the 90's quantum physics i believe in choas, karma, and yet to a small extent, fate as well. ALLAH, MUHAMMAD (S), & AAL-E-MUHAMMAD (A). I am now Quaker sympathetic. I come from an extreme fundamentalist background and am appalled that *some* people in the Christian Coalition (not all!) are trying to create an American Theocracy, not recognizing religious pluralism and tolerance of others. Same Supreme Being using different names Religion should be based on what you personally believe and what makes you happy, because in the end all anyone has to go on is thier faith. Freedom of religion means freedom FROM religion. I don't appreciate the uneducated negative comments that most monotheists make about witches and the occult. Catholics have the WORST history when it comes to tolerance!. I am forever grateful to Jesus for dying on the cross for my sins. Too many religions- too many Gods - which is the truth? I prefer not to jump to conclusions about the unknown. Salvation is found only in Jesus Christ Religion provides an ethical code by which one can and should live. Belief in God and following of his laws will lead one to prosperity and eternal happiness. a Biblically based, born again, evangelical christian. Mass religion is evil. It's the opiate of the masses, Thanks Good buddy karl. On a personal level, I understand spirituality, but when you turn to another person to help you define your reality, I think you become a slave. I BELIEVE THAT YOU HAVE TO HAVE A PERSONEL RELATIONSHIP WITH JESUS CHRIST. IF YOU ASK HIM INTO YOUR HEART THEN YOU WILL GO TO HEAVEN. YOU SHOULD FOLLOW WHAT THE BIBLE SAYS AND APPLY IT TO YOUR LIFE. YOU CAN'T GET TO HEAVEN JUST BY GOING TO CHURCH, YOU HAVE TO ACCEPT JESUS CHRIST AS YOUR PERSONNEL LORD AND SAVIOUR. All major religions have come from the same source; each revealing the same spiritual laws but different social laws according to the exigencies of the time/place. All mankind is one and our current task is to recognize that and reconstruct the way we interact with each other based on that truth. Science and religion must agree; prejudice of all kinds must be eliminated. "So powerful is the light of unity that it can illuminate the whole earth." - Baha'u'llah (founder of the Baha'i Faith) As long as you believe in something/someone good and live a life thinking of others you will be taken care of after your life here on Earth. I don't believe there is a "god" of any kind I believe in one true god Contempt for all things mystic, altruist, & collectivist. "Bob?" "No." also v. neccessary to maintain values If you HAVE to have Religion to find God, so be it. I do NOT. Lies people tell eachother. Trust and Obedience in the one and only God thru Jesus religion is personal.;you must not judge other people I believe that our current attitude toward spirituality is very destructive, but when we can embrace the idea that the devine reveals itself in a multitude of ways, we will be able to benefit from the great variety of practices available to us in this life. LOVE GOD AND YOUR FELLOW HUMAN AS WE WAIT FOR CHRIST. I'm an essentially nonpracticing Reform Jew, somewhat agnostic, who believes in the ideals of the religion but not, necessarily, the specific tenents. I think I believe in God as a first cause; I know I believe in tolerance toward all. I believe in the absolute onness of God and that the Holy Prophet Muhammad is his Messenger I think that everyone has the right to believe what they want Islam is the only way of life accepted by the One true God, whose name is Allah; he is not similar in any way to anything in his creation Basically fundamental Christianity Tolerance to all those who tolerate & beer for all ex-christian, now atheist Religions should help instill morals, not impose them. everyone should be open to something other than what they assume to be right we are all sinners Jesus died for payment of our sins we must accept Christ as our Lord and Savior all others are not saved if He is rejected Basically mind over matter. Ulitmately you can overcome any sickness... even flying.. no I am not psychotic... To bad I wasn't talking to someone... I am sure I could explain in detail all my beliefs.. But this really isn't satisfactory I believe what I see hard evidence of. Rush Limbaugh and the bible are not hard evidence. My philosophy is quite unique :-) First I think that God *is* the universe and a mathematical limit of physical rules. Physicians can try to explain the universe, they will never suceed. They will describe it more and more precisely, but the limit, which is *real world*, is *irrational*. All my "religion" is based on that... Funny, isn't it? Know Jesus, Love Jesus, Worship Jesus. Repeat until each of these increase in measure. A relationship with God is the reason for being on earth. Respect for every living being and self-fulfillment. Jesus died for our sins so that we may have everlasting life. natural. tolerant. peace-loving, adaptive, rational, science-aligned, we define God by what we spend our time doing #14 - na - yes - no - yes - and yes to the rest Fearing Allah and be Just If you are good, you will go to heaven, if you are bad, you will go to hell To do good to all others and have peace umung our differences. There is one God and Muhammad and other prophets are His messengers Religion is merely something that is used to explain things that cannot be easily understood and, as such, provides comfort and security for those that 'believe'. Go for it, people, do whatever makes you happy - but don't expect others to tolerate religi A genuine belief in Jesus Christ as our savior and acceptance of Him into one's life is the key to eternal blessedness in the Kingdom of Heaven. It's pretty much summed up above. However, I'd like to say that I'm Pro-Life UNLESS the mother became pregnant because she was raped, or is a victim of incest or another sex crime. The Triune God is all powerful & all knowing. Jesus, the third person became man to die for our sins, Holy Spirit helps my faith grow, God the father of the world. Religion teaches you how to behave and gives an answer to some questions that science currently cannot answer. There is meaning to this life. Belief in God give this short life meaning. There is a Supreme Being which created the universe in which we live, but as humans we have the free will to choose for ourselves how to live our lives. There is no predestination. Nothing is set in stone. The universe contains many things of which we are not yet fully aware. I beleive that God is much more than the bible,however the bible is true,there is just more mystery to it, in example i beleive i am half alien and i my kind has a ultimate sense of God. I think good and evil exist. I didn't used to have much faith in a supreme being, but that has changed - I've seen some things, felt some things, and now see that a lot of what I considered to be foolish platitudes in my youth, seem to have a real backing Get off it and get on with life. If half the energy spent on "afterlife" were spent on doing good for people, this Earth would be a eutopia. non-christian If Jesus is not your first priority, it doesn't matter what your other priorities are. No success can compensate for failure to purify the heart. Best summarized by John 3:16. God knows us, loves us and blesses us... He desires for us to return to Him, however, the choice is ours (free agency). Christ is the way, the truth, and the logos. Believe in God and be totally honest with him and he will show you right road to follow. The universe is awesome as it is. We need not invent fairies to find wonder in it! Islam enjoins its followers to conctantley strive( jihad) to attain higher standards in this life to elevate oneself from beastial tendencies of humans to srtive to coantral the whims of cantrol, selfishness, immorality and attian wealth without exploitation nor manipulation. It is a wholistic approach to humanity regradless of race creed. I try to be a Taoist. In Taoism there is no duality: so God can both exist and not exist, and someone can be Christian, Jewish, and Hindu, etc., without contradiction. When we as a species realize the illusion of duality we have created with ourselves and One God, the mercifull, the creator, the most powerfull, and all the Prophets sent by him from Adam to the seal of the Prophets Mohammed peace be upon them all. One God, Creator, sustainer, provider, believe in all Prophets and Messenger (Adam, Abraham, Moses, Jesus, and the seal of the all Prophets Mohammed (peace be upon them all). Religion is harmful to life, thought, and progress. Individuals are responsible for the consequences of their actions. Do not believe in God, but recognize the possibility of his or her existence All of nature is alive, to be human is sacred. I am God. You are God. All that Groks is God There are many different paths to the Divine - it's just a matter of finding which path is right for you and accepting that others may choose a different path. Independent Investigation of Truth Religion is so personal, that everyone should follow his or her own set of specific beliefs and not be swayed into thinking that they are sinning. Call it what it is: Pro-Choice = Pro-Murder. C'mon at least be accurate. Jesus is the ONLY way to true happiness and eternal life! <>< I wish mankind would wake up and stop believing in myths. I think Christianity is a great plague upon Western culture. JESUS CHRIST IS THE ONLY WAY TO ETERNAL LIFE AND EVERLASTING PEACE. We are all interdependant. Be tolerant of other views. Peace! Jesus saves sinners... and redeems them for valuable prizes... do unto others before they do unto you It is irrational to believe in a god since there is NO objective, empirical, scientific evidence for the existence of a god. Man has God's spark within. The Second Coming of Christ is within each one of us. I think that there is a God, and that one day, when we die, we will be judged for the things we've done in this life. religion is a crutch that weak people use because they don't believe they have the power to do things inside themselves. You MUST have a personal relationship with Christ, the rest is details. The only way to heaven is through Jesus Christ There are two things that most impact history, technology (science) and religion. One without the other leads to a dangerous imbalance. Jesus is Lord. Religion is like sex, it can destroy you or be wonderful. Each event is a result of karma and the decision to accept that karma. Jesus Christ is my Lord and Saviour. Religion is for stupid people who are control freaks and needs an explanation for everything without looking it for it themselves. Balance, respect, and faith god to me is what is beautiful I sure hope there is someone up there to take care of us..but maybe there isn't.... What matters is what is true. If God has revealed himself, its for a reason, and a good one. If so, we had better get it right, because, he knows best. Evolution Rules, and takes no prisoners Everyone must find their own truth and let others do the same. Any religion that doesn't allow for, recognize, and respect other (or no) religious beliefs is as bad as any of the sins it espouses to fight. The religous right is neither. Man is sinful. As a sinful being, there is nothing man can do to atone for his sins. Salvation for man comes from the Cross of Christ. As the only sinless one, He alone can atone for sin. Creation->Fall->Redemption->Restoration. All-encompassing Ideas have consequences. world-view, not merely a 'religion'. Religion isn't the key to happiness and peace, Christ is. A Relationship with Him is the key. Always believe in the Lord; he is always there for you. We need a basis for morality and ethics. just avoid religion and live as a humanist. Religion is philosophy for morons and/or sheep. There is one God and only one way to have eternal life, through Jesus Christ. God (if there is one) cares more for people who question him, rather than people who follow him blindly. I believe God determines truly who is saved, but Jesus showed God's real promises. Moral reality exists and we desperately want to deny it. Religion is a personal saga. Only you have control over it. Christ said "You are saved by grace through Faith." God touches us; we respond! Don't think about it and ypu'll be ok. Die to ourselves to live for Christ! I am rather unsure at this point what to believe. I consider myself jewish since that is how I was raised and I agree with it's philosophy of questioning everything. If one lookso see just how this universe fits together then one must conclude that a Supreme being was the one who started it all with unending knowledge. Worship and obey God, be kind to your fellow humans. God is in everyone one of us. "God" not a physical person...he is us. Everyone has a right to believe what they want. don't talk about it, it's stupid to talk about it Teach people correct principles and let them govern themselves Science negates the need for religion, if you already have a strong set of morals. I do not need "Satan" hanging over my head to be a decent, well-behaved, moral person. Be good to a point. Religion is a great and viscious nonsense. I don't believe in a God, I think churches are all about gaining (political) power. I think eveybody should be allowed to believe what they want and shouldn't harras others with their believe (Like Jehova witnesses do). hellping people and living a philosophically just life "we is what we is". Science, free-thinking and "Do unto others..." I am Catholic, but I believe that Christianity also has a Jewish heritage since Jesus was a Jew and celebrated Jewish holidays. therefore, I celebrate both Christian and Jewish holidays. Do what thou wilt shall be the whole of the Law. Every man and every woman is a star. Love is the principle we must all strive to live by. Everyone should be able to have their own relationship with God & Jesus I believe God created the Heavens and Earth Druidry: To know "ALL" Paths.! I choose not to be religious but I have respect for those who do in any form. anyone has the right to believe in whatever makes their shorts tingle. do what thou wilt I think that everyone needs religion of some sort. there is no god...no heaven or hell... no anything...when you die thats it....if there is a god...and I do mean IF...he is not the happy-go-lucky one the "holy"bible makes him out to be...he is a soryy benivalent MF...who allows children to suffer ..be it from starvation, neglect, or abuse (phyiscal, mental or sexual) if there was truely a all powerful all seeing god then shit like that wouldn't happen.....that is all I have to say about that.. The Golden Rule says it all You can't know for sure until you die. Smoke a fatty and live long man!! John 3:16 Buddhism is a philosophy. It has the answer to all of the problems of human sufferings. An' it harm none, do as thou wilt. There is not one certain religion that is right or wrong. I think that all religions have their good and bad points, which are based mainly on the same principles! I accept the apostles creed as my statement of faith concerning my christianity Hate plays no part in religion. God created us all different and we should respect and appreciate that. Everything else is uncivilized and inconsistent and incontinuous. Each religion claims to be the "one, true, correct" religion when, in fact, none have been proven so. As the burden of proof is logically placed upon those who believe rather than those who don't believe, I choose not to believe until I see empirical proof (I can nither prove nor disprove the existence of magical elves. Since I have never seen magical elves, it's unlikely that they exist.) Jesus saith unto him, "I am the way, the truth, and the life: no man cometh unto the Father, but by me." Religion is personal and should not be a part of government. I suppose, be nice to people because they're people just like you -- your behaviour should be based on the equality of everyone and you should treat them accordingly because they're just as important as you are; that honesty is all-important; that religio God is hope. Through the life, death, and resurrection of Jesus Christ we all have the opportunity for eternal salvation through mercy and love of God. Just live, and dig it... I consider people to be true, honest, and moral until they prove to me otherwise. Jesus Christ died for you. He loves you and wants you to seek Him. Anyone who is truly seeking God will find Him. I know there is a power we all like to believe in no matter what form it may take and I also believe that power stems from a strong belief and not necessarily the truth Because Jesus has paid the price for my sin and I've believed in, I am now a citizen of heaven. I believe as long as you lead a decent and moral life, then religion is not necessary. We can all be decent to each other and ourselves without it written somewhere that we should be. Love, Humility, Joy through Christ's love Religion is something you live daily to make life better for yourself and others. As a Covenanter {RPCNA} I believe that God demands obedience to His Law by all. This requires repentance and faith in Christ Jesus. Everyone has a right to choose a religious path that best helps bringing that person closer to her Creator and her full potential. Jesus is the only way to eternal life. I believe that religion is personal choice as given by God when he gave us the option to choose or not to choose him; however, I do believe that he is the creator of the universe and the chioce to not follow him is one which results in the consequences al I believe that Jesus is who he said he is, and that the bible is the absolute error free truth from GOD Religion has always been a source of support and inspiration to me, especially now at the time of my divorce !! A Jewish-Druidic syncretist? Religion is for people who are too lazy to think. to live as if you will never die and have to stay here forever Do unto others as you would have them do unto you! God Loves you! Your blessings are new everyday! Trust in Jesus You can't enter the kingdom of heaven unless you be saved. If you believe in your heart and confess with your mouth the Lord Jesus you shall be saved. Do What Thou Wilt Shall Be the Whole of the Law. Love is the Law, Love under Will. the moment you are born you are dying, life is short do what makes you happy as long as it doesn't interfere with someone else. GAY PEDOPHILE PRIESTS ARE THE MORAL FOUNDATION OF OUR COUNTRY People must come back to God. If not, I believe the human race is doomed it's the key to happiness and personal growth If you proselytize to me, I shall make sexually explicit invitations to you. New Age Christain Mysticism freethought Sorry, I don't care to right now. God loves everyone regardless of beliefs. The most important thing is to commune with God in your own heart and have a personal relationship with your concept of God. I believe in humans as the older/more responsible sibling in relation to the world. We have a duty to be caretakers on this world and any others we eventually reach. Harm none and do as you will - Whatever you do it will come back to you 3 times (Karmic law) - Whatever gives you pleasure, will please the Goddess. Lao-Tzu/Heraclitus Process Philosophy - The Cosmos is eternal, uncreated, always changing. All "things" - including personal life - are momentary phenomena, like clouds in the sky or riples in the ocean. There is no God but Allah, and Muhammad is his messenger jesus saves!! Respect Christianity is not a religion; it's a relationship. Though religion can be a panacea for some, for the rest of us, it rocks. do not put windows into men's souls. especially as a christian, jesus is jesus the rest is just an argument over trifles. I pretty much try to adhere to the Golden Rule: Do unto others as you would have them do unto you. I BELIEVE THAT JESUS CHRIST IS THE ONLY BEGOTTEN SON OF GOD CONCIEVED OF A VIRGIN AND BY HIM ONLY CAN WE BE SAVED. Religion is the most important thing for me, but I do not feel I need to force my personal beliefs on others, although I think it would bring them great joy and love. What religion do you believe in (that is not listed in the survey)? I just believe in a higher power. LDS (mormon) LDS Muslo-Christian Charasmatic roman catholic Scientology Paganism sufism Humanism Scientology Scientology Scientology Eckankar Liberal Christian Both Scientology and Judaism a seeker, unsure of where my path is leading. Brought up Jeudo-Christian Sub-genius Scientology Well, I'm a Christian who reads a lot of Hindu books. Scientology also catholic mormonism Catholic Religion corrupts spirituality no real title -- I believe in a god and that's about it none deism Messianic Judaism Gnostic/Hindu/New Age/Christian combination Kemeticism Love Asatru SubGenius I beleive in God, NOT religion independent missionary baptist home-made Catholic ECKANKAR nothing organized with hints of others mixed in. I don't think I am any one religion, necessarily. One that has animals and humans as equals. philosophical theist jewish mormon Zen Daoism Tantra Jehovah's Witness Pagan or wiccan NA Logictarian(Christian/Shintoism) Christian/Deist/Tao/Zen W.H.Auden (Commit a Social Science) I am a Humanist, which is NOT a religion Asatru Not Quite sure what I believe in??? mysticism Spiritualism aspects of buddhism, among other things.I wouldn't use the word religion Mennonite worship of the sungod Ra queer Its my own creation...I guess Reincarnative animism Asatru Diest Pagan Quaker personally defined belief and practice Trekker syncretic mix/Christian/Buddhist not sure being Openminded... New Age Spritualism born again child of god not organized buddhaic-christian Indignant Self-Worship TaoJudistChristian Sub Genius NONE pagan Universal Life shia, muslim PRZ?SZLOSC PRZ?SZOSC PRZ?SZLOSC PRZ?SZOSC PRZ?SZLOSC PRZ?SZOSC PRZ?SZLOSC PRZ?SZOSC PRZ?SZLOSC PRZ?SZOSC PRZ?SZLOSC PRZ?SZOSC PRZ?SZLOSC PRZ?SZOSC PRZ?SZLOSC PRZ?SZOSC PRZ?SZLOSC PRZ?SZOSC PRZ?SZLOSC PRZ?SZOSC PRZ?SZLOSC PRZ?SZOSC PRZ?SZLOSC PRZ?SZOSC PRZ?SZLOSC PRZ?SZOSC PRZ?SZLOSC PRZ?SZOSC PRZ?SZLOSC PRZ?SZOSC PRZ?SZLOSC PRZ?SZOSC PRZ?SZLOSC PRZ?SZOSC PRZ?SZLOSC PRZ?SZOSC PRZ?SZLOSC PRZ?SZOSC PRZ?SZLOSC PRZ?SZOSC PRZ?SZLOSC PRZ?SZLOSC PRZ?SZOSC PRZ?SZLOSC Church of Religious Science don't have a particular one, just my own beliefs all tied together. catholic Sadomasicism wicca/christianity/spiritualism Pentecostal Quaker Unitarian Church of Erik i think church/religion is a farce Roman Catholic I have no specific religion i believe in choas Quaker (Society of Friends) Wicca mormon AA's "God as I undertand God" Sikh Atheism Christain Scientist Catholic I take the best parts of several religions to create my own. please add "paganism" to list Mostly Christian. Be GOOD to OTHER people and Behave. Jehovah's Witness Shia Ismaili Muslim No "specific" organized religion Christian/New Age Mormon Catholic Witchcraft - NOT wiccan Mystical Paths of World's Religions Mahikari personal combonation of Taoism and Christianity, with a little Buddhism none Messianic Judaism Freelance Roman Catholic episcopal, pprotestant Latter-day Saint Catholicism Baptist hard to explain/dont know Nature Worship Rastafari The church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day-Saints Seventh Day Adventist Atheism (you spelt it wrong) No Specific Religion self mormon Neo-Zen Taoist/Humanist Cosmian Catholic/ULC Taoist/Catholic Return to theHome Page. Copyright ©1996, /InterCommerceCorporation, All rights reserved worldwide Send comments to Webmaster@Survey.net WT02-B22-15IA060-000333-B027-5http://www.survey.net:80/rlg1c3.html 204.107.221.240 19970115060435 text/html 56390HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 15 Jan 1997 05:58:14 GMTServer: Apache-SSL-US/1.0.3+1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 56207Last-modified: Mon, 25 Nov 1996 20:26:46 GMT SURVEY.NET - Religion Survey - User comments (ARCHIVE III) Your source for information, opinions & demographics from the NetCommunity! ANNOUNCING: The Internet's finest interactive, totally-automated,immediate survey system. We can take any form and instantly create adynamic demographic database and show you the results as soon as youcomplete the survey! Internet Religion Survey #1 User comments [ARCHIVE III] What religion do you believe in (that is not listed in the survey)? Religion is just a choice we all have to make. I am Christian, but I'm not some Bible beater. Tolerance and the ability to forgive are what God really wants, anyway. I embrace all of my brothers and sisters, reguardless or race, religion, or orientation. After all, we are all God's children. Immerse your soul in LOVE!!! (Smile daily). You can find a church or guru to tell you anything you want to hear. People deeply believe everything conceivable. Nothing wrong with religion when it comforts us and helps us be responsible to each other (heck, we _are_ our brothers' keepers); it's awf Religion exists so that people who a re otherwise useless can scam an income and manipulate people without attaining political office. Don't try to shove your belifs down my throat unless you want them shoved up you ass. Religious beliefs of individuals are too often used for political gains by would-be tyrants Government seeks to control man's actions; Religion seeks to control man's mind. Therefore, I believe in minimal government and no religion. $cientology is a DANGEROUS and CRIMINAL cult and NOT a religion in my opinion !! Jesus Christ is here for everyone, the way they are. They don't have to change. If God wants you change He'll let you know. 'Ashadu'an La Illaha Ill Allah, Wahdahu La Shareekala' Don't hurt yourself. Don't hurt others. Don't meddle. CHRISTIANITY IS TRASH! Religion is personal and should be lived by the individual, not forced on others who may believe differently I believe in me. I consider myself more "spriritual" than religious. I am offended by the Christian Right -- I believe they have turned more people off to the values and principles within personal religious belief than any other factor in our society today. As Buddha said: try to benefit others, not to harm them, and always purify your mind I stand on the laws of Physics - matter and energy can't be destroyed...therefore, we have to go SOMEWHERE... Spirituality is more important than religion Christianity is not suppose to be a religion but a relationship with Jesus Christ The key is finding my purpose for being here. To find my purpose I need to identify my stakeholders - God, myself, other fellow travellers - and find out what they want. This then becomes my purpose. (At 56 I'm still working on it!) God so loved the world that he gave his only begoten son so that we could have everlasting life I believe mainly in humanitarianism. Christianity is outdated and merely to guide the sheep of the world through life (for a price, of course) The belief in one God and his prophet (Muhammad Ibn Abdullah) I hate the word 'religion'. Jesus saved us from sin and the entrapments of religion so we could be free to serve and love him and to live as his example on earth pointing to God. I believe that there is no god and that religion is a system used to control what people think and do. I respect nature and the world we live in. I believe in the cycles of life. no faith, no life If it harms no one, including yourself, do what you will. We are accountable for our own actions, only God is to judge - not man. confessing to god that you are a sinner and accepting the perfect sacrifice (Jesus! dying on the cross) as your personal savior. Organized religion is the most heinous crime perpetrated in the history of mankind. The mileniums-long orgy of self repression engendered by organizers of religion is unspeakably vile. Why do we put up with it? There is absolutely NO evidence of any higher power. Evolution has volumes of proven evidence. Religion should follow a natural path; should not be contrived. Inner-peace, being at peace with one's self, is the key. I believe in the Bible as the True source of Jesus Christ and his teachings. I also believe that to be a Christian I need to be tolerant of others religious beliefs as I would hope they would be of mine. I believe Jehovah God's universal soverinty will be vindicated in the upcoming battle of Armagedon. The history of mankind has proven that us as humans make terrible rulers. We are wrong to beleive that us as mere humans can bring everlasting peace and an end to all human suffering. That which is, shall be. That which shall be, is. Such is the way. The New Testament presents God's offer of salvation to all who will accept his will and are obedient to it. The concept of personal salvation is of paramount importance. By this I mean realizing that you are a sinner, repenting, and accepting the unspeakable gift of salvation given to us freely by Christ's blood sacrifice. none tHERE IS ONLY ONE gOD I believe in direct accountability and service to God in all actions and choices made throughout the day reguardless of manmade religious structures. I believe in a higher power, but I think that religion is generally an institution used to suppress the working classes of people, and to guarantee their submission to the rulers of society. Christianity has been and remains especially bad about this. In addition, Christianity is basically the used-car salesman of religion. Throughout its history, it has regularly changed its beliefs to appeal to believers in various ages until now it does not even resemble the Christianity that Jesus tought. If Chistianity were truly the religion of Jesus, it would be a good thing, but it isn't. Everyone should have one for others to critisize. Not allowing critisizm defeats the purpose. Slack! There is no beginning or end to religion. It cannot be seperated from the whole of life just as you cannot seperate God from the whole of life any more than you could have a river without the water. Ahhh... But I told and that is cheating in this little game of hide and seek. God's best invention? Time! i hate shia because they are not on the true way of islam the are belive in the wrong person to be the proffet . Religion is completely personal and should not be enforced upon anyone else. There are too many religions in the country for there to be one ruling religion. Until religion is no longer a part of our government, its citizens will never be truly free. The purpose of religion is to promote the unity of humankind. I believe God has given us the ability to reason about religious injunctions and their place in whatever society we live in. I also believe that we can only strive to understand that which God has surrounded us with, rather than understand God Himself. Jesus Christ died for our sins and he will return and take the ones who have acepted him into there heart to heaven .Also the Bible is the only truth. Jesus to look for the Truth, you should not be only emotionnal, but try to be rationnal and objective too. If you find gross mistakes in your holy book don't try to excuse them, try to find out why. Too long to describe here man, but I figured it all out. Do what feels right, thats the conclusion, want the proof, find me! Right now, all I believe is that someone or something is looking after me. A Guardian Angel, so to speak. I also believe in treating others they way I would like to be treated in return. I don't believe in pushing my beliefs on others and I despise those who do. I appreciate knowing that after I die I will be reunited with loved ones in Heaven. If relating to a structure does help psychologically some people and if the religious structure is not authoritarian nor totalitarian, than it is socially usefull to believe in god provides a healthy spiritual life There is only one path to heaven --- Jesus Christ I have a very hard time beliving in God, and I know that the Bible is a book of fables. What is there to believe in? God has an individual plan for each of us. Time exists only because we are unable to precieve everything at once. Everything that could ever happen has already happened and we may CHOOSE our own path through the infinate choices. There is only ONE life and YOU are EVERYONE.. (you get multiple trips through the matrix).. Everyone has their own personal reality -> if you believe in something it is REAL for you (like God fot instance) but not always real for others.. You are the only person in control of your life. Anything else is only escapisim, lack of your own self worth. There is definitely something out there but what it is I don't know, and I don't believe half the people who say they do, do either. As far as Evolution vs. Creation, one does not necessarily rule out the other. Perhaps a Creator placed simple life in this universe to see what it would evolve into. Sapien--One cannot be more than a reasoning being. Nothing is greater than REASON. Add Quar'an and Haddith to question #13. God is our Father; Literally. He loves us, his Children and wants us to suceed, to grow spiritually and to use our time here on earth to exercise our faith, improve on our talents and show love and concern for those about us. If there is a devil, it would have to be the Catholic Church. In the begining, God was lonely so he split himself up so that he may always have friends. We are all touched by the divine and are ourselves divine if we would but see it. Some people have just lost thier sight of this. What it boils down to os that in the end, though our friends may help us, if we are to be saved we must take responsibility for our actions (no devine scapegoat here) and save ourselves. Get a Life. Take Responsibility. Save Yourself. You're the Only One Who CAN! I believe in myself, in people, in the individual, in the golden rule, and in being! I want for my sister what I want for myself "Religion" is man's attempt to reach God; it's a relationship with Him that counts; specifically, knowing and serving Jesus Christ. Personal acceptance or rejection of Him is the "bottom line" metric in God's books. God is everything, God is everywhere I believe there is a difference between religion and spirituality. Religion eqates institutions with rules and regulations where as spirituality is something much deeper, personal, profound and passionate. It is something that you must find, and it is not an establishment, like Mc donalds or something, and it is not in neat little categories, but that is okay for the purpouse of this survey... In regards to Christianity--The christian church has taken what was initially a doctrine of peace, love, and acceptance from a beatnik philosopher and turned it into a dogma of hatred and exclusion. I have no problem with Jesus the philosopher & teacher, but I have every problem with the idea of his divinity and what amounts to a mass cult of personality-The Church. Honor God first and then treat mankind as you should treat yourself Islamic is the answer to all the worrys of the world. WHERE DID GOD COME FROM? I believe that God exists, whether or not people acknowledge Him. Christ, His Son came to reveal God and save humankind from a fallen state of being--one God allowed as a human choice. We can receive salvation here and now and in all eternity. Salvatio Treat your fellow man as a friend - till he proves otherwise. i believe that god is a spirit and the human names we have given him are making things confussing. because we are dealing with spiritual laws there is no need for color, gender, or anything other then spirit. we must worship in spirit and truth only and god will reveal himself (spirit) to us. All men are sinners. Jesus Christ was crucified on the Cross to pay the debt for all man's sin. He was raised on the third day to give all those who believe in him Eternal life in Heaven. If you do not believe and ask God to be saved, you will spend eternity in Hell. I think that religion is a personal choice/belief and it should remain that way. To try and regulate government, etc. etc. etc. by one religion is bigoted. Religion first evolved in ancient Mesopotamina as a way to explain and soothe fear of such things as death, sickness, hurt, pain. People are afraid of "their god" and worship it to aid them in things they cannot decifer. Your heaven or hell may very well be lived on earth within your lifetime. We are normal beings with great intelligence, and we try to make something of life by making up religions. Seek truth in all things...there is a higher purpose... Jesus is Lord,He atoned for our sins, no one comes to the Father except through Him. I am a Southern Baptist, formerly Jewish, who believes that God has a special plan for Jewish people which is different from His salvation plan for Christians. It upsets me when I see others targeting Jews specifically to be converted. The Gospel needs to be shared with EVERYONE. Religion is a personal thing and is necessary for us in regulating and disciplining our lives but we should not impose things on others. Religion can be a good thing BUT.... While I am a devout Roman Catholic I do not believe in the Bible. The Bible has been translated, interpreted and twisted to be a horribly bigoted arrangement of words. People need to keep religion to themselves. Attempts to force religion on people has ca Religion is best kept inside. Sharing with others is great, but any attempt to convert or push your own beliefs on someone else is juvenile, wrong, stupid, misguided, a sign of insecurity, not in the best interests of that person, and common. Religion is one to himself, There are two many different possibilities to decide. In my opinion, religion (defined as a set of beliefs which are organized under one or more leaders or higher beings so that the overall structure is heirarchical) is created and maintained in order to control the masses. I prefer not to think of myself as religious, but as a Christian. I have a personal relationship with Christ that affects every aspect of my life. I believe that the only way to heaven is through faith in Jesus Christ and accepting his gift of forgiveness and grace. Without God's teachings as a base, you lose your anchor in life; you become too fragile to weather major crises Religion is the conerstone of a culture and most be a part of a family and community's belief systems. i think spirituality is much healthier than religion People have a tendency to accept whatever their parents taught them and do not understand the true meaning of being a Christian nor have they carefully digested the words of Jesus in the New Testament. When any one tells me they have the only way to Heaven--I run. If this was true there are many people who can't be "saved" Unquestioning FAITH leads to Unquestioned HARM Religion is a social construction that helps normalize human interactions, make people more accountable to one another, and to simplify what is unknown or unclear in the world. I haven't decided yet, but I believe Christianity is probably right. I just find it hard to believe such enities as God exist and that humans are anything besides "DEAD" after they die! It's not logical. And what will you DO forever and ever in Heaven? Won't we get so bored after a while we wish we didn't exist?? I FEEL THAT CHRIST IS HERE TO SAVE AND LOVE US ALL IF WE FOLLOW HIM AND LOVE AS HIS SON DID, THAT MEANS RESPECTING DIFFERENCES IN ALL PEOPLE AND CULTURLES The evidence for any God is precisely the same as the evidence for Santa Claus. There is just no reason to give such credence and respect to what are essentially fairy tales. I feel many people use religion as a crutch. Instead of handling their life and problems themselves they wait for some miracle to happen and if it doesn't they can say it was "God's" will. HA! PEople need to take responsibility for their actions, opinions,etc... John 14:6 Jesus said, "I am the way, the truth, and the life: no man comes to the (God) Father but by me." Religion is to people what the herder is to sheep... makes them mindless & willing to follow anything! Trust in GOD in ALL things. Love God with all your heart, and love your neighbor as you love yourself. There are many paths to enlightenment. The worst of all sins is arrogantly believing that your beliefs are 100% absolute and right. I have a prayer . . Oh Lord, protect me from those to whom you speak directly. without religion, my life has no meaning at all !!! God is a Universal Concious, all living things are God. Respect the life giving earth and we can respect ourselves better. The Wiccan Rede: And it harm none, do what thou wilt. I believe there must be more than the man. I'm curious about the universum, what it is and how it works. But I don't believe in God as a person. I believe in extraterrestrical intelligence, but not in UFOs ! respect all religions--they all speak the same language esoterically Its About Peace and Joy I no longer go to church because I believe that a church is a state of mind and a God is your mind helping you to find what you are looking for There is no god but allah and mohammad is his messenger islam is my religion, I am getting the information to follow the shia sect of islam as I am suppose to I am a Southern Baptist, formerly Jewish, who believes that God has a special plan for Jewish people which is different from His salvation plan for Christians. It upsets me when I see others targeting Jews specifically to be converted. The Gospel needs to be shared with EVERYONE. RELIGION IS THE KEY TO LIFE GOD IS EVERYTHING Religiously, I am extremely proud to be American for two reasons: freedom of religion and separation of church and state. I am very religious, but I STRONGLY support each fellow citizen's right to believe anything else, or nothing at all. Thomas Jefferson said it best: "It makes no difference to me whether my neighbor believes in one God or thirty; it neither picks my pocket, nor breaks my leg! Only a lie needs the support of a government. The truth can stand on its own!" I really do not believe the light is a religion, Forever= Forever the removal of all religous references from public education has transformed our culture into one of feel good irresponsibility and blame I think w/out GOD you are lost! Only a divine guidance can lead the world out of its troubles, man made laws will be implemented and repealed but true guidance is from God, Islam is the truth. I believe that Jesus came to earth and took on the sins of the world, and died for all of us. We must believe in Him and ask Him into our lives. He gave his life so that all may go to heaven but... God will have no puppets. It is our choice. God's way or our way. If we want to go to heaven then we must choose His way by receiving Jesus into our hearts. Jesus is the only way into heaven. There is no other door. God is absolutely one. He has no partners, no parents, no children and nothing shares in divinity with him. There is nothing whatsoever like him. He alone created everything from nothing and he alone deserves to be worshipped and obeyed. All the religions around are a bunch of garbage. The government should keep out of my womb ,take in god we trust off our money,take it out of the pledge of allegiance, and anywhere else the god myth concept shows itself in government documents or proceedings Righteous (by prayer+) forces rule over Evil ! Live and let live - Freedom of choice to believe or not believe as long as it doesn't affect anyone else i believe that everyone should have awareness of other religions and be tolerant. i also believe tha Matthew 25:31-46 clarifies it all I'm an atheist. I get pissed off when religionists say that atheists are amoral (or even immoral). I have very strong moral beliefs: I believe in honesty, integrity, and tolerance of diverse viewpoints, and live my life accordingly. I do feel that religion has worked much good in many people's lives, but it really bothers me that so many supposedly religious people are close-minded, intolerant, mean-spirited bigots, who can't seem to get beyond their "us vs. them" mentality. To a significant degree, a hink that organized religion is a destructive and divisive force in society. It should be just the opposite. The point is to be reconciled to God who made you. I have my own set of values which does not preach to, demean, or judge those with different view than I. I believe that you cannot find true inner peace on this demention because of all the suffering. If we love others and the earth, we will be able to pass into a more peaceful dimention. Tolerence is almost as important as love. Anyone who is good at heart will be "Saved", not one group of people with the same beliefs. No matter what, God and Jesus are always willing to help us. Organized religions are too often devoted to rejecting other ways of life, creating intolerance, or (perhaps worse) reassuring members that they deserve what they have, and that the less fortunate need to be patronized to (while they deserve their lot too.) The history of organized religion is largely one of corruption and hypocracy. Quakers seem to have the most democratic, least blameworthy history -- if only their religion were more successful in the US, we might see faster progress... A 'Soul without a religion' is the same as a 'Body without a Soul.'. I am he who admires the storm. I believe in a Greater Being but not like the GOD and JESUS of my childhood. I don't understand. Do people really believe these implausible things? Are they pretending to believe in order to be accepted? Are they pretending to themselves that they believe? And why do they all want EVERYONE to be compelled by law to follow the rules of THEIR relilgion? Everyone should mind your own damn business!!! Does the phrase "separation of church and state" ring any bells? It says "church", NOT "all religions that are not christian". People have the right to believe anything they want. I have many morals that Islam is the way to happiness To most people, religion is a formal, structured thing. It does not need to be that way. Religion is different for everyone whether they be Catholics, Jews or of no formalized-Christ/God-believing-structured beliefs. This is what makes us who we are. IMHO, those that say "be saved or be damned" don't understand the whole concept of personal beliefs. Personal being the key word. Believe in the deity of your choice, if you so choose. Everything that is in the Bible is correct. Doctrines that interpret the Bible with superb accuracy are fine. The Book of Mormon sucks. Though I know there is no god in my life, there very well may be in the lives of others religion is the inner peace of knowing that you believe in something that is real... it makes the universe perfectly clear I believe there has to be a supreme being because of the complicity of the human body alone. I was brought up to believe in the Trinity, but at this time of my life I am unsure how everything fits together in the Master's plan! I am a part of the Christian right, and feel the media has maligned us very much. Please remember that the first schools, hospitals, and orpahages, were founded by Christians who share these same convictions. I believe that each person can find their own way religiously. Priests of formalized christianity seem to teach their personal views instead of 'this is how I percieve this, read it and make up your own mind'. The doctrines of Christianity are too coincidental, especially to someone with knowledge of Greek mythology I believe that the earth is owned by one man(PBUH) and I believe that the folowers of that man(PBUH)are the chosen people of god if and only if they excercise piety. I am an open-minded Christian believing in loving thy neighbor as thyself. Do unto others as you would have them do unto you. I call my "higher power" (and not from any "ANONYMOUS" group) God, Jesus, Holy Spirit - but that doesn't mean that the Indian or the Jew or the Buddhast or the Jehovahs Witnesses wrong or right. Maybe we all love the same "higher power" and just call the power by diverse names. Love is all that matters. Don't condemn or judge others especially if you've never walked in thei moccasins. Any term a worshipper uses (whether it be God or Jehovah) that leads to good, peace, unity and love is what it's all about. If we'd all cop that point of view, maybe we could get something done TOGETHER! All religions have the power to help or hinder...only humans can taint the divine, and we have. We are all spiritual entities here to learn and grow, we are all part of one being. Love is what will bring us together. i believe that everything Is, and Is valid. my personal approach include, daoism, buddhism, discordianism, chaos, and generally, learning to be the best human being i can manage to be. Seek you own answers. Don't rely on some prefabricated notion relayed by some self serving "servents of god". Religion helps, if you find the right one! Fulfillment and life are found only in the person of Jesus Christ. Christians are to spread the love and acceptance of Christ, not hatred or political agendas. For me religion is a process by which "God" is helping mankind grow up Man created God. There is magic(or God, sprituality, whatever you want to call it) going on around you, all the time, in everything. The key is to see it and/or experiance it. Develop a sense of wonder. You will be happier for doing so. i do not know yet Too many "Christians", too little Christianity we are born, we live, we die. it has always been so. it is an endless cycle wherein we exist in a constant state of chaos. it's very pretty so why should i not dance? Life happens. Supreme being? Why not. Something does not come from nothing. Don't harm anyone if possible, contribute to your community, love thyself and as many other people as you can Religious beings, including deities, but also including prophets and teachers, and supernatural beings, are metaphors representing concepts in human life. For example, God (or at least my version of Him) represents the infinite potential of humanity if it overcame all adversity and achieved perfection, in other words, a gestalt of humanity and all life acting together in harmony. Real-life humanity has a LOOOONG way to go to approach that ideal. Humans should care about humans and not hope for imaginary magical solutions prayer was removed from the schools...look whats happened Only God is the true judge. This was fun. I always wanted my belief system reduced to a series of multiple choice questions. It's so...trivializing. Ethics derives from metaphysics. Those who believe in the supernatural will not arrive at a rational ethics. God loves us unconditionally. He is always with us, always wanting to love us, we need only open our hearts. God is our Father and we are his children, brothers and sisters in his family. The worst things that have happened on this planet have religeon as their cause, when KKKristians abuse me for their sexual orientation they 'forget' that I have not been responsible for the unjustified killing of millions of other people who did not agree with their belief systems Basically I believe in the tried and true values of what's right and what's wrong and live by them All creatures are equal.One should use their life to help protect the enviornment.Live in peace! God is my goal and His Redha is my aim I do not believe in a God or supernatural being per se, but there are some aspects of spirituality which I think must be examined in a more scientific empirical manner. You need to be open to the Spirit and allow Him to direct you. We need to seek the will of the Father and respond to His directing. Harm none. Judaism believes that our purpose here is to make the world better. Can there be any goal better, higher, or more worthy? Make the world better by eradicating racism, hate, intolerance, and disrespect. Take care of that, and 90% of the world's problems will disappear. Religion allows people to give up personal responsibility, they often feel that "god" will tell them the right thing to do instead of making their own choices Overly religious people need to get on with their lives. Try to treat everyone well. You yourself will be a better person. I don't think everything in our great world was created by some freak accident. I believe that it is not our place to judge one another's choices in life (i.e abortion or homosexuality) that is God's job -- not mine. My "job" is to follow the teachings of Jesus Christ and be the best person I can be so as to set an example for our children. To re-establish Islam as the supreme Ideology. To look after the affairs of the poeple, in a just manner. I am part of the cosmic spirit, and it flows through me, bringing me the wealth and benefits of the universe I used to be a strong, Fundamentalist Pentecostal Christian, but I have come to see (by means of studying modern biblical scholarship) that the inerrant attitude towards the Bible is without a strong logical foundation and thus many of the beliefs derived from the Bible should not be accepted at face value. Rather, they should be tested for reasonability. I believe that what God says is true, not because God's word is the standard for truth, but because God only says true things. In other words, thestandard of truth is independant of God. God came to earth and redeemed mankind and founded one,true Church, the Roman Catholic Church. I believe everything the Church teaches. Churches seem to be nothing more than "semi-private" clubs. The building, facilities, and religious/worship-based entertainment is open to the public. You are free to participate as well. BUT...the congregation is by invitation only. It is not possible to be known and accepted inside the church until you are known and accepted OUTSIDE the church. The established members of the church must know you that way or your efforts are in vain. Faith is, by definition, something that is not tangible and impossible to prove. I believe its greatest value is that of a source of strength for difficult time. It should be kept as a personal matter. The universe is bigger than you can imagine There is only one Religion, the Religion of God. All the "world religions" are just chapters in the book. Use reason (and spell "Atheism" and "polygamy" correctly next time) Take heed of God's phophets (peace be upon them all) and do not be led astray, for Allah can crush you like a blood-swollen tick if He so chooses. jews are the devil Nothing actually exist in this universe, but we can thouch by our eye, ear, skin, etc. God is an atheist Finding a personal path that lends some insight into your experience. Organized religion will be reponsible for the decline and eventual extinction of humanity. A person without some sort of a positive religious foundation is a lost soul. And it harm none, do what you will Do what thou wilt and that shall be the law. However, remember that an unjust blow travels the circle three times. So does a "good deed". The doorway to reformation is never closed to any soul, here or hereafter. Be kind to others. Be tolerant. Work hard. Love. I belive that everyone has the right to believe in what they wish to based on their reasoning. As far as the wicca goes, I believe in the duality of life and the sacredness of all things. Ephesians 2:8 I believe there is no hell, because we have enough hell on earth. I believe without knowing. Death with reveal the truth. Religion = nonsense be yourself, and regulate yourself by principles set by the wise men of time, (both religous characters and non-religous) It's as naive to firmly not believe as to believe; therefore I am open-minded. However, whilst following no religion, I have my own strong personal code of ethics, and believe always in honesty, loyalty, and the pursuit of understanding. If the world does not have religion, the world will end up killing itself I think you should live life at its fullest, RESPECTING what other people do and believe, as long as you dont hurt anyone in anyway. "El respeto al derecho ajeno es la paz". Be a good person. Don't harm anyone else, and hope for the best. :) I believe that most of the world does not understand the truth about God and his intention for our lives. I regret that most people use their religion to destroy God's creation through hatred and self-righteousness. Let us be merciful, loving and forgiving. None of us are without sin. All of us fall short of God's grace. Do you want to be judged the same way you judge others? I really wonder why God allows us to suffer through this life. What is his design or purpose? I happen to be United Methodist and the lay leader of my local church however I have a somewhat different view than the typical Prodestant in that I believe that God is in all things animate or inanimate and thus we need to respect everything around us because if we don't we are being disrespectful of God. Concious will creates reality, but we've lost touch with the part of mind that allows us to connect with the invisible forces behind the world. The way to get in touch with this is through raw personal mystical experience, and huge late-night festivals full of smoke, bonfires, strobing lights, and half-naked people vibrating to trance-inducing beats couldn't hurt. Have respect for the unknowable -- in heaven, in fellow humans and in oneself. Everyone needs God and Jesus deep down in their hearts. I believe there is a supreme being (possibly) and Christianity is the result of people who are afraid of the unknown God was created by man. God gave us all our own minds and the ability of choice, therefore it is up to us to live our own lives and not act like His programmed little robots. As long as we do not intentionally hurt anything or anybody, than nothing is wrong. God is that which is the same in all people and things -- the simple common denominator, if you will. (No point in anthropomorphizing it, except as metaphor.) read some books on near death experiences, they're very persuasive and total strangers get almost the same exact conclusions tolerante yet accusing of unbending religions and religious leaders such as the Pope and his attitude to abortion and birth control among Catholic people which has led to the huge increase in the number of people with AIDS especially in the South American countries. None (Life philosophy, however: humanism). Jesus is coming back, and boy, is He mad! No object worth worshiping But Alla(god) Sometimes I feel that there are forces at work in the world, both good and bad. I also think that humans have a hunger and intellectual and emotional drive to explain the unexplainable- why was it someone else on the TWA flight 800 and not me or my loved ones? I often think that even though this concept of "God" does not exist, it has been necessary for us to create him; to answer our most unanwerable questions. religion is a key to heaven Jesus Christ is the our Lord and Savior. The only way to heaven is through Him in accepting his Lordship and to seek his righteousness daily. dispensational orthodox Christianity I believe that your soul will last, but I don't believe in "God" I belive that we all hold a great deal of powers that we are unaware of It is WHAT Christ taught that is important...and Buddha, and Muhammed, etc. Not the question as to when he's going to return. It is the teachings of religions that I use to build my own. As for afterlife, I believe we are all part of a unified spirit: individuals, yet joined in spirit. I believe in a social philosophy. Try to make it better for everyone while you are here. I have sinned many times in many ways and cannot make amends or pay my debts. I cannot save myself and I deserve punishment. Only Jesus Christ, the Son of God, who gave His life in payment for our sins, can save us. Regardless of my beliefs, I should respects the rights and feelings of others. love one another, and dont be taken in by cults (Mormons and Johova Wittnesses I don't have a strict religion, but I believe that God exists within all of us, but that nobody can honestly claim to speak chiefly for Him because we all are a form of Him, even animals and plants. Religion is a cruch for crippled minds We are here to make the world better. Being respectful of other beliefs and being intolerant of racism will help achieve that end. Right wing Christians are dangerous, bigoted, unfair, and murderous. More people have been murdered in the name of Christ than any other cause. I know many Christ-loving people who are good, but when I hear people like Pat Robertson and Patrick Buchanan, I am reminded of how dangerous and Hiter-like these two leaders are. I hope good sense and an obligation to goodnesswill overcome the hate they represent. Evolution is too obvious, and not just the evoulution of "Us" in the past. But the obvious indications that everything in our Universe functions acording to laws that are so perfect indicates to me that there is a creator. It's just that our creator created the "Laws of God" and then let evolution run. Understanding God means striving to understand the beauty of these laws. Walk in faith with Jesus. God didn't make man; man made god. i believe that we live through numerous lives in order to progress spiritually. in order to do this, we must protect life (of all kinds) upon this planet by acting out of and encouraging compassion, peace, and collaboration. Go where God says to go, do what God says to do, when God says to do it, and He will confirm His Word with signs following! the golden rule im a christian Got my own born-again Sri Sydasti! This statement is a mirror, when a mirror looks in, no prophecy looks out. Keep the Sacred Chao, my life is my apple. Like everything else in life, religion is relative. There's a continuum that ranges from the total non-believers to the overly strict adherents. Then ther's everyone in between. You should believe what you feel. Listen to your heart(conscience), it's probably the best guide. Love to you all, smiles and happiness on you and those you love. Somewhere out there is a natural law, presented to the world via different religions, with one common goal - maintaining peace. Humanism is a commitment to reason, freedom, and responsibility. Humans are the true gods!!! Apart from REligions few admirable points.. religion is solely the most destructive force on the planet... More wars have ensued because of religion than all the other reasoning combined. All people are created by God, born as sinners and will die a physical AND a spiritual death unless they are born again -- to be born again is to believe that Jesus is the Christ, the son of God, and that we are guaranteed eternal spiritual life by accepting and trusting in His gift of grace through his death and resurrection. Islam is answer to everything. Do what thou will, but harm none. Follow the teachings of the Bible. Homosexual is not a civil rights it is a behavorial problem but if a homosexual asked Gods forgivness and then gives up that life style and accepts Christ as his Lord and Savior then he will reach the Kingdom of Heaven. Religion is the cause of most if not all of the world's troubles. The whole principle should lay on the love of Jesus into once life I dont beleive everything and I hate those damn christians Love Some people would say I've committed sins; I say that I've made mistakes. But rather than be punished for them, I have learned from them, and that is the reason I am here (on Earth, or in this realm, as it were). "Religion" is very different from Spiritua we are all a holotropic projection of God All any religions are, are guidelines, by which values are taught. Religion should never be used as an excuse. i have found a greater peace within since i rejected christian teachings and started thinking for myself...walt whitman is my teacher now... You find out when you die. I have no need to worry myself in my lifetime over religion, because I don't know anything. I don't know what happens when you die or anything. I don't believe in the bible, but I could defintely agree to believing in God, if I had proof. One main reason I choose not to believe in life, is to not set myself up for a downfall (because, afterall, what if there is not God, no Heavan; What Then?). IT IS IMPORTANT TO NOTE, THAT THEIR IS A DIFFERANCE IN HAVEING RELIGON AND HAVING A PERSONAL EXPERIANCE WITH THE LORD JESUS CHRIST! IT WAS "RELIGOUS PEOPLE" THAT CRUCIFIED HIM, AND ARE STILL THE MAIN FORCE BEHIND THE WORLD TROUBLES! IN REVELATIONS, SATAN SETS UP HIS THRONE [PLACE OF AUTHORITY AND RULE]...IN THE CHURCH.[RELIGOUS SYSTEMS OF MAN!] BUT GOD IS BRINGING A CHURCH OUT OF A CHURCH! A PEOPLE OUT OF A PEOPLE! A NATION OUT OF A NATION! AND EVERY KNEE SHALL BOW, AND CONFESS HIM LORD,AS THE KINGDOMSOF OUR LORD. . .BECOME THE KINGDOMES OF OUR LORD AND "HIS CHRIST!" God is not unlike Aristotle's "unmoved mover." We know God through moral interaction with each other and through our experiences with creation. There is no personal God who intervenes in the daily affairs of humankind. But the absence of a personal God doesn't preclude moral absolutes. "For the wages of sin is death but the gift of God is eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord." Religion is something to enlighten and uphold humans through life, but also something God wants us to "participate" in. It is possible to improve oneself and live a better life. The kingdom of God is within. I think that if god exists, it's not reachable anyone and doesn't particularly care about anybody. If it exists, that's all it does--exist. i just make it up as i go along, so theres much too much to even attempt to place here. Religion is the ultimate two-edged sword. When wielded wisely, it is protection. When foolishly, destructive. IF YOU BELIEVE ENOUGH, IT WILL DO YOU GOOD. I.E. WITCHCRAFT ONLY WORKS IF YOU REALLY BELIEVE IT DOES. Taking from Harriet Martineau, current religious mysticism is a prelude towards an atheist enlightenment. Reality can be explained by rational means just because people haven't found the answer yet is no reason to conclude that a god is the reason for being. Everyone is an atheist, I just happen to believe in one less god than those who claim to be theists. Religion breeds and encourages ignorance, choose science as a better alternative. Personal responsibility, love of each other and the earth, value in all life. Religion is what each person believes either siritually or morally. My belief lies somewhere between science and nature. I was kind of hoping that human kind grow out of its superstitutions. Believe in myself. Let the wankers believe. The biggest suvey is yet to come...:) be truthful A supreme being must have created the universe, and is AT LEAST 50% female. If everyone followed the Golden Rule, life would be really nice. Live and let live, I respect you're beliefs, now please respect mine (or my lack of). 24, Solar Deity Sun, 1977-1999 live a decent life and you have nothing to worry about. A man without a religion is like a car without headlights. There is nothing to guide him to get to where he or she wants to be. "The worst moment for an atheist is when he is thankful and has no one to thank." I believe in the Biblr as the word og God, and tried to live by it to the best of my knowledgr and abiliti. Consciousness creates reality; there is only One Mind. number 14 said it--besides the Big Bang theory.. Religions of the world are based on common principles. These truths are how we accept and live within our humanity while accepting something larger than ourselves.. Find out who you really are and help others to do the same I cannot tell if there is a supreme being or not, but i try to stay away from all forms of organised religion, big or small. I try to be tactfull when talking to religious people, but it is not always possible. However, i do have religious friends, and we get along ok if we don't talk about science or religion. God cares greatly for each of us, he is available to us simply by asking, he has given us so very much, and like a parent, is disapointed when his children turn their backs on him. We will all make our own way, and everyone is not ready for the same thing, I hope that we can all arive where we wish to be. God's word is the absolute truth. To believe things that lack support and run against proven fact is stupid and dangerous. And that is what religion is. God created everything. Science can't prove evolution but it can prove creation...reluctantly! If it wasn't for the threat of hell, I would probably be agnostic. Live and let life; keep a communal concept and strive to live better. i believe that when u die you die...that's it..nuthin, no afterlfe just nuthin but u decomposing in the ground (not that u would notice as u r dead) I believe that there is a heaven and hell and every action you take has consequences Agape Love Since nothing about religion has been proven, I must assume that none of us have souls. And upon death we will cease to exist. As for how the creation of the universe was initiated, I'm not sure. This is my body given up for me. Do not initiate coercion (force or fraud) -- don't do anything to anyone that you would not want done to you. There No deity but Allah & Muhammed is his messanger Be Excellent to each other ! Jesus Christ is the Son of God who dies for our sins and was ressurected. He desires a personal relationship with everyone and offers Gods grace to all who will accept him. Religion is beneficial, if they do not use it as a crutch Each to their own - it is up to each of us to find our own spiritual path and to follow it as best we can. We're all in this at the same time, make the best of it for self and others That only the Almighty Allah swt who created us knows our everyday needs, that's why we have to thank him constantly for the rahmah bestowed on us. Trust Jesus...Just say his name. You will find peace. Believe. Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ and thou shalt be saved. The "answer" is not known nor knowable. The U.S. was founded on Christianity. Our move away from the principles of our founding fathers is destroying our country. Religion is the greatest evil in the world today. Death to the meak. The strong shall inherit the earth. Religion provides structure and place to state beliefs. Spiritualism is belief and love for God Religion is different from Spirituality I wrote that religion is personal. However, I also agree that religion is necessary/helps to maintain values. It's easier to follow a guideline from god than to decide for ourselves; we come back to a cannibal tribe, by whom it is "right" to eat another person. I believe in god, but I also disbelieve that lightening will strike you down if you do something wrong. I think god cares more about how we interact with eachother and the world than if we slight Him. I wrote that religion is somewhat destructiv because I've found that instead of religious people understanding that the basis for religion is loving everyone, not despite their beleifs but because they are god's creations, they use their religion to set up barriers between themselves and anyone who does not view god *exactly* as they do. And that is sad. THAT YOU MUST CONFESE WITH YOUR MOUTH AND IN YOUR HEART TO BE SAVED Do not remove a speck from another's eye until you've removed the board from your own. Jesus Christ is the only true living God through whom is eternal life. This was hard to complete. Actually, religion is man's attempt to reach god. True Christianity is Gods plan to reach man. Regarding question 6 - I also believe reincarnation is possible. Ther are a lot of falsehoods in the field of religion, but without understanding that one IS an immortal spiritual being, and with responsibility for his/her actions, the individual will not do as well. A free state should hae absolute separation of church and state; e.g., churches should be taxed as any other business. Yeshua-Jesus-God-is the begining and ending --everyone will see that one day--my one mission in life is to be Jesus'plan on earth and prepare for his return -- I believe in ten terms/values ,love,friendship,trust,duty,respect,honor, etc these things are important to me a I live my life in accordance to their value. these values are encompassed in many religions in some form or another. There is a god. Nice guy who watches lots of cable tv. I say: Thanks for creating the world. He didnt have to so i won;t worship him. To subit to the will of the one Divine being (ALLAH) I think it's pure silliness to believe in a make-believe supreme being... I used to believe and now am embarrassed at how foolish I once was. I am not religious but I believe there is a god. Religion is human made and that does not impress me. I've been very angry at religious groups lately for the way they want to tell us what to do. I have something to say to all of them. Do you want a say? Then start paying taxes like everybody else!!! Belief in one God{Allah}& that Mohammad {sas} is the last Profet & Messenger,belief in the Angels,life after death,the day of judgement,all the books of God that were sent {that have not been changed} This is what a Muslim believes for more info about the Truth about Islam please send e-mail to abdeen@megahits.com Typically Anglican, and enjoyably so. treat people the wayyou like them to treat you ..never lie... True Christianity is a relationship with Jesus Christ and living life according to HIS word...not following the rules of any particular church. We cannot save ourselves. God has done it already. When we understand that, we may as well join the party and celebrate. I venerate the Celtic and Norse pantheons mostly, but serve the Goddess (in all her guises) above all. I am her priestess. To believe in hocus pocus in this day and age shows a certain amount of ignorance. That might sound harsh but its true. There is no god but Allah, and Muhammad is the messenger of Allah! What religion do you believe in (that is not listed in the survey)? Church of Bob anti-$cientologist It is spelled "atheism" atheism... please spell it correctly Mormon I don't have a specific religion. paganism derived from many beliefs catholic Personal Relationship with the supreme being. Chinese folk religion: combination Buddhist, Taoist, Confucianist. gnosticism Im'R Deism-non Christian XENUOLOGIST Xenuology muslim ***sunna**** atheism but its not a religion I dont have any sapien Sufism Gnostic Christian baptist Pagan non-religious Truth Catholic Judaism I do not have one. religious science Odinism catholic Universalist (I'll believe when I get there) Spirituality Wicca Sufi "THE LIGHT" Mormon jehovah's witnesses I lean toward many religions. Deist- Unitarian Universalist no religion Roman Catholic Meld of Christianity and Wicca VERY Open-Minded Christian deism Metaphysical i call it 'improv' Secular Judaism I dont like *organized religion Humanism Deism Life religion, somewhat like Paganism, but very individalized. Urantian (The Urantia Book) My Own God non-theist pagan MORMON Spiritualist Unitarian Universalist Pagan (Wiccan) urantia Episcopal Catholic my own type of thing, but im forced to go to Presbyterian church Mormonism deist My own I am not a conforast Eckankar pagan protestant --- metaphysical [Unity] I don't really have a "religion," but I do have my own beliefs, therefore, my own "religion." believe all religion is wrong slightly tarot/mythical I am Matt. generic pagan with Wiccan influences Just the Golden Rule... Do on to others... God=One=All=Void No Religion but spiritual Christianity - Congregationalism I have no religion catholicism satanism Return to theHome Page. Copyright ©1996, /InterCommerceCorporation, All rights reserved worldwide Send comments to Webmaster@Survey.net WT02-B22-16IA060-000333-B028-106http://www.survey.net:80/pol3c4.html 204.107.221.240 19970115060909 text/html 110779HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 15 Jan 1997 06:02:50 GMTServer: Apache-SSL-US/1.0.3+1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 110595Last-modified: Mon, 25 Nov 1996 20:26:45 GMT SURVEY.NET - 1996 Presidential Poll #3 - User comments (ARCHIVE V) Your source for information, opinions & demographics from the NetCommunity! ANNOUNCING: The Internet's finest interactive, totally-automated,immediate survey system. We can take any form and instantly create adynamic demographic database and show you the results as soon as youcomplete the survey! Political Survey #3 User comments [ARCHIVE V] Who will be president in 1996 and why? Harry Browne...The Second Amendment! Browne - Get Big Brother out of our wallet and out of our bedroom. Pat Buchannan Bill Clinton Clinton Harry Browne Harry Browne for more personal liberty. Harry Browne! The only way to ameliorate the gaps which divide people in this country is to get people turning toward each other and away from government. Harry Browne for more personal liberty. We need to end this infanticide or our nation and world are in big trouble. Oust Clinton!! Harry Browne: He wants to reduce the size of government and he has a valid plan on how to do it. Ralph Nader...he's honest Harry Browne. History proves that big government doesn't solve problems or make people's lives better. Browne understands this. He will vastly reduce government & taxes while restoring personal freedom & responsibility for one's actions. Harry Browne - he has pledged to work to drastically reduce the size of government Harry Browne - we need less government, not more Harry Browne - government doesn't work and he will reduce it Harry Browne - government doesn't work Bob Dole i could not in all good conscience vote for someone with as little character as Clinton He is the male version of Jane Fonda Harry Browne because there is too much government and the United States is no longer the "land of the free" thanks to our government. Harry Browne because he is the only candidate attempting to reduce the size of government Harry Browne, stands for something Browne - WHY GOVERNMENT DOESN'T WORK! Harry Browne - Give me Liberty or Give me Death! Dole Richard Lamm; fresh Harry Browne. The two major parties are in collusion to peddle influence and protect their own privileges. Only an outsider even has a chance to break up the game and bring power home to the people. Harry Browne; Clinton/Dole-two sides of the same bad penny. Bill Bradley has the most consistent and fair-minded ideas I've seen so far. Harry Browne, because I think the Libertarians are right! Ralph Nader - serious about environmental protection Harry Browne- he is the only man who will really straighten out this country. Ralph Nader - Green Party candidate. Cares about the people of the country rather than big business. Harry Browne-belief in the Constitution & getting the gov't out of our lives Harry Brown because he will cut Federal Gov't to the constitutional minimum. BOB DOLE, because he is the only one running with the character and qualifications. Harry Browne, because he is the only candidate sponsored by an ongoing party structure who has anything interesting to say. Harry Browne Because Government Does Not Work Harry Browne-We need to brake to a full stop, put it in reverse, and back up to the founding fathers. Harry Browne because he has a real plan to reduce government. Harry Browne-We need to brake to a full stop, put it in reverse, and back up to the founding fathers. Clinton, Can't stand Dole Bill Clinton because I believe he is more in touch with the feelings of the average American. He seemes to have an open mind about controversial subjects and comes across as a much more caring person. Alan Keyes- He has the best understanding of the issues and the best solutions. The only thing that prevented him from being nominated is his race. Harry Browne - I'm tired of both parties pandering to the extremes Harry Browne Sound financial strategy for less government Harry Browne, major governmental downsizing is needed and I don't believe Clinton or Dole want to reduce the size or intrusiveness of government. Harry Browne - He's is willing to take a a real stand on reducing government, whereas no other candidate can truly claim to be infavor of reducing government. Bob Dole. Character,Character,Character!!!!!! Harry Browne. Less government = More liberty Clinton, because he is not a nazi like dole Harry Browne, because this country needs a radical change and I believe that he can deliver. Harry Browne. Because he is committed to upholding the Constitution and Bill of Rights. dole, anyone but clinton Bob Dole - He and the Republicans will finally get the chance to make real changes toward correcting the mistakes of the Democratic party over the last 40 years! Harry Browne - Dole and Clinton are the Problem, the can't solve the problem. Billl Clinton. He deserves reelection for the good job he has done over the past four years. Harry Browne for his innovative ideas Harry Browne, freedom I have a black & white screen-can't read most of these questions but I answered the one's I could read. I'm voting for Bill Clinton. That says it all! Harry Browne, because he is the only one who really wants less government Bill Clinton, because Bob Dole represents a bigoted, close minded, and greedy segemnt of our society. Bob Dole becouse he is proprosing tax cuts and becouse he is pro life Harry Browne - get government off of my back! Harry Browne, because I have a Libertarian ideology and he is the Libertarian candidate willing to execute Libertarian policy. Harry Browne, because Libertarians are the only party that will really reduce government interference in our lives and get the federal government back to its contitutional limits. Harry Browne. He is for getting government back into shape. Browne, because he's not trying to please every group he meets, but to do what has to be done Browne, because only he really believes in human rights Harry Browne: End this insane War on Some Drugs Lowell Weiker because he put his actions where his mouth is. Harry Browne - A change from a ONE PARTY SYSTEM! harry browne,reduced federal government and expanded personal liberties and responsibility Harry Browne. In question # 13, you left out Honesty, Integrity, & High Moral Values. Harry Browne has all three. Anybody but Hillary Harry Browne {libertarian nominee) ... Of all the candidates now availabel, Mr. Browne is most devoted to Liberty & Constitutionally constrained government. Failing the election of mr. Browne, I dearly hope our current Coward in Chief is retained in office. Bob Clinton will steal no more of our freedom than Bill Dole, he does have, however, so infuriate people that they will be watching & perhaps resist. harry browne will cut govt 2/3 & return our freedoms! no gvt Harry Browne -- I support the great majority of the LP platform Harry Browne for less government intrusion into private lives and for upholding the Constitution and the Bill of Rights. Harry Browne for Libertarian goals. Clinton because he stands politically liberal-moderate. He stands for many of the same issues that I do: welfare reform, helping the disfortunate get back to a fresh start, pro-choice, etc. Harry Browne = Freedom! Bill Clinton because I think he is doing a good job and would like tp see him carry out some of his plans Clinton Clinton - his viewpoints are those with which I most agree. Bill Clinton because his record is impressive and he's the most liberal candidate for whom I can vote. No one, we should have small local governments a Jewish black woman, because we've had too much of the white Christian male perspective harry brown. because he supports taming the federal gov. and abolishing the I.R.S. in his first year. Harry Browne, 'cause he's not a career politician bob dole, we need a change, Harry Browne. The major parties have no new answers Harry Browne say "Government Does Not Work". Too Right. Harry Browne. Let's try something new for a change! He can't do any worse for our country than the two major parties already have! Pat Buchanan- no queers,abortionist,jews Bob Dole because he will follow through on tax cuts Dole; he's not afraid to be President and he knows how. DOLE-HE CAN BRING RESPECTABILITY BACK TO THE PRESIDENCY Harry Browne, because I am pro-choice, because I support the right to keep and bear arms, because I think government is too powerful, and because I support open immigration and open borders. "Weird Al" Yankovic Clinton - better policies than Dole Harry Browne, I agree with him on every issue. Harry Browne-- The only person who realizes government makes more of a mess than it solves. HARRY BRWONE Bill Clinto. I believe he has done a good job. I think he has a handle on the issues that are domestically important for this country, economic opportunities and reducing the national debt, creating a positive outlook toward the future. Harry Browne: Government doesn't work and cannot work because it is based on coercion. Harry Browne We need a better economy which Washington is not capable of giving us. We don't need the government in our private lives Clinton. He is not an ideologue. He at least understands the problems, although he has difficulty articulating the solutions. He understands that there is a need for a national government, unlike those who would eliminate the federal government. Clinton, because Bob Dole is too old. Harry Browne: Libertarian ideology works in real world. I would like to see Harry Browne win in November. He is the only candidate willing to dramatically change the government. Harry Browne, because as he says, "Gov't doesn't work." I want minimal gov't Bob Dole - Best candidate for the job Harry Browne - stands for less government If the choice is Clinton or Dole, I will choose Clinton, since he is more open minded and less set in his ways. However, I believe there are better people, such as Alan Keyes and Ralph Nader. Unfortunately, they have little chance of winning. If you want more, I have plenty of opinions. Harry Brown. Impresses me as principled, consistant, logical, well thought out. I have heard him questioned and he is all of the aforementioned and impressively so. harry browne-to introduce a legitimate third party into american politics. Browne, not politics as usual Bob Dole because he will do what is right for the country and not special interests. Harry Browne. He will get govt out of our lives. Harry Browne - We need a REDUCTION in government, not decrease in rate of growth. Harry Browne, he is not afraid to take a stand against big government. Clinton\Gore, the economy is good, the deficit is dropping, and inflation seems to be holding even with a fairly hot economy, unemployment is down, sounds like people are positive about spending for high ticket items. I believe a lot of economists are surprised. Harry Browne - Libertarians are the only party whose goals are true to the philosophies and concepts upon which this country was founded... INDIVIDUAL liberty, rights, and responsibilities. Government IS the problem... and always has been. Harry Browne bod do Harry Brown, because he is tho only one serious about limiting government. Bill Clinton - Bob Dole does not have any idea what the average American is dealing with. He has his congressional retirement, medical coverage, and more money than he knows what to do with. Bob Dole needs to be out of politics for a while and get back Harry Browne, to reduce the government burden and restore common sense to America. bob Dole Harry Browne. Because only he will cut government. Harry Browne, principled proponent of minimalist government Harry Browne. I agree that little as possible Government control is not only best for the country but the was the Constitution intended it to be. BILL CLINTON INTELLIGENT SPEAKER Nader! because he actually has his head screwed on and understand the importiance of the enviroment Bill Clinton Harry Browne... he understands what individual freedom means and has thorough understanding of property rights and the absolute importance of keeping our experiment in freedom going by getting politicians to adhere to the constraints of the Constitution. Clinton-- no better viable progressive alternative Bob Dole uor country needs moral leadership. Harry Browne. Only candidate that offers to significantly reduce government oppression. Harry Browne I want to see him included in the debates, but more inportantly I like what he has to say. He is a fine speaker who seems to say what he means and means what he says. I don't like any of the choices we are given. The system eliminates capable people by making certain that only people that owe obligations to the party can be candidates. These limitations begin when you first attempt to enter politics. Harry Browne because he is the only canditate who wants to shrink the federal government and give me back my freedom, money, and self responsibility. He is the oppisite of the socialist candidates Clinton\Dole. Bob Dole Richard Lamm because he supports the future generations (ie balanced budget, social security/medicare reform) by protecting us from all that debt we will inherit. Harry Browne clearly is best choice for President. He is honest,brilliant, understanding of what needs to be done, and has the will and ability to carry is through to make a free society basist on The Constitution and The Bill of Rights, to vote anyone is a wasted vote. Bob Dole, Mr. Clinton is a digrace and should be impeached. Any person believing in practical Libertarian principles. Clinton, because things have been pretty quiet these past four years than they have been my entire life. The president can't control the stupidity of others; he can only control his own stupidity. And I believe he's doing fine. Harry Browne, He makes sense and seems honest. We need a change! Harry Browne - only candidate for liberty Harry Browne. He's the only candidate who will reduce the size of the government. Harry Browne, because he supprts freedom. Bill Clinton, He has the hang of the job now. Bob Dole decency integrity experience warren rudman: knowlegeble and experienced- domestic & foreign affairs, military, workings of congress, pro-choice, pro-gun control, straightforward, sensitive to difficult social issues, practical, honorable Clinton, He has a record of reducing the deficit, stimulating the economy, while concentrating on education and the environment Ralph Nadar Clinton. Good balance with Republican majority Harry Browne in hopes of ending government's image of a "servent" to the people because instead it has become a slave master for utilitarian goals. Bill Clinton, because of his policy this country has reduced the deficit and has eased many foreign tensions, albeit while antagonizing others. Ralph Nader he is a decent man Robert K. Dornan - One word...LEADERSHIP! Clinton Harry Browne - because he is a true libertarian Harry Browne. Browne is the only candidate who truly wants to dramatically reduce the size of government. Browne is also the only candidate concerned about protecting our civil liberties. Harry Browne is the only candidate for real change. Harry Browne...will free all non-violent drug war POWs and get govt. out of our lives for the most part. Stop the BATF from terrorizing. Stop all forfeiture laws. Anything is gravy!!! Visit my web site: www.primenet.com/~jomash. Harry Browne - For freedom in personal _AND_ economic matters Harry Browne. He believes as I do. Harry Browne -- he's the only candidate in the race who promises to restore individual liberty. Harry Browne, He is the only one that is serious about cutting government. "Would you give up your favorate govnt. program if it ment you never had to income tax again." bill clinton and/or libby dole for vice--because they're there. Harry Browne... he wants to cut government, and put more rights in the hands of individuals like my family and friends Reduce impotance of position to level where nobody cares Harry Browne - America's only chance for personal liberty and econmic freedom. Bob Dole-he's honest,honorable,intelligent and a good leader clinton, to keep a balance of power at the federal level. Harry Browne. I don't agree with all his ideas, but I trust him. I don't trust Clinton or Dole. Harry Browne clinton energy,growth in job,resilience, sensible objectives Harry Browne, to bring back true constitutional government (according to the vision of our founding fathers). Harry Browne. He will honor his oath to follow/defend the Constitution. Bill Clinton - I can trust him! Bill Clinton. Understands average-American problems. Bob Dole -- Need a Republican controlled Robert Bills--Socialist Labor (workers' control of industry) The decision is not yet in. ralph nader Bob Dole- I believe that he would carry through on his promises. Bill Clinton, Dole would erode freedoms. Browne, because he is a radical departure from the status quo Anyone but a Democrat or Republican. They have gotten too powerful. Time for a change. Harry Browne - Common sense philosophy, dramatic ideas, paradigm shift Harry Browne "Government Doesn't Work!" Bob Dole because I believe that with a Republican Congress and President things would be changed for the better. Harry Browne, the only candidate who wants to reduce government spending NOW. Richard Lamm, because he is serious about reigning in out of control government spending. Harry Browne. Reduce government to the lowest possible level Harry Browne, No other candidate truly offers change Ralph Nader, I trust him Harry Browne, for all the Libertarian reasons Harry Browne because we need LESS government. Harry Browne. To shut down most of the Government I would LOVE to see Harry Browne elected as president. Browne is the ONLY candidate who has respect for the constitution. His offer to do away with income tax forever if we are willing to give up all government programs is the best offer around. Check out Brownes site at http://www.harrybrowne96.org to find out why everyone is WILD ABOUT HARRY. Bob Dole, Powell isn't running Harry Browne, so he can give as his reason to refuse to sign bills that he believes them to be unconstitutional. Pat Buchanan - He has a anti-globalist platform that America needs right now to fend off the economic traitors that want to sell it to the highest bidder. Harry Browne. End the Income Tax. Abolish the IRS. Let my people go! The economy is good, I think President Clinton has made mistakes, but has learned and adjusted to the job. He is bright, and I feel confident he has the heart to make tough, but fair decisions. I feel President Clinton will continue to serve the country well. Colin Powell Harry Browne is the only candidate who believes in smaller govt. Al Gore : strongest environmental advocate of all Harry Browne--he makes sense! BROWNE-HE KNOWS TO KEEP THE DESTRUCTIVE HAND OF GOV'T AWAY FROM PEACEFUL FOLKS Clinton because I don't trust Dole Bill Clinton. He is the only candidate combining a respect for the leaders in our society with a respect for those who are less fortunate. In theory, I'm Libertarian, but I don't think American society is intelligent enough to prosper for all under Libertarian philosophies. Bill Clinton, I don't want to be living in a church state Harry Browne - He is our only hope of reducing government Clinton- best chance for working people Clinton...better off now than 4 yrs ago Harry Browne; he recognizes that government IS the problem Bill Clinton The only viable candidate that concerns himself with the people of the country. Harry Browne, because his ideas about dismantling govt. programs and turning money over to those dependent on Social Security sounds like a great idea. Those my age and below, (and probably quite a few older) will never see any of the money they "put into" Social Security. Harry Browne, because only Libertarians mean what they say. Harry Browne. For reasons see his book, "Why Government Doesn't Work." Also see his website address @http:/www.HarryBrowne96.org Colin Powell because we need a man of integrity who does not lie and can lead. Harry Browne is the only 50 state candidate who would really reduce government harry browne--he's a patriot and we need one Harry Browne. The only one that can turn this around! Harry Browne--Only candidate who has professed sincere intent to honor the constitution. I cannot waste my vote by voting against my conscience and beliefs. I cannot vote for anyone other than the Libertarian candidate, Harry Browne. Harry Browne, No other candidate truly represents change, they stand for the status quo which is socialism Bob Dole, because I think a re-elected Bill Clinton is a very dangerous idea! Harry Browne, in politics, as in genetics, (ie., cattle breeding) you must reach further than the goal to be able to achive it. Harry Browne. He is not a career political parasite like Clinton & Dole. Nor is he a part of the political establishment as the other 2 major candidates are. Bill Clinton, even though he is a moderate, and that is the mood of the majority of the electorate, he hasn't demonised the government and instead believes in fixing the problems (of which can be found in any human endeavor) Harry Browne, because he is the only candidate who is uncompromising in his proud support of the Bill of Rights Former Gov. Lamm of Colo. - has a better grasp of the national angst with a well developed agenda to solve the country problems. He's more on target than the Libertarians David Duke because he will help the White Race to survive Bill Clinton. His record is much better than Dole's form my view point Harry Browne - "Huge Tax cuts NOW! Huge Spending Cuts NOW! A Balanced Budget NOW!" Not seven years from now! Undecided Ross Perot. He's not my 1st choice, but I believe him to be more sincere and honest than Bill Clinton, and more capable and driven Bob Dole. For this, I can overlook his personality flaws. Harry Browne, because he is the only candidate who can bring prosperity back to America, and solve our moral crisis. Harry Browne. He respects the Constitution. Colin Powell: man of integrity, commitment to ideals and values, and open-minded. Harry Browne- We need a less intrusive government. bill clinton:he is more responsive to the middle class Browne, runaway government must be stopped Harry Browne ENOUGH IS ENOUGH Harry Browne Bill Clinton, because he has done a better job than what his opponents would have done. Clinton, I agree with him on the Environment, Education & Health Care. He is pro-choice and somewhat Libertarian. Harry Browne. Smaller government, less taxes, greater individual rights and freedoms consistent with the original framers of our Consitution, etc. etc. etc. Harry Browne. Someone has to be willing to begin reversing the "government has an answer for everything" syndrome. Harry Browne - Clinton & Dole are part of the problem and have no idea how to fix what's wrong with the country. Harry Browne - Reduce the size of the federal government Harry HARRY BROWNE, BECAUSE HE WOULD TRULY REDUCE GOVERNMENT IN ALL AREAS, WHICH IS ALL I REALLY WANT Harry Browne. His positions are most closely those I support. Bob Dole: Wouldn't have been my first choice, Conservatives should have help advance other candidates Harry Browne - to protect the indivudual (we all are individuals) from the power of the elite in the name of the majority. President Clinton. I feel that he has done a good job as president, and the nation is doing as well as can be expected with the current problems we are facing. Harry Browne; government is too large A return to strict adherance to the Constitution and Bill of Rights and rid this nation of the War Powers Act of 1933 Bill Clinton will win re-election because the economy if fairly strong, the United Staes is at peace, and Bob Dole is a very week candidate. Bob Dole. He's a man of greatr experience and high moral standards harry browne, the only candidate who wants to get the government out of our lives and return freedom back to the American people. Harry Browne - I wish to see a Constitutional Government Harry Browne! He would reduce/eliminate taxes and government intrusion in our lives. Huge Tax Cuts Now, Huge Budget Cuts Now, A balanced Budget Now! Abolish the IRS Now, return to Constitutional limited Government that respects the Bill of Rights, Harry Browne is the Man Harry Browne - He is the only candidate who admits that government doesn't work, and promises to reduce it to it's constitutional limitations. Harry Browne--less government intrusion a person that looks out for the american people Bill Clinton moral, non-new world order candidate, not to be found yet. R. Reagan Harry Browne Harry Browne (Libertarian) - He's the only one who has said exactly what he would do as President. The others change daily as the political winds shift. Harry Browne, He's cool! Huh huh Dole, experienced, conservative values, pro business Harry Brown...Less government Harry Brown to reduce the cost and intrusiveness of the Federal Government Ralph Nader - won't be bought by big business Bob Dole. He has experience and is a man of high moral standards Pat Buchanan we need a truly conservative leader Harry Browne, we need more than two choices for president and most people share most of the views of the Libertarian party. It is the only party with a chance of winning that has a central philosophy that is based on the Constitution. Harry Browne, because he understands the Constitutional limits placed on what govt is permitted to do. Harry Browne, Libertarian Party--Party of Principle and less government. Harry Browne; to free the economy and reduce the size of government Clinton is EVIL!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!! Steve Forbes -> A flat tax and the REAL return of power to the states Trustworthy, Truthful, downsize government, lower taxes Harry Browne Harry Browne. Because he's right. Harry Browne - because he would reduce the size of government. Harry Browne, free minds = free markets Harry Browne - the only candidate who understands what the real problems are and their proper solution. Bill Clinton only because the alternative is Bob Dole Harry Browne It's time for a third party and someone willing to make the cuts in government spending. Harry Browne-He will abide by the Constitution when he swears to upon taking the oath of office. Do not reveal my E-mail address to anyone or anything! Anyone other than the Demo/Rep candidate. End two-party system deadlock. A person with vision and leadership, therfore a third party candidate (Harry Browne). Harry Browne Less Government Elizabeth Dole - well qualified Harry Browne - I am convinced he will stand by his convictions Ralph Nader--we need more democracy and less corporate welfare Bill Clinton He is the only person that cares for the lower class Harry Browne, or anyone else willing to get the government out of the morality business, out of my wallet, and out of my hair. All major parties and candidates insist on pursuing social agendae involving mandates and prohibitions based on personal and popular bias, and it's time for it to stop. Alan Keyes. He has the best grasp of the real issues affecting the country. HARRY BROWNE, BECAUSE HE SEEMS TO BE THE MOST OPEN-MINDED AND HONEST CANDIDATE WHO DOESN'T WANT TO TAKE AWAY A WOMAN'S RIGHT TO CHOOSE WHAT SHE DOES WITH HER BODY (EXP. ABORTION). Harry Browne. Return to the Constitution... Harry Browne; only candidate that will end the war on drugs. Dole-Man of experience,integrity & honor Harry Browne Harry Browne--to achieve less government involvement in our lives. Steve Forbes because he isn't beholden to the special interests. Harry Browne - "would you give up your favorite federal programs if it ment you never had to pay income tx again?" Harry Browne Cut Govt. Bill Clinton because he Harry Browne, to restore *constitutional* government Ralph Nader. Clinton is Republican Lite. Harry Browne because people should be free and not slaves! Harry Browne is my choice for President because he is the only candidate who knows the role the federal government was supposed to have in our lives and is the only one willing to put it in its place. Harry Browne - He's honest, uncompromised, non-politicaly motivated, he has an honest love for the united States of America (Yes, small u) and he understands what this (once great) nation was founded upon... the Constitution - a document I miss, because it certainly doesn't exist in the U.S. anymore. Bill Bradley, who is experienced, thoughtful, and principled. But he isn't running. I'll probably vote for Clinton, because (1) there is no way I would ever vote for Dole and (2) Clinton would prevent the right-wing Congress from running amok. Harry Browne. Because, no other candidates advocate any concrete plan for changes, but rather business as usual in the already unresponsive and behemoth system. Harry Browne - He's the only one that's for reducing the size of the Federal government Harry Browne-- he's most likely to reduce the Federal Gov't browne, Less government, taxes, spending. Strict adherence to the bill of rights and the constitution. Harry Browne, because he is a Libertarian. Bill Clinton-- already dong a great job Harry Browne because he is the only candidate who believes in the freedom of the individual as long as one does not interfere with someone else's freedom. Harry Browne, because Bill and Bob are so similar it's become hard to tell the apart. Browne is the only man with an real agenda for change--namely, cutting government back down to size. Harry Brown. because he speaks the trurth Harry Browne -- I totally agree with the views of Harry Browne and the Libertarian Party. Harry Browne. He is the only candidate that will take this country back to what it was intended to be. A country where the government exists to protect the peoples right to life, to liberty, to the acquisition and possession of property, to security, and to the pursuit of happiness without interference from outside entities; not to provide these things (i.e. take from some to provide to others). The government was never intended to instill and insure an outcome based society, but to protect the right f individuals to pursue, or to not, there own goals, in their own way, by their own means. Government doesn't work and Harry Browne knows this and he will do what it takes to get the government to leave the people alone. Harry Browne- The man has some good ideas that I think will work.We are just a few steps from slavery now and if something doesen't change in the near future the great American experiance will be doomed. Bob Dole..because Clinton is a pot smoking, gay-loving, draft-dodging, womanizing bastard. Character DOES matter..and Dole has it. Bill Clinton because of the far right Harry Browne-downsize government, reduce taxes, get the gov't out of my life. Harry Browne, Because Government Doesn't Work! Harry Browne; only candidate who is for FREEDOM and personal responsibility. Bill Clinton, Dole is way to conservitive and is trying to force Christian viewpoints on the country as a whole. Ralph Nader, because I respect his opinions, and I despise the other candidates. Pat Buchanan-Tells it like it is. Browne. Change is needed, it's not going to come from Reps or Dems. Not Republican, not Democrat. To open the process Underlying the success of the American experiment in human liberty is the idea that all individuals have the right to be free from interference from any other person or group of persons so long as they respect the right of others to do the same. Harry Bro Harry Browne, to take the Federal government out of the problem-solving business and limit its functions to national defense and protection of individual liberties; to promote a general atmosphere of tolerance for others' preferences as long as they don't Clinton- The best choice. Harry Browne: for much less govt and taxes; for a better economy for all I would prefer a conservative other than Dole: however, I will vote for him rather than see Clinton re-elected. Dole is a patriot. He will insure the appointment of more conservative judges, and cabinet members. He would sign s lot of the legislation in "the contract with America". I believe he will lower taxes and try to cut off the long arms and deep pockets of the Federal government. This government of ours is a beast that has far reaching tenticles that are destroying this country and the ideal itterated in the Constitution. I am ashamed and embarassed by our present President. God help us, if he is re-elected. Forbes/Gingrich/Gramm or any candidate who wants to cut taxes and lessen the influence of government on people's lives. Pat Buchanan: He has the balls to put his cards on the table. He is standup. Harry Browne: I've read his book, and he has very well defined plans for reducing taxes and clearing up the mess that government seems to be today. Harry Browne is the only one who will return the Federal government to its Constitutionally granted powers and give us back our freedom. Harry Browne for president! People should have the right to choose how to live their own lives without government intrusion into their financial affairs. The free market is good, efficient, and should not be tampered with except with extreme care (perhaps on the environment.) Local governments give individuals political power in their communities. Government regulation (socialism) will be the ruin of us all! Harry Browne, because I want to see people's individual liberties and personal responsibilities restored to them. Hary Browne William Bennett - Best person that would have a chance at winning. Harry Browne - Will seriously persue ways to reduce gov't Harry Browne, because, if elected he would push for repeal of the IRS and the War on Drugs William Bennett Harry Browne/Less Government Bob Dole - he has the integrity, experience and strong moral character we need Robert Dole, ANYONE is better than Bill Clinton clinton best of worst choices Harry Browne, to restore respect for the principle of a voluntary society. Harry Browne because government as it exists today does not work! pat buchanan Clinton; he is better than Dole Harry Browne - reduce government Bob Dole Harry Browne - Gov't has gone beyond Constitutional authority. Libertarian policies restore legitimate power. Harry Browne - He'll reduce the power and size of the federal government Clinton....he is the only choice as the Republican Party has been taken over by the Christian Crazies. We need a third party which would split off the fundies into their own sick little group and let the rest of the Republicans get on with insuring the rights of the individual...regardless of their personal philosophy. John Hagelin of the Natural Law Party has some good ideas on really "reinventing government", and deserves more attention. Society should however do more independent of government, in which case this is a less important question. Harry Brown: government doesn't work. buchanan Harry Brown, Clinton=murderer, Dole=Old crank dole Brown, to bring an end to prohibitory laws (Drug War). Richard Lamm-Responsible Entitlemenmt Reform Browne is for less government Harry Browne bwowne-legalize drugs now more discussion on lowering payroll taxes on middle class. Clinton... he cares about education, health care, fairness Pat Buchanan because he is unwavering. I believe I know where he honestly stands. He believes in America first and not the UN. He believes in equal opportunity for those that will take it. All are created equal with the right to become unequal! Harry Browne, because he will stop the government from strangling the economy and violating our rights. Harry Browne, He believes the government does not work, He's right Browne - because the eroding of civil liberties is my primary concern Harry Browne, because he's prochoice in everything. I am having a difficult time with the decision, I do not favor Dole or Clinton. I do however prefer someone who supports less government involvement, who is pro-choice. Who will that be??? I will wait to see who runs a positive campaign not a negative one.... Harry Browne, Make the federal gov smaller no fed income tax Harry Browne- best ideas for the future/would implement most real change. bill clinton he is doing a good job and should have four more years. Clinton, Dole is way too interested in the rich and big buisness. Harry Browne... I just want to be free... Harry Browne: Govt is causeing most of today's problems. He spells it all out in "Why Govt doesn't work". harry browne, shake things up Harry Browne. We need the sweeping changes he proposes. Bob Dole, The only viable alternative to someone who does not deserve to be president Harry Browne, (Today's) Government Doesn't Work! Altruism IS evil. Lower Taxes, Less Spending, Less Spending, Less Spending Bill Clinton The economy is good and he more nearly represents my views Mary Col Hollis of the Socialist Party Anyone but who's running Harry Browne!!! Help get him into the debates and you'll see why. Bill Clinton. He is more moderate. Harry Browne -- less government! Harry Browne because he represents a real change. Differences between the Republican and Democratic candidates are merely cosmetic. Harry Browne- He's the only one that really wants smaller government. Harry Browne because he is the only candidate who has not lied, cheated or stolen from me. He actually has read the U.S. Constitution and will actually abide by it rather than reinterpret it out of existence. DOLE Clinton--he's doing an outstanding job! Harry Browne has the potential to bring about drastic changes in government - sometimes too drastic, but as long as we have a Democrat/Republican congress to keep a leash on him, he'll take our government where it needs to head. Harry Browne - he stands on princples, not for political gain. Harry Browne - because hes stands for what our founding fathers stood for - FREEDOM!!!!! Harry Browne Harry Browne - primarily because of fiscal and taxation policy, and also because his party advocates a liberalization of our societies draconian drug laws. The candidate who is most honestly working to better the country. The least selfish. Harry Browne would act on his convictions Someone who embodies the working man. Worked in a factory, works 9 - 5 at 4.25 an hour. He would do better the all the "professional" poltitions I'd like to see Harry Browne. Failing that, Richard Lamm. Harry Browne Harry Browne, he is the only candidate who has truly interested in reducing the size of government. browne - his econ policies harry browne because he speaks the truth about government and is firm in his commitment commit Harry Browne - He is the first candidate who knows and actually says that Government does not work.I believe him when he says that he would slash the Fed.Gov. to constitutional levels. Harry Browne will fire the IRS and end the drug war idiocy! Clinton---he cares for the middle class and for the poor---his experience in avoiding the draft in Vietnam is admirable Ross Perot (because he has more of a chance than Harry browne) Harry Browne - because government doesn't work! Bob Dole (although the possibility is remote), because the notion of four more years of Billary nauseates me. Harry Browne- I'm tired of Replicans & democrats clinton, strong on gun control Harry Browne Harry Brown, we need government to protect the environment, the elderly, and provide for a common defense. Not to slowly take our rights away and in the process make itself even more powerful. Harry Browne - Smaller Government, Lower Taxes, More Liberty Harry Browne, because of his statement that he would sign all bills that decrease the size and scope of gov. and veto all that would increase it until it was 1/10 the size it is now. Bill... to maintain a moderate supreme-court only... Of the candidates still running, Harry Browne. Bob Dole and Bill Clinton BOTH represent BIG GOVERNMENT and will support more of what is destroying the U.S. today. Harry Browne, to get Government off of our backs. Anybody who will get rid of stupid welfare, why shouls SOME people get FREE money without working while every else works hard? bob dole he has the experience to do the job and most importent dole tells the truth..... Harry Browne. He is the only candidate committed to making government smallers and less intrusive dole. a republivan president will achieve more than a democratic one would with the current republican dominated congress. Harry Browne, because he will reduce government intrusion Harry Brown -- only one willing to protect freedom, and who would eliminate the national debt Harry Browne, for his representation of a vast number of Americans who are tired of the criminally negligent and self-serving politicians responsible for the explosion of unneccesary legislation that gluts our society and has destroyed our freedom. Harry Browne, both parties have failed miserably and he is the only reAL alternative BILL CLINTON Harry Brown. Refer to his campaigne statements and his book; Government does not work! Clinton-- He is very good and he has demonstrated it, the country is in good shape and he has done what he said. Clinton--Under his administration the Federal payroll has shrunk, unemployment is down, inflation is under control. I firmly believe he cares more about the "little guy." And, lastly, Bob Dole is too old! Harry Browne, because Government doesn't work! Harry Browne - He will reduce the size of the federal government I want to see Bill Clinton re-elected, because he's getting things done, dispite personal attacts Harry Browne, reduce the tax burden, balance the budget, make our country more prosperous Harry Browne - libertarian principles Alan Keyes. He is a man of principle and character. He knows what he believes and is able to articulate it clearly in a persuasive way. Harry Browne: Federal Government is in serious violation of the US Constitution! Pat Buchanan. He is a Conservative and is not controlled by the "establishment". Pat Buchanan He's the only candidate I have seen that has convictions that stay the same nomatter what poll comes out Browne Browne, smaller government is better government Clinton. Although he isn't perfect, he's tried to make things better. � like that. Harry Browne because he will end the war on drugs Harry Browne is the only candidate who really wants to reduce the size of the federal government Harry Browne because I feel that he would be a big help in taking the government back to its intended state. HHarry Browne Harry Browne - he understands that government's role is only to prevent the initiation of force and fraud and nothing else. Richard Lamm, eventhough he is not in your survey, I believe that he is the best candidate for the presidency because he has governmental executive experience as governor of Colorado and has some new ideas that are feasible. Harry Browne realizes that the US is not run constitutionally. Harry Browne. He is the only one with consistent principles aimed at reducing government and giving back the much needed civil liberties to the people. He is the *only* presidential candidate in history to qualify for and consequently *refuse* federal election matching funds! He believes that people are individuals and such have the right to do as they see fit for themselves, without hurting others. Weather that be putting drugs into their body or jumping off the Empire State Building. Freedom, tru freedom, of choice must be returned to the people. Harry Browne-because a small government is cheaper than a bad one. Harry Browne, because he is the only candidate who will really do something to reduce the size and intrusion of the federal government Ralph Nader because he has great ideas and stands by his principles. A principle center leader harry browne-he is the most libertarian candidate President Clinton The economy is so much better now than four years ago and he is more for low and middle class people than the rich. Since Buchanan & Forbes are out of the picture--I will vote for Harry Browne! Harry Browne is the only candidate committed to upholding the Bill of Rights Harry Browne - Less government, less government, less government!!! His uncompromising convictions! Bob Dole because he possesses that quality from which all others are derived - character Harry Browne, to return America to the Constitutional principles the country was founded on by Thomas Jefferson nearly 200 years ago. Harry Browne; smaller gov't Harry Browne. He is the only candidate who is committed to substantially reducing the size and power of the federal government. He also plans immediately balance the federal budget as well as take a huge chunk out of the national debt. I can't imagine anyone who I would rather see as predident, including Colin Powell and Ross Perot, as much as I would like Libertarian Harry Browne to be president. Harry Browne. I want the IRS abolished. pat buchanan because he is diggity dank Harry Browne, I have children, I want them to live freely in a stable, peaceful world. Bill Clinton would probably be my choice for president because he cares what happens to the people. He dosen't want to cut taxes so the government can do more for the people and I admire that. Besides, all the other candidates are too religiously involved or family values. Harry Browne is the only cand. who recognizes that government doesn't work. Clinton Harry Browne,he is for dismantling the big goverment money machine Colin Powell Harry Browne since he is the only candidate committed to the fundamental values outlined in the Constitution. Bill Clinton...appointment of federal judges and a check on Republican excesses I would like the Bob Dole as president, because Clinton can't stop lying. Harry Browne because he konws that Government doesn't work Honesty-Harry Browne I'm not sure but I do not like the current choices. Harry Browne. Harry Browne - Less Government Intrusion Harry Browne, he stands for less gov't. and personal liberty. Harry Browne. Can speak to the issues most Americans care to hear about in the presidential debates. He is running an honest campaign, 100% voluntary contributions. He refused matching funds, the first candidate to qualify,but refuse. Electing him president would have a significant positive impact on the lives of many Americans Harry Browne, because he would reduce government the most without playing favorites. Dole because he's not a draft dodging, wonanizing, pot smoking draft dodger like his opponent. Ross Perot, the defecit is the biggest problem we have Harry Browne: He's the most logical choice to anyone with a brain. Harry Browne, Because Government Doesn't Work And He Knows It! Harry Browne, because he stands for personal and economic liberty. All the other candidates want to run your life -- the hallmark of authoritarians, whether left or right. Libertarians simply believe you should be free to live as you choose so long as you don't hurt others. I think this is morally and pragmatically correct. Browne believes in this, he has integrity, and he will try to win liberty for all. Harry Browne would dismantle the federal government and return power where it belongs, with the people themseleves. Harry Browne Harry Browne. He is the only candidate with a coherent policy to return the country to one the founding fathers would recognize. Harry Brown Continue current path & experiance revolution Harry Browne - less government! Harry Browne. To show people that they can live better lives with a smaller, less abusave goverment. Ralph Nader, to challenge the corporate control of government. Harry Browne, because he is running on the principals that our country was founded on. Harry Brown-End the War on Drugs!!Stop the black market w/ provides incentives that corrupts governments,police & criminalizes everyday people. Harry Browne - He is the only candidate who has any philosophic consistency. Harry Browne Harry Browne - I'm tired of the Constitution being ignored. Bill Clinton. He seems human and in touch with the people A libertarian, because the government is our biggest enemy harry browne to make the govm't viable in the 21st century Harry Browne, read the Constitution. Clinton-- he's one of our greatest presidents! Bill Clinton Harry Browne - he will help to restore our constitution Pat Buchanan, Pro Life and puts America first Lamar Alexander ! He's pro-gun and he is pro states rights ! Harry Browne to restore Constitutional governmnet Harry Browne...because I believe he will bring about much needed changes in America. Not so much a return to American values and ideals but a beginning of the expression of the true idea of American values. Harry Browne- End the War on Drugs, let business do business, no legislation of morality by the government. STEVE FORBES WE NEED SOMEONE WITH BUSINESS EXPERIENCE Harry Browne - the only candidate really wanting less government There is a definite need for Libertarian viewpoints in U.S. Government offices. David Duke because he will help the White Race survive Harry Browne because he is the only candidate who will actually reduce the size of government, drastically cut taxes, and revive American liberty. Harry Browne. We need less government and more individual responsibility. Harry Browne We need less government - less taxes! Colin Powell- leadership Charlton Heston, he seems to be the only canidate that knows the 2nd amendment is in the bill or rights. Harry Browne because he's the best person for the job!!! Harry Browne: He's the only viable candidate Harry Browne Anyone who will help dismantle a large segment of the US gov't without preference for lobbyists' concerns Harry Browne Because he believes Gov't is the Problem not the solution. Harry Browne. The dems & reps can't get it done. Bob Dole, because Bill Clinton is a liar and if we had a president who would work with Congress, then they could make some changes and get some things done. Harry Browne because the current status of government doesn't work! Jack Kemp because he is agood leader and has great ideas about the economy Harry Browne, because he would try to reduce the size of the Federal Government. Elizabeth Hanford Dole - Bob for First Gentleman! There's still time, let's change the dynamics a bit at the 1996 convention! I'm sure the party would support it - Bob Dole just needs to say he is out of energy or something, and he needs someone better to carry on the campaign, someone who still has the energy to lead America in the next four years - Dole (Elizabeth) for President in 1996; If not, then in 2000. Bob Dole His campaign doesn't have a body count Harry Browne Harry Browne. Prosecute Criminal Elements against the Constitution! Bill Clinton Harry Browne. While I am not 100% libertarian, it is obvious to me that our government has gotten far too involved in far too many areas of our lives. The intent of the constitution was to prevent a large, uncontrollable government from ruling absolutely. What we currently have is part democracy, part fraud. The states should have authority in all things not spoken of in the original constitution; and the people if not the state. In other words, it has gotten to the point where we serve the goverment, instead of the government serving us, and that must end. Harry Browne 'cause noone else will save America Nadar. I disagree with him on a lot of things, but I don't think he would try to appease me and people who disagree with me. I just want him to do what he thinks is right. When it is all boiled down, Most americans agree on fundamentals, like education and freedom. The nitpicky, though often necessary, should be put by the wayside for a while, and someone like Nadar could then organize. Clean the cobwebs, if you will. You can only patch a boat so long before you should buy a new one. Hopefully te new one will look like the old one mostly Harry Browne....Less government. Period. Harry Browne, because he's the only candidate that faces the Issue that Government Doesn't Work! Government programs have things worse, not better Harry Browne - He will help limit the powers of government to those clearly defined in the constitution and Bill of Rights. Harry Browne. He makes the most sense. Browne, So I may raise my family and run my business and life the way I want to. Not by the assinine standards of the Gov or the current fadish mores of the media. Thank you Clinton Dole he is a better leader. And he gets things done. harry browne will end income tax, reduce crime, abolish ATF, FBI, and other federal thugs Harry Browne because I support his campaign statements and an end to the War on Drugs. Harry Browne, best chance of a 3rd party candidate to win and interesting ideas anyone who is concerned with the good of the country Harry Browne. He understands that government doesn't work. Everything it touches it screws up in a very expensive way. For-profits and non-profits can handle all of our needs if only we could keep our own money to donate and spend it as we see fit. Government regulations benefit the politically well-connected at the expense of consumers and smaller competitors. Republicans betray free markets and Democrats betray individual liberty. Harry Browne. He makes his decisions based on the principles on which this country was founded. He has a legitimate workable answer to all questions raised about the operation of this government, nationally and internationally, which also protects the freedoms that are secured by the U.S. Constitution. Harry Browne, He is the candidate most in favor of liberty Harry Browne - Less Government Harry Browne for the biggest change in U.S. Government history Of the 3 candidates, Dole. No surprise huh? While I'm not a Clinton apologist by any means - he's rubbed me the wrong way more than once - I prefer him to almost any candidate that could get the Republican nomination. The Republican Party has been taken over by rightwing religious zealots who want to impose their beliefs on everyone and rich or wannabe rich people who care about little besides creating more wealth for themselves. The Democratic Party has itsown problems, but at least they haven't adopted a party platform based on control and gred. Harry Browne- He's the only one I trust :) Harry Browne - because government doesn't work. harry browne libertarian ideals Harry Browne should be the nest President because he is the only candidate willing to drastically reduse the size of our government and revert to Constitutional and Bill of Rights morals. Harry Browne - Reduce the government NOW. Browne-gov't reduction; elimination of IRS; etc. Pat Buchanan Dole - Anybody But Clintoon Jack Kemp 1. Harry Brown 2. Most accurately reflects my philosophy Ralph Nader, we need an independent left politics in the US Harry Browne, he says what he means, not what he thinks people want to hear. He knows what it's like to work for a living, and the fact that government doesn't work Harry Browne. I believe it is time to move away from large govenment control and into personal responsibility. Bill Clinton... He is the best man for the office. He has youth. Ralph Nader. He is the only candidate not owned by MNC's! Harry Browne - we need to eliminate 90% of the federal govt. Harry Browne - We need someone to attempt to stop the republicrats. Harry Browne, he seems to stick to his convictions and he has a genuine plan to eliminate the national debt. Harry Browne to end the income tax and stop the war on drugs! dole seems to be a pawn of the tobacco industry Harry Browne-Ihave read his issues and believe that he is the best person to lead this country Harry Browne - all other candidates promise "more of the same" which clearly has not worked! Ralph Nader -- most honest, caring, compassionate, unwavering candidate available Harry Browne - Less government, more personal responsibility Harry Browne; He wants to return the federal government to constitutional levels. Harry Browne because Government doesn't work Harry Browne Because I read his book. harry browne. Because he wants goverment out of peoples lives. Harry Browne, he'll get govt off my back and out of my wallet. Harry Browne because he would slash government. harry brown to abo;ish irs!!!!!! Harry Browne because he neither sells out to the "haves" nor patronizes the "have nots." clinton because he is fair and open minded, a man of all the people clinton Harry Browne - To dramatically reduce size of government Harry Browne because he is the only candidate that really wants to reduce the size of the government. Dole More positive media, less scandal, security minded more than freedom minded voters Bob Dole , You can't trust clinton to tell the truth Dick Lamm because he understands the need to reduce both legal and illegal immigration. Bill Clinton. Although I think little of the President, I believe Republicans are too indebted to the so-called "religious right"(their focus is on a Christian world, and I am not a "christian"), the wealthy and corporate America. Republican Congress members, particularly those most recently elected but also people like Thurmond, Helms, Dornan, et al, stand for the worst elements of America. Bob Dole is not the answer.Even if I thought he was a better candidate than the President, I would not vote for im because his party is too dangerous. Bob Dole, To continue reducing goverment, Eliminating Abortion Browne...we need real change..go back to constitution Pat Schroder. One Bitch'n Babe. Is a go to gal and can cry to get things done! Harry Browne, he's the only one I can support! Harry Browne. The Libertarian nominee is the only presidential candidate with a bold plan to roll back the Federal government AND the apparent will and convictions to finally take the fight to the two-winged "Federal Party" in Washington, D.C. Clinton - If he doesn't win, Dole will, and with a Repub. Congress, that'd be real nasty. Harry Browne, to restore our freedom. Bob Dole Harry Browne because he has an actual plan to rid our lives of the government Harry Browne (the candidate most likely to reduce the size/power of the federal government) harry brown, because he is rational in his thoughts and actions and books, and he has a wider integrated perspective of the world. plus he will set free businesses to produce for freedoms for individuals, so that they can take back control for there lives to be more productive. Browne, libertarian idealogy, personal freedom=personal responsibility Ross Perrot Pat Buchanan on the U.S. Taxpayers Party ticket! Harry Browne. He is the only major candidate who would shrink government. Bob Dole - Anyone is better than Clinton Harry Browne: He represents a return to the Constitution I am torn on this issue. I grew up republican, but Dole says nothing that has any value, he avoids controversial issues and has latch onto a tired and unsuccessful economic plank. Clinton on the other hand, has turned out to be an excellent leader, but his alleged weakness of character and initial liberal tendancies make me a bit nervous about voting for him. Harry Browne! We need less government, not more! Clinton. He is closer to the people's viewpoint. Clinton - I fear the alternative Harry Browne - Quit spending so much of my damn money irresponsibly and get the feds the hell out of my life. Pat buchanan because he says what he means and means what he says! Harry Browne. He is the only one saying we need to cut government a lot -- and means it! Browne,less goverment Harry Browne (the candidate most likely to reduce the size/power of government) Harry Browne, I believe that government exists solely to protect man's rights. bob dole Harry Browne - has a view of the federal government's role which is more consistent with its Constitutional design. Browne- in order to stop the cancerous growth of the federal gov browne-because Dole & Clinton are not trustworthy Clinton-Of all the non-Republicans,he can be elected. A Republican congress AND Republican president would be the WORST. Harry Browne, because government doesn't work Clinton-He's for the common person,not the rich Harry Browne, he will give people their lives and freedom back where they belong; in their own hands. Harry Browne. I'm sick of waffling policiticians like..... clinton needs another shot at it Clinton - the alternative is unacceptable BOB DOLE HAS ALL THE EXPERIENCE!!!!!!!!!! Harry Browne, Like me I am convinced Government does not work. I would like to see Mr. Browne on the Presidental Debates. Harry Browne will take the debt off my kid's back and give them a future Harry Browne: Less government, Less tax, More freedom Harry Browne, because he is the only candidate who would abide by the Constitution Harry Browne, so that the DEA's war on the American people will finally end. Ralph Nader Ralph Nader Harry Browne: eliminate big government Harry Browne - the size and scope of gov't must be reduced. Harry Browne because the Libertarian Party represents my beliefs the best. Harry Browne - we need him Harry Browne because Big Government has had it's chance.now it's time for small government. harry Browne Libertarian Harry Browne to dramatically reduce the Federal government down to its constitutionally mandated size. Browne - He can win, and he will dismantle the entire unconstitutional federal system which has been in place since FDR.al Pat Buchanan because he understands the "The Insiders/Bilderbergers/CFR/Trilateral/Globalist/New Age conspiracy, his conservatism(he is really normal only present society makes him a conservative, and his stand on the Constitution. Pat Buchanan - not afraid to confront difficult issues. someone libertarian, we need a stronger third party Harry Browne, less government Harry Browne. Get the government off my back. Truthfully I do not like Dole or Clinton for president; I am mad because the republicans did not keep all thieir promises. I would vote for Ralph Nader if I really thought he could win. The country has become an oligarchy run by captains of industry who infuse more money into lobbying congress than it takes to run the damm thing Bob Dole--let's get serious about this nation and where we're headed as we approach the next millenium I would like to see Bob Dole pick up Harry Browne as his running mate. Harry could really bring teeth tho Bob's campaign. Harry Browne - what a breath of fresh air... Harry Browne because he represents ME. Bill Clinton Harry Browne, Only candidate who is seriously about reducing the size and scope of government. Someone smart and careful who is not much interested in the personal exercise of power. Pat Buchanan Harry Browne. He's the only candidate who brings something new to the table that makes sense based on my own beliefs and perspective. Harry Browne because, he, and most Libertarians, invision _true freedom_, which is that people SHOULD BE ABLE TO do whatever they want, be it drugs, sex, you name it, as long as it doesn't harm anyone else. bob dole, he's honest, has integrety, can trust him bill clinton, because he is the best man of the men running for the job! Harry Browne. The only candidate who will truly reduce the intrusion of government into our lives. Harry Browne, Libertarian - because he has the right ideas! Harry Browne, because of his desire to reduce taxes and increase personal freedom, including ending the "war on drugs". Harry Browne; REAL reduction in government Harry Browne: He has a firm belief in the Constitution Harry Browne because the Democrats and Republicans are only interested in maintaining their political power. Bob Dole , He is not bill clintion Harry Browne -- time for a Libertarian Harry Browne: Eliminate IRS, Balance Budget, REDUCE government Ralph Nader. He is the only candidate not owned by big business. Harry Browne because government that governs least governs best. Harry Browne - Because Government Doesn't Work! Harry Browne: Government is a protection racket with pretty uniforms and we need less of it Ross Perot to break the two party corruption control of governemnt and to leave a new permanant Political Party for average people. Harry Browne. The two older parties are hopelessly corrupt and need to be swept away! Bill Clinton. He is not a puppet of the religious ultra-right faction. Harry Browne. He will fight the nanny state mentality. Bill Clinton. He is not a puppet of the religious ultra-right faction. Harry Browne, because I don't like Clinton or Dole at all Harry Browne - Democrats & Republicans have become too similar in nature. Harry Browne, He wants less government and so do I! Harry Browne ... because government, today, simply doesn't work. The Federal government should focus on a few things (in line with its Constitutional responsibilities) and do those things well; it tries too hard to do too many things. Harry Browne for freedom, self-determination, justice Harry Browne, he presents the only alternative to politict as usual Harry Browne. It's time for a real change; the two current parties are useless. A candidate with moral, social, and religious values. One who will not compromise on his/her principles and basic beliefs. A candidate that put America and the people ahead of Party interests. Harry Brown: He is the only canidate the will reduce the federal government. Harry Browne -- we need LESS government Harry Browne: Get the Federal Government out of our way! Harry Browne because he wants to end the drug war HARRY BROWNE HAS A PLAN TO REALLY BALANCE THE BUDGET NOW Bob Dole: he is a good man, and is ideas are good. He is not too far right, so i think he can serve all of America well Harry Browne, he will do more to end crime in America, and restore our Bill of Rights, than anyone just by ending this Insane War on Drugs. Harry Browne, because he's in favor of the people and their Constitutional rights. Harry Browne, for a smaller, less intrusive and *less expensive* government. Harry Browne, as I am an instinctive libertarian. Also, I feel sick when I consider voting for the 'normal' candidates. Bill Clinton. Cuz he's better than Dole. Browne only candidate serious about paying off national debt and making government much less intrusive. Harry Browne, Libertarian philosophy of government Bob Dole -- Four more years of Clinton, his lying, and liberalism will destroy America. Harry Browne will get us back on the Constitutional track. Harry Browne. We have gargantuan problems in our society and the two major parties are not willing to use reason in coming up with new approaches to solve them. A third party candidate will not be fettered by political expedients and will not be afraid of not getting elected next term (in part because he will probably support term limits). All these reasons and hundreds more lead me to my conclusion to support Browne. CLINTON. HE'S NOT PERFECT, BUT HE'S THE LEAST DANGEROUS. Harry Browne for Liberty Harry Browne Harry Browne - He is the only candidate who will adhere to the Constitution and give back the freedoms the government has taken from us. Harry Browne, because both primary parties are lazy and corrupt. Harry Browne, reason:for less federal government Ross Perot-A brilliant business man to improve the US's bottom line Browne-> He is the ONLY one for less govt! Bob Dole--anyone but Clinton!!!!!!!!!!!!!!! bob dole Harry Browne because he will help me realize my greatest value: my personal freedom. Clinton...Others are meanspirited and lack compassion... anything is o.K. with them to get relected Harry Browne. He is a libertarian. Perot - He would run the government like a business. Harry Browne, because government doesn't work! Harry Browne - for his clear and consistent defense of individual rights, including the right to property. Browne is the only candidate who is willing to act on principle. Browne - if he adheres to Libertarian principles Harry Browne is the only credible pro-liberty candidate. Harry Browne would be great if he can get elected. Bob Dole. Great man, great leader, great record. And, look at the other choices, Clinton and Perot. Scary. I want Harry Browne to be the president. I believe that he will put freedom first, and that is what I want. Dole. We need to elect someone to reverse the current direction the government is taking toward more intrusive control. Harry Browne; it's time for radically smaller government! H. Browne - He is the only candidate I have heard who sticks to his beliefs during interviews. less goverment across the board on all levels Harry Browne. Only candidate that generally agrees with my own political positions. Harry Browne-There is an alternative to the republicrats Harry Browne, because Government frightens me to death. Dick Lamm, cause he's our man! Dick Lamm because we need an honest, hard working, hard choices President who can get things done! Harry Browne Harry Browne:The Federal government must return to its constitutional limits and return power to citizens so that may exercise maximal individual liberty and personal responsibilty. Harry Browne; he has the most honesty and integrity of them all Harry Browne - the only candidate who believes in freedom and understands the intended role of the federal government. a president with high moral standards, the decline of this nation is due to a lack of morality by leaders, parents and others in authority Some who has morals & values (not necessarily Christian - this is where your poll is biased - ) Because I cannot honor and believe in someone who is not. I woould not go to a physician who smokes, drinks & is overweight -- why should I trust my future to someone who lies? Harry Browne: He's the only candidate on the ticket who stands for real change--a change back to the form of government envisions by our founding fathers. Harry Browne, for his support of individual freedoms Harry Browne. Huge tax cuts and spending cuts now Harry Browne Harry Browne because he knows that government should be used as a last resort for any problem Harry Browne: He's the only candidate on the ticket who stands for real change--a change back to the form of government envisions by our founding fathers. Sam Nunn would make a great fiscally conservative pro-military candidate, but he won't run. Based on the current candidates, I would like to see Dole elected because his views more closely line up with mine than Clinton's. Dole because he'll make America a better place to live in Harry Browne: Less government, corruption, The people do not have a voice in government affairs and I believe Harry Browne is the most effective "voice" for the citizens of the U.S.A. Harry Brown....because Government Doesn't Work, stupid! Harry Browne The best chance of reducing the federal gov. and returning to the Constitutional government intended. Jack Kemp, I believe he is the most qualified man in America to lead us into the 21st century. Harry Browne: Fed infractructure is unhealthy. Ross Perot- he might actually CHANGE things- REP's and DEM's have been given a chance and have only made it worse; let the Reform party have a turn- it certainly can't get much worse! Harry Browne -Best candidate in the field by far Harry Browne. He seems to be more intune with the reality of the government's situation Pat Buchanan- I trust him. He has integrity. He knows what's wrong and needs to be fixed. Harry Browne is the only candidate who knows the constitution of the US. The federal government was never intended to do more than military protection and judicial-contract law. Government cannot dictate morals or help the "poor". Federal income tax is unconstitutional. Harry Browne, because GOVERNMENT DOESN'T WORK! harry browne; for goverment reform Browne -- he's a change, and represents ideas that many americans would agree with, if they were aware of those ideas. Harry Browne-He's the only one who REALLY wants smaller Gov't ??? Has a dream, does not suck up to be liked, kids are our future and not ment to pay our bills Harry Browne, the other parties have sold us out for too long, I want to see some changes before we no longer have any choice! Harry Browne. He'll abolish the IRS Harry Browne, less federal governing, no income tax, more self-determination by states. Harry Browne -he'll abolish the IRS harry browne-government is out of control, and republicrats can't control it. STATES RIGHTS! Harry Brown: Zero Income Tax Harry Browne, he is the only candidate who promises to uphold the constitution with no apology! Harry Browne because he is the only candidate that represents radical change. Maybe what Harry Browne; Will put abortion issue in hands of states Browne--believes he can clean-up a system which is a mess. Bill Clinton-because if a Republican is elected with a Republican Congress, this country will be racked with a budget-slashing conservatism that will hit the poor and middle the hardest and benefit the rich and big business the most. Rush Limbaugh because he is the only one that had good views We need a president with integrity and one that the people know where he stands on issues. Harry Browne Harry Browne because I can't stand seeing a third of my income being spent on useless things that don't work, like the drug war. Harry Browne - Becuase he's the only one talking about the MAJOR changes that need to be made in government Harry Browne-he will eliminte the IRS If only Alan Keyes, a man of integrity and Constitional & common sense, could be president... bob dole Harry Browne, Has good ideas, is honest. Not a pol pro. Alan Keyes- strong opponenet of abortion jack kemp, best suited for the job- lots of experience as a politician Harry Browne, because he is a Libertarian. Steve Forbes: has a philosophy the nation needs Harry Browne... The only candidate I have heard who swears to follow the Bill of Rights and Constitution literally. Bill Clinton, because he is a tolerant Christian who knows how to do government and has high moral values which translate into good policy. Senator Hatfield of Oregon. He comes up with very practical solutions. harry browne,because the gov't is too damn big! Bill Clinton Gene Taylor, a true conservative democrat (dixiecrat) Harry Browne, because there is no alternative. Bob Dole, because at least he's a Republican and we might gets some bills sighned into law. Harry Browne--He's not an authoritarian or a socialist, he's Libertarian and I share his views. Harry Browne: because government doesn't work. Dick Lamm. He wants to build the country for the future instead of trying to please everyone right now Harry Brown or Steve Forbes, because they would help remove gov't from our lives Harry Browne, to get some new ideas into the ring Harry Brown or Se Harry Browne-- Because the other two are Hacks ! Dick Lamm. He wants to build the country for the future instead of trying to please everyone right now Richard Lamm; New party, good ideas Pat Buchanan Harry Browne - He'll REALLY make good changes in the country! Harry Browne Harry Browne(L), because he'd challenge the statist status quo. Harry Browne harry browne Bob Dole Harry Browne, I like what the libertarian party has to say for the most part. Bill Clinton, appears to be looking after the interest of the Senior Citizens and the working class people. Harry Browne. We need freedom now, no more death, and destruction by government, or government-created environments. Clinton. Why fix what ain't broke. Clinton--A Republican will be obligated to its riht wing constituancy to load the courts witth the likes of Clarence Thomas and ditto for the Cabinet officers, public prosicuters, etc. etc. etc. Pat Buchanan, the man has never said something that I disagree with. Jack Kemp His ideas on invigorating everyones competative nature. Anybody But Clinton Harry Browne, because people would rather decide where to spend their money Harry Browne, everyone is tired of Republican/Democrat bs I feel like the government has far overstepped the boundaries laid out for it in the constitution. To prevent further intrusions into Americans' personal affairs, I would elect Harry Browne. Harry Browne because I'm tired of the corrupt power junkies! Browne, because the Fed. gov. is just too darned big. BOB DOLE--TOUGH AND SMART!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!! Pat Buchanan because he will live up to the obligations he assumes in his oath of office to "protect and defend the Constitution of the United States of America from all enemies foriegn and domestic". Harry Browne he would restore the constitution Harry Browne - We need a change. Ralph Nader Harry Browne, because I belive a lot of our problems stem from wating our money on non-problems like drugs, tax-evasion, etc. Harry Browne: Because he seems to have "common sence", unlike the other candidates. Harry Browne: Yes, I would like to never pay income taxes again if it meant losing my favorite government program! Let's have a President who believes in the Bill of Rights and the Constitution! Harry Browne Looks at real issues not the blame game Ralph Nader. Because he suports the best most egalitarian economic structures and social programs. He is the only candidate who is outspokenly anti-racist, feminist, pro-queer, and ant--classist. It is ridiculous that the creaters of this poll list the Green Party as a party affiliation, but do not list the Green party candidate as a choice amongt a lot of less viable and less well known candidates. Ralph Nader is the only candidate that supports a platform that can maximize freedom for everyone throuh maximizing equality. Harry Browne. His appraoach to limited fedral government is the most sensible approach to solving the problems that the federal government inflicts on people Harry Browne he's the only honest one running Harry Browne; Dems + Reps = Big(ger) Govt. & more socialism BOB DOLE TO SAVE AMERICA Harry Browne. Get Big Brother off my back. I'm a big boy now! Harry Brown or Mrs Dowle I would like to see Steve Forbes as president because, I feel that his "outsider" status and personal fortune would insulate him from the "business as usual" that infest national politics harry browne - he believes in what he says Harry Browne - The Libertarians are the only party that wants to bring real change to the government. Harry Browne, Principled, Would cut government to constitutional size Harry Browne, because he is a constitutionalist and belives in a constitutional republic. He shares the ideas of our founding fathers, and I believe he is correct in doing so. Harry Browne - He'll revive the principles as spelled out in the Declaration of Independence and the Bill of Rights. harry brown message is the best i have heard in years Richard Lamm, because he's unafraid to speak unpopular truths. HARRY BROWNE LIBERTARIAN President Clinton has grown on the job Ralph Narder - the one party system is not working! Harry Browne, we need less government with lower taxes. The democrats and republicans have destroyed the country of our forefathers and I want it back according to the constitution. Harry Browne - Good sense, solid values, has'nt been "bought out" Harry Brown or Pat B. Out of the two remaining candidates, Bob Dole. I believe he is a very sincere man who loves his country. He has shown he knows how to run on the national level and noone deserves the job more than him. HARRY BROWNE, GOVERNMENT IS FAR TOO BIG Harry Browne, to restore the Constitution. Richard Lamm Harry Browne, the salvation of this great country relies on a reduction in government. Harry Browne because he says, understands and MEANS that government doesn't work. Paul Wellstone, because he has the balls to tell the truth and isn't in bed with moneyed interests Harry Browne--knows what makes for a moral government and knows how to begin the move toward that moral government. Jack Kemp or Bill Bradley: honorable men, neither of whom is running. We need campaign finance reform!!!!!!!! Pres. Clinton is my choice. He is a good, kind, humane person who, while making mistakes and straddling on the fence, best represents my own views. He is a decent man and wants to do what's right. His wife is intelligent and an asset to this country. He is not perfect, nor is his wife, but given the choices we have, Bill Clinton is the best President we have had since JFK. The only person who would have been a great president, had he been given the opportunity, was Hubert Humphrey. Harry Browne, because he matches more closely, but not completely, what I believe in BOB DOLE BECAUSE CLINTON IS HORRIBLELFG Clinton, because the public is stupid. Browne, becuase neither Clinton nor Dole are acceptable Ralph Nader bob dole, honesty, honor, character, does not lie and lie like current president and staff Harry Browne. A non-politician with guts & brains. Harry Browne- The only one who will reduce the size of government. Ross Perot, the only one who can get us out of this mess There is no politician that I really want to see as president. It is a choice of the lesser of two evils. Harry Browne Bob Dole - Because Clinton is untruthful. Harry Browne - He will help the economy by making the free market 'free' again. He will also ensure that the citizens of this country enjoy the freedom that they are guaranteed by the US Constitution. Get rid of Federal Government intrusion, and spending. Give rights bacck to the states. Harry Browne.He wants to end the "Insane Drug War" In a race between Dole & Clinton, Dole, since Clinton has completely failed to make any of the changes he set out to, and due to his lackof ability to hold to a stand on any issue. RALPH NADER-he is honest & ethical and has proven it for 30 years. He is the only candidate we can trust and who has the intelligence, the attorney and Capitol Hill background to be "savvy" enough to handle the shysters and specail interest leaches...and all others who have sold out to greed and power. He is alert to the huge and ever growing threat to us all from the corporations. Harry Browne, Agree with all Libertarian Party Policies and with what Harry Browne would implement in particular. Anyone who is not affiliated with either the Democrats or Republicans Bob Dole. Bill Clinton is too far to the left. Harry Browne. His views are closest to my own. Harry Browne since he is a Libertarian Ronald Reagan- Why not the best! Ross Perot We need someone who will balance the buget and be a strong negotiator It doesn't matter Harry Browne. Goverment doesn't work! Dole, He is an honorable man. Clinton is less than honorable, his track record reflects this. Less government and repeal laws restrictive to individual freedoms Pat Buchanan: He has the best policies on abortion, trade, immigration, taxation, education, and morality. Harry Browne, reduce government,manage expenses,restore freedom, Forbes or Gingrich; Stop/shrink government; stop socialism; balance budget & eliminate national debt; get the government out of life and my wallet. Charles E. Collins--He is the only president who would eliminate the federal reserve Bob Dole. Honesty and Leadership abilities are far superior. clinton - he may suffer from the same corrupt tendencies as others in positions of political power BUT at least he has values and wants to accomplisg something besides lining his own pocket and wielding his own influence over others. Hillary Clinton Forbes or Powell, need decisive individual as president Harry Browne; the only candidate who truly believes in returning liberty to the people. Harry Browne! Buchanan - Return control of the country to it's citizens HARRY BROWNE the ONLY CHOICE!!! Campaign over. Someone who will truly act on getting to less government intrusion into the private citizens life and support the return to instituting the much trampled upon rights outlined in the Constitution. Harry Browne. The only candidate who is committed to smaller government, a balanced budget, and lower/no income tax. General Colin Powell. He's the on;y one I've seen that I feel I can trust. Gerald Horne, because he would fight for working class people I cannot find argument with the platform of Harry Brown, but I find it difficult to empathize with the platform of Republicrats or repeat the mistake of wasting my vote on Mr. Perot. Bill Clinton Above Dole..Dole is less trustworthy Harry Browne - Time to try something new since the Two Party system isn't working. I would like to see Harry Browne or 2nd choice- Jack Kemp Dole, because his life is an example of what this country is about. Clinton, because he'll be best for ALL people, not just the rich. More gun control Ralph Nader Robert Dole. excellent Character, years of experience, Bill Bradely - a solid moderate. Harry Browne. More Freedom. Less Government Taxation/Regulation. Harry Browne -- The only candidate willing to REDUCE federal government! Bob Dole - He is an honest-up-standing person who doesn't lie Browne - Agree completely with his platform Bill Clinton - it's simple, Clinton's the best man for the job We need a return to Constitutional government! Harry Browne because he will reduce the size and power of the federal government drastically! Harry Browne for President Bob Dole, because he is the only one who can beat Clinton now Harry Browne - Only one left who respects our Constitution. We need a president who be unwaivering in his/her representation of the US. Someone who will stand their ground w/out compromising the integrity of the White House. Bob Dole has the ability, over Clinton, to do this. Harry Browne because I believe he is the only candidate that will truly reduce government and taxation. Dole the only man running that can win and is not a crook. Harry Browne Colin Powell - He appears to be honest, sincere and not a hard liner. perot Harry Browne is the only candidate who has presented a coherent set of ideas, coherent because it is based on strict adherence to the Constitution. Bob Dole Bob Dole..because character DOES matter! bob dole. because bill clinton SUCKS!!!!!!!!!!!! Harry Browne - The only candidate who advocates restoring the Federal system of government as defined in the Constitution. Ross Perot. He is dedicated to political reform and is open to new ideas. Harry Browne, because I feel the Libertarian platform offers the best hope for America's future. Jack Kemp - Sincere interest in responsible governemt and knows how to do it. Bob Dole...He's conservative Harry Browne. Because we are selling out our children. Bob Dole, Mr. Clinton is morally bankrupt. Harry Browne. I believe in the principles of the Libertarian Party. Anyone but Bill Clinton, We need an honest president! Browne - our county would benifit from a libertarian influence Harry Browne because I would like to see his Libertarian plan of action given a chance to work. Harry Browne - Time to start over with original constitutional limits Dick Lamm: a candidate to tie the overlapping political loose ends together. Harry Browne. The most important issue for me is to reduce the size of government Dole-Leader, military experience, honest and trustworthy Harry Browne because I think it is the best chance to reduce the size of government! Harry Browne, because he is the only candidate that believes in the individuals ability to take of themselves. Harry Browne, Dole and Clinton are not talking issues and there seems to be little difference between the 2. Harry Browne, Balance the budget now, not in 7,5 or 20 years, Bob Dole, because he is more trustworthy harry browne. the us gov. cannot and cannot be expected to provide for the needs of the people. the people provide there own needs. we need the government out of our lives, as much as possible, in order to do so. therefore the washington beaurocracy needs to be dismantled and Browne is the only candidate who is likely to do that. George Bush; he is the greatest president ever! Mr. Browne. Get Gov. out of our lives. Bill Clinton is the best person for the job. BOB DOLE. Of the candidates running, he offers the best chance of implementing pro-growth policies and reforming the government HARRY BROWNE-HE'S ENTITLED TO MATCHING FUNDS-BUT HE WON'T TAKE THEM. NO WELFARE FOR POLITICIANS. THE ONLY HONEST MAN RUNNING FOR PRESIDENT. Harry Browne. His ideals match my political beliefs almost exactly. He would pull the US military out of other countries, and drastically reduce the national debt and tax burdens. He also believes in eliminating victimless crimes. The best canditate. Preferably one who has no preordained political agenda. Bill Clinton has been a good president and deserves a second term. Harry Browne Bill Clinton-- after rocky start w/ appointments+health care, I feel he's done a pretty good job. Economy is a +, Somalia+, Bosnia+, N. Ireland+, Middle East+, Family Leave Act+, NAFTA+... if, however, he has deep involvement in filegate (the only 'scandal' with any substance), he should step down. Ralph Reed He's the man! Bill Clinton-- after rocky start w/ appointments+health care, I feel he's done a pretty good job. Economy is a +, Somalia+, Bosnia+, N. Ireland+, Middle East+, Family Leave Act+, NAFTA+... Bob Dole - This country needs to get back to real leadership. Pat Buchanan Richard Lamm--He's not Clinton or Dole and is well qualified. Let's shake up the entrenched political system. Dwight David Eisenhower....8 years of low taxes, amazing prosperity, world peace, a REAL leader Clinton knows about the FBI files! A 'snafu'? Yeah right! Bob Dole - he will bring back some dignity and honesty to the White House and the country. Bob Dole, because Buchanan wont get the nomination and he isnt Clinton.. Ralph Nader because he's for the average person Harry Browne because he would actually try to reduce the size and role of governmentby both eliminating programs and taxes AT THE SAME TIME Harry Browne, because he's the only candidate that understands that Government Doesn't Work! He won't try to fix it. He'll try to shrink it! Harry Browne because I agree with every single point on his platform Browne. The government IS the problem. Harry Browne - Only candidate who will reduce government HARRY BROWNE-ONLY BROWNE HAS THE GUTS & UNDERSTANDING AS TO WHY THE FAILED PROHIBITION OF DRUGS IS DESTROYING OUR SOCIETY & OUR LIBERTIES!!!!!!! Bob Dole, because he is the best man for the job. I would like to see Ralph Nader for President. For over twenty years he has been a stauch consumer advocate who speaks for people, not politics. Ralph Nader because he is a Green! HARRY BROWNE Pat Buchannan, only real pro-life candidate Bob Dole because he has Military Experience and is has Morals and a wife who would make a very gracious First Lady Colin Powell because the two main candidates - Clinton and Dole - are mired down in a campaign that is an insult to voters. I believe Powell is well qualified and would adhere to policies, issues, planning for America instead of feeling "entitled" by his party to win at any cost Bill Clinton - We need someone who will at least to some degree, stand-up for the middle to lower classes, and will not allow religious nuts legislate how we live, and also, to keep corporations from destroying the Earth. Harry Browne. The Rebublicans and Democrats are merely two different heads on the same statist body. We need less government, less taxes, and more individual freedom. We also need a government free from the influence of those who would have us live according to their particular religious tenets. A Libertarian government is the only way to achieve this. Rick Thompkins, The Right To Arms issue defines the candidate who trusts the people. Steve Forbes on most issues (taxes, abortion, business), Pat Buchannan on emotional energy and nationalism. The bottom line: we conservatives haven't a slick willy this time around! Bob Dole- He's moderate, as are, in my opinion, most Americans. I belive he would be a president for all Americans. Harry Browne. He will severely curtail the whole government bureaucracy, get the government out of our private lives, and promote the Libertarian ideas. Bill Clinton. Record of achievements speaks for itself. Don't believe GOP election-year sleezemongering. Bill Clinton, Because I feel he is more genuinally interested in improving conditions for all Americans not just the wealthy and privlaged, I also fear the social conservatism prevalent within the Republican party. Bob Dole, lesser of 2 evils, the most likely to win on the republican ticket. Clinton's whitehouse has had to many problems due to lack of experience, lack of deciseveness, lack of moral leadership and standards. Dole He has the experience and the ability to lead N. Gingrich. Rush Limbaugh because we need someone with a set of goals and priorities that can be identified and counted on, someone who has beliefs and principles. Bob Dole - He has the experience, integrity, and values this country needs - and he is not a dishonest, sleazy, liar lik Bill Clinton! Dole, because I cannot trust Clinton with the future of this country! Dole. Leadership..someone who will work with congress. Bob Dole because we need a leader with conservative values, experience in Government, and one with CHARACTER!!! Harry Browne who will REALLY reduce the size and intrusion of government. Bill Clinton, because I believe that he is more pragmatic than Dole. Ronald Reagan - reasons: 1983-1987, in the USA. Ralph Nader, because he has a proven record of advocating for "we, the people". Ralph Nader/eliminate pac's, campaign reform, take care of the planet, reform healthcare...dems & reps won't do it, they serve each other & follow party bosses like sheep. Bob Dole because the Clintons are a joke ! rush limbagh Bob Dole because of his positions on lovcal vs national govt, balamced budget and I have no trust that I can believe anything Clinton says!!! Bob Dole; honest,, cares more about the country than himself Pat Buchanan, because I am Pro-Life and believe in America First! IMPEACH CLINTON IN '96!!!!!!!!!! Harry Browne -- the ONLY one who truly will REDUCE govt Dole, Clinton is a Socialist The country must have a man with integrity; Bob Dole has it; Clinton, a con-man and a liar, does not. I will vote for Dole in 1996. Bill Clinton, because he is pro-choice and I understand his stand in the issues. president clinton he works hard Pat Buchanan. I believe he Ralph Nader, because he's the only candidate with any integrity. Ralph Nader. Bill Bradley if he were running. Ralph Nader - would help return the power to the people rathar than corporate America Harry Browne - He would significantly downsize the federal government. Bill Clinton- The lesser evil (by far) Bob Dole because the current president is an embarrasment to our country with all his lies and cover ups. Bill Clinton's victory. Bob Dole is out of touch Buchanan-for moral,eonomic,social and national security reasons Clinton -- he won't screw up too badly. HARRY BROWNE, HE WILL SHAKE THINGS UP AND GET THE COUNTRY MOVING IN SOCIAL EVOULOTION AS WELL AS JUDITIAL ,REFORM. Bob Dole, because he has character. And, with a Republican held congress, he can get out the conservative ideas, without interference and lies put out by liberal democrats, so that people can actually see what the Republicans stand for, AMERICA!!!!!!! Less government, balanced budget, and more individual responsibility. Bob Dole is an all-around good man, and will make an excellent president in '96. President Bob Dole!!!! Harry Browne to reduce size & intrusion of government Harry Browne. He would restore the government to the role outlined in the Constitution. I believe Bill Bradley would make an excellent president. He is intelligent and respected by the US People. He could be the only choice able to unify the two parties. President Clinton and his wife, guilty or not , right or wrong have made Washington ineffective and more like a children's SHOUTING MATCH. !!! Harry Browne because government coersion is still coersion and should never infringe upon anyone who is not harming others. *Whom* I want is just about any libertarian or or libertarian-Republican, rather than a collectivist (Democrat, Socialist, etc.) Bill Clinton He is our hope for the moderate view in the national government. Harry Browne -- More Freedom Less Taxes Steve Forbes dole, because clinton reminds me of a used car salesman dole, because clinton reminds me of a used car salesman I would like to see an individual who will come out and say: "Look people, this country is 4trillion in debt, education sucks and we need to fix it. Someone has to suck it up and make it better for those who follow after." Harry Browne is the only candidate calling for the end to the "war on durgs" and assett fofeiture. Bob Dole- Conservative Bob Dole - He has dignity and experience in government. harry browne because government is out of control! B.Clinton...He has put the economy back on the rite track Bob Dole. I think he would return some class to the white house that the Clintons have destroyed. David Duke, because he will stop the destruction of the White Race Harry Browne. I trust neither Clinton nor Dole to say what they mean and do what they say--they're too busy trying to appeal to everyone to do what's best for the nation as a whole. Harry Browne, because he's the only one who truely respects the bill of rights. browne less government intrusion, no IRS!!! Buchanan. He puts America, it's workers, it's military ahead of foreign interests. He seems more honest and forthright than most other candidates. I would expect him to DO as he SAYS, not say one thing and do another. Drugs Legalized Bob Dole I feel he displays more of the qualities I find essintial in a president Harry Browne, because he represents a philosophy desperately needed by this country. Charles Collins. The only candidate who respects the Constitution,will repeal the Federal reserve act and get us out of the UN. Dan Quayle. Who is a strong leader with good moral sense. Bob Dole because he has the honesty and character that I would like to see in my President. Bill Clinton because he is the lesser of all evils clinton Harry Browne or Ralph Nader, because the two-party system is pathalogic Dole-he's honest and sincere. He might do what he says he'll do. Harry Browne: We MUST take the power back from the elitist oligarchy inside the Beltway and return it to individual Americans. bob dole - best available choice Right now, the best choice is Dole. However, you left the most important issue to me out of question 13. I want someone who is HONEST. That is the most important quality that I would look for in a President. A third party canidate winning would break the monoply and corruption from both the Democrates and Republicans. New visions are need to lead the country at its most troubled times. We don't need poll watching leadership (Clinton and Dole). dole Clinton. He's done a very good job so far Harry Browne - That government governs best which governs least Jack Kemp because he supports a flat tax and he is a social conservative. Harry Browne. Why? Read his book! Harry Browne, because the demopublicans are pro big govt, no matter what they claim Bob Dole, because you can trust him. Harry Browne. I want government out of my life. I believe that the Republican and Democratic parties have exercised an oligopoly over political thinking for too long. If this country is to be saved, it will be by neither of these parties, but be a third. I like Browne, I like his ideas, he has no chance, I'll vote for him anyway. Bob Dole - he's the best of the two.... Harry Browne, B/C He seems to be the candidate with views closest to mine. Harry Browne or Rick Tompkins. I want a Libertarian. Richard Lamm A non-politition Harry Brown - The problem is the System. Need Minimal System. Harry Browne. We need to get the federal government out of our businesses and out of our bedrooms Bill Clinton been in office to long to give up now. Browne, only one with a plan to drastically reduce the size of the federal government Someone I feel I can trust who has demonstrated his/her dedication to the future of this country. Bob Dole , he is trustworthy, experienced, and good for us. Clinton. He has his eye on the future more than almost any other politician I have seen. His personal life is his own business, if Hillary is satisfied, that is all that matters. His strengths are also his weaknesses. His ability to weigh options and seek compromise is good. He can be forceful and strong when necessary. The hardest folks for him to be strong with are his own constituency who are often too reluctant to compromise. Bob Dole! He's fair and would provide much a needed values injection into the White House. Harry Brownwe, because he stands for radically less government intrusion in the economic and personal lives of the citizens of this country. Clinton, Because the Republician party is against black and other minorities bob dole-honest, experienced-decent human being Clinton, he has kept many of his promises despite what you hear from Newt and his friends Bill Clinton. 1- We know how he reacts. 2- No preferable choice. the best--and we do not have the best choices Harry Browne uh, i guess clinton is the more, aah, how to put this, YOUTHFUL of the two, but really, both suk. Bob Dole He has basic moral character and understands that ultimately God decides what is right and what is wrong. Harry Browne. Constitution, taxation, end this stupid war on drugs. Harry Browne, because he believes in reducing Government. Government doesn't work. ALAN kEYES moral and honest Lowell Weicker, former gov. of my home state and a tough, no nonsense leader with broad political experience and a moderate outlook Forbes/Engler vs Powell/Kemp real candidates, real issues! real choices!!! NO BOZOs!! Bob Dole - Honesty, integrity, experience, would support republican agenda Pat Buchanan-- two words -- CHRISTIAN COALITION Harry Browne, to return gov't back to minimal intrusion upon its citizens. Harold Brown because he could stop Democratic efforts to rule your finances and Republican bills that would rule your private lives. Ross Perot, because our country is not so much a government as it is a big business, and Ross Perot understands business, as opposed to economic theory; he understands what is ruining this country, and his approach is absolutely on track - I came to these conclusions BEFORE I ever heard of Ross Perot. Clinton - Clinton has the interest of the people at heart. Dole is a professional politician with too many strings attached. Ted Gunderson, former head of FBI in LA he is knowledgeable about many skeletons that show how corrupt the system has become. Harry Browne because he will uncompromising in support of freedom, liberty, and smaller government. any republican- the further to the right the better. Dole is the only choice right now. Questions, comments, suggestions? Contact us. Return to theHome Page. Copyright ©1996, /InterCommerceCorporation, All rights reserved worldwide Send comments to Webmaster@Survey.net WT02-B22-17IA060-000333-B020-348http://www.survey.net:80/inet1c.html 204.107.221.240 19970115054039 text/html 51551HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 15 Jan 1997 05:34:23 GMTServer: Apache-SSL-US/1.0.3+1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 51368Last-modified: Mon, 13 Jan 1997 18:25:12 GMT SURVEY.NET - Internet Survey #1 - User Comments (Latest) Your source for information, opinions & demographics from the NetCommunity! ANNOUNCING: The Internet's finest interactive, totally-automated,immediate survey system. We can take any form and instantly create adynamic demographic database and show you the results as soon as youcomplete the survey! Internet Survey #1 User Comments What else do you like to do on the Internet? research competition Sought (and found) answers to difficult factual questions [as a reference librarian] read newspaper sports sections across the US propagandize business research Flirted try to find information promotions/business contacts Kill time!!! Travel information Online corporate communications Fill out surveys.... locate people,connect to our Univesity Library system,entertainment Listen to music before I buy it Look up data for referencing, shop, obtain BETA programs, get plug-ins, Research purposes local events search for relatives -- Elaborate information contents to be placed and used on Internet just surf I like the naked pictures of woman they have, and how easy it is to get them. Also i think that there need to be more XXX sites and no regulations on naked pictures Lots of stuff Play games, Mainly research on companies,latest corporate news, and some newspaper/magazine reading. read the newspaper Become a thorn in the sides of Politicions, and protect our history. seek employment Look for information that I can use in my job. Try to learn about the WWW (I'm a new user) utilize data services and other research sources Play Games Find information on Sailormoon! Take free online classes. Answer questions of newsgroups users. provide access for others booked travel You mention it, but didn't give me a way to cite it: research Look for market opportunities look for merchandise I cannot conveniently find in my city Comunicate with friends and relatives around the world Use it as a primary information source. play games Research, upload photography to website i would like to have a email address on net. Surf to find out the latest information in cosmetic surgery and beauty treatments loooking for job opportunities check on my mutual fund You didn't ask any questions regarding time spent on the internet. I'm usually on between 1-10 or 12 hrs/day depending. Unbelievable!!! reading news, playing games, communication Have fun Communication reading news, playing games, online chat I often read news from internet. I also often get information which is very helpful to my MBA study from different web sites. plan vacations look for information and sports results Internet Banking applications development & promotion download reserch info. Surf. the survey was done under duress! make freinds Wait and wait and wait and wait and wait and wait wait and wait and ! Plunging the Stygnian depths of depravity and researching the vast amounts of truly bizarre perversion on the Internet. Reading on-line newspapers, In company Intranet, Obtaining information about different companies play games teleworking group work find product information on expected purchases, research my competitors in the heating and air industry, looking for opportunities post concert announcements in classical music pages: research barcodes in survey documents and backup materials for submitting research grants in social science research Just research only! brouse search information about my work I shoot goats in Colombia I chase after small rodents electronic Commerce Surf Lurk a lot hack your ass nothing chatting!!!!!!!!!!!!!!! often, it takes quiet sometime to download the information not fast enough for us staying in africa My friends at this school essentially have what seems like an exchange-student in cyberspace program ... we've gotten to be good friends with people halfway around the world :) Answer surveys market analysis, research, check out the sports news Keep in touch with family. market research I just wonder around explore, learning, look at things other than erotic imagery. Multi-level marketing Test marketing, competitor monitoring THE BEST THING ABOUT THE INTERNET IS THAT IT HAS ALLOWED AFRICAN AMERICANS AND OTHERS INTEREESTED IN JUSTICE GET OUT THE TRUTH ABOUT THE RACIST LAPD, THE RACIST FBI, THE RACIST LA DA'S OFFICE AND THE REACIST MAJOR MEDIA WHO TRIED SO HARD TO FRAME MR. OJ SIMPSON AND ARE NOW TRYING TO SKEW THE FACTS IN THE DOUBLE JEAPORDY PERSECUTION HE IS BEING MADE TO SUFFER THROUGH NOW. NO JUSTICE, NO PEACE! getting goods idea from the Net To supplement our searches from the commercial database vendor such ah Lexis/Nexis participate in surveys and look at all the free porn!! woo woo!! I have been attempting to utilize the Internet for the past 6 montha now! My level of frustration has peak more than once. If you would like specific information or an opionion from less computer-intellengent end-userson, please contact me at mbk@netwalk.com or at 614-766-0104 direct voicemail. I look forward to hearing from you. Thank you for your time. look for conspiratorial historical viewpoints create customer applications/intranets I also use the internet for finding government inf. get information on any given subject, anytime, quickly I think that pretty much covers it. I am also currently learning how to create web pages. watch who are on the net research for thesis Revolutionize the economic and sociocultural paradigms of the entire world. I like the chat lines to relax and meet new people Keep The Internet Free!!! The Internet is the best means of communicating, researching and shopping. mainly surf for interesting things. chat projects for school Use it to find information that I am intersted in, Learn about spoliers for favorite tv shows. Chat with friends across the country, Surf for lesson plans and get stats for fantasy football. Survey competitor activity Research info for work; get travel info Learn aboutart and science, astronomy, geology etc Visit the Museums. Track industry & internet development; advertise a rental property; keep track of happenings in regions where my family lives (CA & UK); pursue other hobbies, like growing bromeliads or herbs; consult user groups for advice, i.e. house remodelling. Searched for business associates, old friends, unknown family members. Gone on to chat. conduct research Internet BBSes games We all use PC's. Mac is dead. Browse to find interesting information. look for things that I am interested in research and play Research for graduate program, research marketing trends, entertainment I enjoy looking through the various pages on the internet that are relovent to my education, although I have found at time that there is very little information regarding the world of agriculture, which I find disappointing. Promote our Webpage and services I spend very little time on the internet, I spend the majority of my time online on BBSes... Read News (Usa Today, the Times, etc...) subscribe to special interest group mailing lists to monitor them buy second-hand stuff off vendors on Usenet news look up specific niche information on various topics - scientific topics, travel info, people Work I get nude pictures....;) ideas sharing I learn about my future i.e. College, Carrer a great research tool Business and personal research, find travel information, download recipes i take survys Play chess online The internet is the worlds greatest storefront, and I love to window shop. research looking bfor information download updates and freeware expose the truth about the cult of scientology Internet Phone we have meetings of ppl from israel who use the same internet chat sites download books & read magazines read a lot of ezines Watch the legal battles using other survers (AOL, Compuserve) have found that the chat rooms are superior compared to those that you give us to try to work with!!! Upload my fan fiction Just surf for fun! research Find uncensored information Do these damn surveys. operate mailing list surf the web How about listing AT&T's Worldnet enter contests and request catalogues Search for general interest inormation download legal software Research in various fields of interest to myself and my family. moderate a mailing list; teach people to use the internet; teach online courses Surveys Read foreign press Look up information regarding my pets (tropical fish) Study it! Fill out political opinion surveys ont the WWW. I do my school on the internet, well kinda. I do my school on the computer but we use the internet to comunicate with my teachers and class mates. Plus I use the internet for Lot of research. work for internet provider kill time --surf investing Random surfing Most of my time is spent on education and some entertainment. Often the two can be combined very well. I like the ability to find out anything I want to know about. To me, education is entertainment. SURF! :) Ftp, telnet (not to MUD's) Distributed technology development write about it It's better than my Cable System surf In addition to Education and Entertainment, I use the FTP sites to upgrade my systems capabilities. i've met old high school friendz and kept friendships with people i just met...it's an interesting way to get the news and keep in touch with friendz and loved ones who r either in the U.S. or abroad...i hope the internet doesn't get regulated any time soon!! Research, Surf to find out what's there.. aol sucks Marketing surveys for potential clients on interent service including comparison of web pages. research search music related topics on the www Design Websites Listening to the music, Voting My internet/WWW usage is a close call between communication and edutainment. If I had more time, I would use it for more things. Type in random domain names and I'm amased at what I get. Ex: Spanky.com, jacko.com, bannana.com, etc. Surfing the web is mostly what I do, I'm interested in surching for the things that interest me. I always look in the classified section of my local newspaper on the web. I need a better job!!! Educate myself.. Get information to better do my job. Reading newspapre I use the internet to collect data on the illegal and criminal activities of the clinton adminstration long distance talking for FREE Keep track of tyranny Read newsgroups. Take over the world!!! Earthlink is my GREAT ISP! You ask dumb questions. Read fan written fiction which is stored on ftp sites and/or sent through e-mail to a group Contribute to world spanning projects (LINUX) download occult and macabre info and images using it for getting software (linux) Webphone! mostly i browse around and research areas of interest i didn't have time for before retirement. planned holidays I'm to cheep to buy a newspaper, so I read 'em free simply surf Like to see what others have done, for ideas. Subscribe to mailing list, use e-mail, but not as primary use. Nothing research for classes and meet lots of friends:) get updates on computer products, take polls, etc. research, communications, exposure to new ideas Enter contests and sweepstakes Read and research existing information. Will (in the near future) conduct business over the Internet through email and advertising. e-mail Read Dilbert Comic Strips Downloaded lots of shareware. discussions on IRC. collected info. pedophilia.girls have you check out my home page and fill out polls: http://home.earthlink.net/~lundstrom Look nfor stock quotes, gourmet recipes, we did look for our second car in the internet too. I am still overwhelmed as I learn the scope of what I have ahold of. If there would have been computers when I was going to school I can't even imagine what I would have turned out to be. Anything I wanted to be I guess. Somewhere down the line, what we're using now will seem silly to some. Besides research, I find the internet and excellent opportunity to educate myself on subjects and in fields that are either too prohibitively expensive or are not offered at a educational instiution or by seminar anywhere local to me. distribute mah myoozak It's too awesome for words. I surf everything. I love quizzes, surveys, interactive stuff & genealogy. So much available education & entertainment on the Net - when are we going to find the Internets Anonymous page? This is the most addicting thing I've ever encountered. I suppose it's better than the alternative addictions. Love these surveys. Let the people speak! it's the future, and i like it! use at home to search job databases, gather information about home decorating, reading newspapers, researching a wide range of statistics about various areas of interest such as the social impact of the internet and the www and uses for the technology int Explore all kinds of wonderful information from all over the world, especially in the sciences. research info for my history class I teach Conduct genealogical research communicate with others, find statistics evaluate plug-ins for possible commercial use Chat Chat Chat and have fun! download programs I have a ball exploring all the wonderful places I probably wouldn't get to visit in person. Family History Research I find whatever I need Ni box for Internet Service Provider, just BBS....seriously flawed survey run my business www.ripweb.com self publish my work (art, book) Research, review other sites Research search for career opportunities Keep it Free!! your chices in each catagory are too confining. we subscribe to lists for hobbies, specific interests as well as newsgroups, do a lot of browsing and research subjects we didn't have time for before and for friends not yet online. Waste time. Aside from games, what else you gonna do? Keep up on government Read and explore Great educational resource/ learning aid. PointCast!!!!! I'm a weather junkie so I use intellicast and The Weather Channel to find out what I need to know about the weather. Also I've done some family history research through the web. Run for elected office. College research. Contact hardware and software vendors. Reference, encyclopedia, entertainment, museums relax you don't want to know check accessibility for people with disabilities answer survey (WOW! Somebody is willing to listen to my opinions, cares what I say, and doesn't tune out??!?! check message boards Chat Answer surveys Seek info related to Politics searching for informations/ chatting Sex Learn, people, cultures, new ideas, new products, endless new learning opportunities. Talk with friends who no longer live close by. Job seeking Chat work U think I'm gonna answer any of that? spy on competition dsadftgadfgbadfgasdfg You should have a survey related to the positive/negative affects of the internet and it uses.. I haven't done any of the items listed in the last question and I hope that others would retain a moral sense of decency. Say what you want but say it responsibly. Thank you. I bombard American Companies with complaints about their use of American English eg. COLOR instead of UK English eg. Colour. They just do not understand that International English is UK English not their regional hybrid. alternative research venue read online literature, stort stories, poetry, articles, etc listen....(realaudio) Get daily news; read daily Far Side comics; read newspapers from other cities; check stock prices. study languages and other things you can't learn locally I�m a www newbee ... :-) demographics I LIKE TO DOWNLOAD PORNOGRAPHY!! AM I ALLOWED TO SAY FUCK HERE? research work related subjects competitive research read newsgroups play Xpilot lots It's very hard to find places to chat with someone my own age. My daugher has looked everywhere for places over 40 but not too many were found and if they were, you had no place to "jump on in" and chat. read want ads; learn to fix things; answer others' questions; fill out surveys; buy synthesizers; read about electronics; argue politics; laugh; spread infectious ideas Purchased items from other individuals via newsgroups. Search for information drink beer I am new to all this. JOB HUNT mailing lists have fun! make my living! learn communicate Research for specific information on various topics. Search for Financial Investment Tips I've found lost friends through search engines. And I would NEVER date someone I met online. course work is primarily available on-line (for Com Sci classes at least) Constantly keeping up with new technologies/plugins for Web enhancement. (Videoplayers,RealAudio,VRML, etc.) when surfing the net I stop at a lot of sites that I never would have known about and have learned alot. My use of the internet is through a small, local provider. Find people whom I have lost touch with and search for my family name. this and that :) I publish my own writing on-line I am a student at Georgia Tech and all of my classes are on the Internet. research for a masters in communication fill out dumb surveys Play Hearts via Gaming Zone Promote my business! Learn web design techniques conduct research/check out stock quotes Use Internet voice communication I am very new - Geneanolgy Research, mainly. Query others in BBS services for ideas/information. Use to learn more about contemporary visual arts endeavors/resources/marketing Chat on politics channels Masturbate. browse the web, play games used to gather information for college classes. Still trying to find chat rooms worldwide. Download free software search for product information and compare prices when possible checkout magazine and news articles I try very hard with out much success to avoid flame wars... BE A HERO, ACT LIKE A HERO educate myself before making a purchase Internet Telephone Read Newspapers Third: newsgroups. research information collecting information Got information. Sent e-mail. Consulted newsgroups look at non-erotic pictures Found movie listings run a web server and am an ISP for Delaware work on interactive tutorials Just browse around, collecting interesting data Research competitor information surf job search I'd tell, but it's just too sick... that's about it, I believe... Special Interests made friends teach Actually, I'm still getting familiar with it. just look to see what is out there See sports scores and stock quotes, updated! i'm webmaster Tell friends about interesting sites I have found. surf!!! do research for articles I write Reasearch/business development take surveys play MUDs(Multi-user dungeons) Ircing! :) get a lot of free samples from companies Browse for interesting topics don't ask research, set up selling, evangalize net Interactivity send free info from http://www.TheList.com/ to AOL and Prodigy subscribers enter contests, research movies, download software spend too much time I read Newspapers from around the world. Promote a Club: GMRS kill time Quit your job for BOB! search and read Wintalk create art and graphics Contact businesses I would like information from, search information on subjects myself, learn about new products and techniques for use in my business and for my clients, direct access to services with more information than the telephone book, get more d research job search I browse, it's a great learning tool. everything Love to answer these surveys! Love to visit the "cool sites" and funny stuff. Run a business, publish an E-zine Search for Vacation Places download and upload guitar tablature files Bypass Long Distance surf Pray that each one of us does not lose site of the real world outside the Web, you must remember that you can communicate with human beings in the world outside forgive me if I failed to mention first that you can also touch and smell people as well. Don't get so hooked that all you do is hang out with the Internet. Go get some friends damnit! If you don't think you have a problem, then I ask you right now to call one of your closest friends. See...you called a fucking FAX line, you don't have any fiends! So get up right now and go shower and walk down the street and do something with yourself! You know you have a problem if you have taken the time to read all of this crap. "GET OFF THE WEB YOU LOSER!!" Arty Play games, learn about other cultures research Surf at work Listservs chat w/ people and use newsgroups Get information for school statistics projects :) Research Look at pornography surf, research and stay current with what's going on out there. Did I mention working? BBS on the Internet search for information You underestimate the power of local bbs and email networks. And I've been dating the guy I met online for two years now. obtain investment info A mean of trully communication wait download a lot of database material for research download files Enter contests and surveys :) Play Games --- I'm interested in who else plays, how many, etc. Surf for knowledge! Book of the Dead is example. heckle neoNazis on UseNet -- that's entertainment! Introduced two people I knew from the Internet and have started them dating. Reviewing the Business Benefits of the Internet Complete information absorption download messages for my answering machine Develop Ideas. Survey should explore commercial aspects more Genealogy, Politics Check up on my competition What do you mean by "are you a�" read information we are a cybercafe; and offer various consulting services on the Internet. listen to audio tons of research hacking is part of my job, i've to test internet security and performance at my actual job learn research Senegal; look for interesting design ideas Listen to audio read news sources Fuck Hot Women surf around looking for interesting stuff I just love to explore for whatever catches my interest. surf, surf, surf. Use up free time while the weather is bad, any more than that is out of hand. Research ftp subscribe to several listservs read pornography Look at NUDY WOMEN!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!! chat play interactive middle ages roll playing games recruit employees write and report about online marketing and media Gather News interactive games Talk to the Astronauts - NASA Research and explore downloaded other that erotic pictures... Keep up with the NEWS, mainly political... play games smut search It is the main channel and medium for my journalistic work Talk with others via Internet Phone Seeking information for written magazine-articles share info on sites I've located with other people run mailing lists, propose newsgroups, write FAQs, participate in newsgroup creation gather competitive info; gather investment info Download news make company contacts Use telnet to search libraries for research information and get programming assistance for statistics, perl and html. netscape-wonderful program new user Listen to Real Audio news reports Gather Resources (Web Sites) for possible use in classroom, or pass it on to others. locate quality resources to assist others Continue to get amazed.... :-) read magazines and news off the newswire Download software upgrades; education (NASA's Quest Series); worldwide pen-pals read news, do research, get operating system updates, etc. I don't understand this question! particpation in coordination of group activities remote support Conduct research for classes. Have fun! Lots of things! MUD! conduct a part time business surf do research (couldn't check above); download software I use mIRC chat lines. Educate myself Games--Bolo, F/A-18 hornet SEX Listen to RealAudio programs Product support surf!! research, advertising/marketing Cultural Exhange PLay Games keep electronically in touch with new friends non structured info on the WWW Investigate the universe of web computing. enter sweepstakes & contests Browse I like to just look around. There are a lot of sick puppies out there! I read the news. Politics in particular and keep finding more uses. It's fabulousand e multi-site product development Look for jobs - please add this question. Gathering information for marketing use mailing lists e-mail; telnet to do work from home I sold one of my silkscreen art images from my home page gallery display Study and meditate search personal interest info. talk to family and friends through e-mail Have fun. i've met a lot of people from the internet, too bad that i couldn't see what they looked like before i saw them read "City of Bits", constantly upgrade company's anti-virus software. surf - follow a trail.. Use the WWW for work and school information have phun Bypass media/govt. propaganda by going directly to the source Chat on WBS Tune nothing investment information many things. look for business oportunities Makes cross-country fantasy sports leagues possible. enjyoing myself and all of the internet Placed classified ads online. (with success!) suuuuuuuuuuuuuurf !!!!!!!!!!!!!!! Research Research just enjoying it, thank you! Made many close friends read i just gawk at the screen subscribe to a ton of mailing lists Browse various sites for pure entertainment!! just look around and learn Go to the White House, U.S. House, U.S. Senate, TV studios for transcripts and interaction. dfsa nothing BROWSE- I'M STILL NEW Research and development Read Magazines and surveys Explore I complete surveys :-) research Send creative written material surf continuously acces game industries Although I use the internet (which should be censored for things like nudity, people who don't like strong language can leave) primarily for entertainment, I do enjoy being able to find quite a bit of information when the need arises. ?? NOTHING USEnet look look look Participated on dating services. When you are affiliated with a university is is free and therefore GREAT. Otherwise, it is a waste of time, but fun! Download foreign news--newspaper & audio Built business relationships. oj simpson survey Read erotic stories Write Java applets try to learn research competitors PBEM games To get news updates everything downloaded files for research A lot of surfing! Make money gain general knowledge Research on science education Find work. (I'm a writer.) surf have internet sex Surf-Surf-Surf-Surf Get confused, must simplify shopping areas Create copyright free backgrounds for free downloading and use. surveys! send letters to congressmembers, research The Internet will be of great importance in the future. download software, surf Explore products and services When will you send me the results of your survey. kleimanj@gort.canisius.edu MOO - but you might consider that IRC/Chat, but it has elements of programming Answer Surveys Availability of a wide variety of Information visit MSN Its a great outlet for creativity Master of my own domain. buss research check out sound bites STALK NEWSGROUPS FOR PANTYHOSE WEARING MEN. FOUND ONE THAT ALSO USES SUNFLOWER OIL IN HIS BATHTUB. LIKE EXPLICIT HARDCORE ANAL PICYURES - RACE, BREED AND SEX OF SUBJECT IRRELEVANT. I LOVE THAT STORIES ON MUTUAL MASTERBATION WITH HOUSE PETS NEAR BY. SPIT IS THE UNIVERSAL LUBRICANT AND SSECOND ONLY TO SPAM IN DIVINE INSPIRATION. AIN'T AMERICA GREAT!!! BUT IN EUROPE I COULD GET IT WITH GOING TO JAIL. I'm too new to know however, I need more gateways Download software updates nothing email, surf the net...plan to use it for doctoral research Look for information waste endless hours of nonporoductive time meet people I got to know on the net meet interesting people CyberSex Have fun! Go round in circles Utilized Internet to mount and coordinate a human rights campaign. have fun! absorb differant cultures......i have learned more about life...culture and society on the internet than i could have possibly imagined! school and job research review sites research for school i use it as a tool for political organizing Research play games have fun look for information read Chinese newspaper info-gather/brain overload Web page designer IRC chats vote in a poll Search for help w/computer and software The Sports Services are awesome!! Up to date scores ands stats!! look for competitors products Webmaster/Web site developer nued femal Research information that I need for my own knowledge Ask questions about products, geneology,solutions to problems such as teen violence. I use the net as a City Councilman seeking answers to city problems. Get the latest news Have Fun Talk to the MAgic 8-Ball not let the goverment interfer with the internet!!! Research data and articles for downloading Audio Listen to music and annoy the hell out of all the stiffs in this computer lab!!! Sports stats & info. News. I try to sell my Compact Disk Everything, but nothing Download hardware drivers to aid in job. This is new to me... Just logged on today. no spot for housewives in your what are you section. In australia we have blue collar, WHITE COLLAR, and professional classes. I have looked at shareware and will probably buy some. Got informayion from school. entertain Research info, look for business trends Sports Chat, European News, Surveys Surf the internet, it's great! You can read about events and news all over the country and the world. Great resources. Better than the library!! Type download of c-source-code download of source-code in c this survey is rather pathetic. it is completely biased towards common morons, with very little applicable to intelligent informed computer users. Try to provide factual data and reasoned opinions. talk talk talk MUSh Play Bridge @ OKBridge email, telestudent I married him. n/a AWESOME CyberSex Explore!!!! Have fun!!! play general surfing Look for Nude Pictures Check real time wind conditions for windsurfing! I have both direct access to the internet as well as subscribe to E-World keep track of state and federal gov't postings Create Web sites and Internet Marketing programs surf the www job search Masterbate to nude pictures of men Learn about people, places, and things from the people who know it best. There is always someone with the correct answer or information you require. It may take time to find that person, but at least the internet allows you the ability to do so. I like the internet because I can get news not filtered by the current media. They report, for the most part, only what they want me to know and ignore things that are wrong with their belief system and political views. Where are the "investigative repo gather research information read newsgroups Match people and jobs. research, make friends, talk to people entertainment -- browse and play research my personal interest groups Publish news to campus community I'm learning more everyday. Look for jobs waste time (browsing is fun..but not too constructive) video Look for software and information that would help me in my software development efforts. Productivity tools. Take Surveys have fun browse Found people E-mail met friends I made on the Net brouse not that I know of. Manage Coursework and Classes gambling Download .gifs and transfer them to bitmaps. Really like the pictures of foreign countries and landmarks. I love the access to all these nice graphics. search for business opportunities Beats channel-surfing (and cheaper than cable!) anarchy Looked for jobs, looked for information on city where I plan to move. Subscribe to technical-interest listservers Browse all over the place Supporting not for profit org., group and its members make a whole bunch of friends via irc Find the interesting, the humurous and the naughty PLAGIARIZE stuff Meet people in my field, with common interests. Answer surveys; bet you didn't know that nothing, this is only the 3rd time i've been on the internet. Drive out the forces of darkness, then bring them back access timely information I'm a mush-coder Keep the damn prudes off the net! make friends Just mainly read alot Main source of daily news Play Chat on IRC. ENTER CONTESTS Subscribe to another major internet provider Online gameing Explore research Copy html pages as models Coding a MUD Browse talk about Star Trek, meet new friends and have a great time!! poetry General entertainment in surfing the net. Exchange information of personal interest Get Tech Support from Manufacturer e-mail study group learn software Send/receive audio expand my range of knowledge fucking loads, mate entertain myself, search for computer/software soulutions I-Phone, E-Cash... Am currently examining opening an internet service provider copmany Just generally hack around (in the good way, not the bad.) Find other Resources molest sheep Found out who I am Manage one of the Domains (mrwa.wa.gov.au.) Search for Shareware/Freeware I met my husband on the net. One-way and two-way audio communication with others write surveys My whole family is online around the world... Great for cheap and fast communication. MUD Conduct business and meet investment partners online educate myself; look up info; explore contact others in my esoteric academic area enjoy newsgroups I've got new families here. I have a part-time job helping Internet users. Most of what I do is research market research browse; hunt new locations have cybersex conduct research Evaluate Web Sites for clients nil do random chats with strangers your industry categories are stupid Retrieve information and answer questions. cybersex Help people talk to each other Make a living work and study I just criuse - pure information/exploration Watched to part of a TV show that's not available in my area, debated people I've met on the internet, and listened to music. belong to a private e-mail group Put together this presentation! Create Web sites work I enjoy reading information about subjects that I have interest in, such as sports, music, the OJ trial,or trivia. systems consultant Use to communicate and exchange work with customers as a virtual business Look for job ops., company profiles, and good Web pages Surf Usenet News sending articles to E-zines CUSeeMe Video Conferencing Amount of time spent on web - average videoconference find professionally valuable and needed data Expand the conciousness of others whenever and however possible 8) Made a best friend in England who gives me advice on topics I can't discuss with even those close to me. Involved in a Internet-only Mac Programming/Users' Group Contact Congress/ U.S. Government Agencies with my personal views. Research Hot patootie, bless my soul, NETsex and rock'n'roll... :-) search for good games and business related software Basically everything it was meant for. This survey seems to cover the most absurd users. IRC & Write/modify HTML web pages browsing for information Collect worthless information. I think you pretty much have it covered. Downloaded a fair amount of freeware (as well as shareware), a lot of that being Linux-related. Transfer work back and forth between myself and my assistant when one or the other is out of the office (effort _not_ supported by the company) via our personal 'net accounts. watch pages simply for entertainment, like tv Trade Music Tapes Search for business information business Provide and receive emotional help. Researcg Teaching Materials for various topics education Alot.. mostly meet other people. I have met many people with the same interests as myself, and plan to meet many more. hunt for and download software - telecomute,subscribed to ann listed IP look for porn Learn about people I've used the internet to organize a social group and have used the political resources in my work. Enjoy the only availible info. on marijuana publish a cyberzine just getting into real audio work play chess via TELNET sites like FICS Publish things no publisher is likely to touch (too weird) Career Information Nothing else. Information Source n/a I do everything training, publsihing, and consulting Love the backgammon server Some good stuff, but lots of garbage. Worse than TV, overall. IRC is THE BIGGEST WASTE OF TIME I HAVE EVER SEEN! read daily news, research financial interests, locate old friends... subscribed to mailing lists, run mailing lists, Watch all the goofballs start fights in the sports chats Communicate! games Print out Simpson trial or anything else interesting Evangelize through our church downloaded software demos Look around like crazy. Work write to penpals in other countries Research Gather information research Download programs, from all sources talk dirty to girls look for jobs in academia, and since there are none I've not been too successful. wait and then wait some more made productive use of information Download things. work stock purchase and research research info Discuss philosphy while getting games over IRC!! ;) Participate in nifty surveys nothing more. explore Academic Research maintain a FAQ Just love to surf things that catches my interest Nothing surf Internet BBBs explore web sites web developer Job search Learned about foreign cultures, learned much educational material, developed my written-communication skills, made friends, made plans, made hay while the sun shone, made up, made out.. oh nevermind.. Research advertising options on the WWW I do almost all of my business "Networking" Fill out surveys game playing: MUD, XPilot Get lots of electronic text Help other people. You Name It Share information Laugh at frikkin' idiots. JOB SEARCH Specifically - Play chess I also IRC Made travel arangements and reserved airline tickets Keep current on Current Events (especially Political) play games Work 60 hrs a week find info w/ gopher, telnet, etc. staff development Used the internet for enquiries to companies over services they provide. Also use the news groups to post questions I have. Separate the hype from the reality Explore moo Sysadmin/programmer for an ISP :) research work related topics via Usenet News Read newsletters surf alot,learn alot,Have a hell of a good time! Participate in loads of unprotected Cyber-Sex Having fun with people that think they know better work in a responsible manner for the betterment of mankind Read newspapers (Nando, etc.), Use reference tools. operate a publicly available search engine provide info to corp.s not on the Web credit card use Up to the minute sports news and scores. send files, docs via MIME or FTP Run programs from inhouse network/test software play games - xpilot Make contacts with others on professional basis use yahoo Use it to support others check out what competion is out there Open business communications I take computer courses and read magazines look into cool stuff Sell dedicated Internet access, promote Electronic Marketing on the WEB run a couple mailing lists, waste time, use FAQs for pointers for new interests conduct international trade visit w/ family members who live abroad learn training Subscribe to an e-mailing list newsgroups/mailing lists advertising nothing yet, but you've given me some good ideas! Trade tech. information on broadcast transmitters see what's going on internet for my studies..:) get info for myself and others Contact Governorment Officials participate in scholarly listserv groups Download artwork Politics volunteer for a Free-Net Organize politically, network wine entertainment competitive research for advertising clients run around in circles! share information I provide Internet Connections... Surf confuse people at work by showing them what's on their desk!!! Meet fellow electronic techs. Get news--daily and specialty Study Web trends and the competition progressive political activity Observe Play interactive mind games on IRC like to ftp ebooks Visit interesting sites I've become a deeply feeling whole person. Track down and turn in pedophiles in IRC I've only had internet for 3 days games, entertainment lookimg for adult poetry Useinternet as a teaching tool Surf for new & interesting information at Web Sites I useinternet as a teaching tool for teaching about the internet! Obtain Information sleep Research! Educational research chat Applied for jobs...and got one at Digicash! :) promote consulting about Internet in Brazil learn technical support and entertainment mpegs, etc. learn more about the net Meet other people face-to-face in non-date situation running remote applications Trade Files. read news Direct people to the best place on the net according to their needs market a product Subscribe to e-world/ take classes, education browse communicate with family member gamble research Surf! Cruise! astrology web pages, newspaper services Look at how businesses are using the Internet RealAudio delivery system Answer polls Met in person people I met on-line. Found a job. I write articles for Internet. Search for metaphysical pen pals through various means ie newsgroups, web pages. nothing. IRC Connected with people all over the world with similar interests stay in contact with old friends Exchange genealogy research Correspond with self-help group keep in touch with friends and family Set up informational Web pages Download newsletters, news, ads, etc. Freebies!!! Educate myself with info from Home Pages get information for my school work HAVE FUN!!! Usually get lost! Don't know my way around. browse the web just browse to see what's out there browse virtual libraries have fun just surf the inter net, its interesting subscribe to several lists Browse play Magic:The Gathering make my living download ftp files DOOM II wads complete surveys! Download legit software & try it out; usually discarding afterwards Get lots of multimedia stuff :) Teach myself programming skills Browse using the Web. Research, Send e-mail from WWW site Maintained an archive for a game I play. surf explore brave new worlds & seek out new civilzations. use Worlds Chat read about people on thier web pages Learn more about my field thru mailing-lists, argue with people, laugh at some of the stupid things people say (especially the alt.sex groups, whose members are so prurient it makes sex ridiculous). I am currently liminted in what I can see because I only have text-based access. CHECK FOR E-MAIL ADRESSES OF THOSE IN WASHINGTON just observe what is available to read use it for remote servicing of systems live chat Information provider on unique topics, Promote organizations (political, social) with which I agree Surf Information gathering for market trends Research get lost flirt Met someone online in real life Use Listserv and Newsgroups for business and spiritual purposes help run an international hobby club Participate in mailing lists nothing Learning I look for good video games on FTP. Just Browse. It's peachy-keen! FTP, Careers search and Information chat with people all over the U.S. Access library catalogs JOB SEARCH Do you want this answer in hardcopy or UUencoded? I am Kids Staff for America Online's Kids Only forum surf-for the entertainment of all the rapidly expanding online pages/servoces/info sites married someone I met on a BBS, publish a newsletter on MSN relax surf for information. I am a librarian in training who is in library school. Promote Electronic Publishing Publish Information, provide some Web Services compare websites Explore WWW sites Post to newsgroups and bulletin boards READ ABOUT STALLION SERVESE Own research and sharing of information educational, I'm Canadian with a local provider Read news through news services, financial info Voice communications (using NetPhone) Product Research download fine art None Developing a business that markets only by internet Play Internet games read Look for ways to be the first in the boat when it comes to marketing a product to the millions of newbies that are on the way. Literary research and marketing research. I do it all, baby. surf investing in stock and research Find information searched information Have fun Run a literary fan club Play Backgammon Al that was mentioned :) Persue my hobbies (Environmental issues, games, secure admissions in Universities when I need to, Submit a research paper Lots of Buisness through the http://www.londonmall.co.uk/ politics communications Lots of info, not a lot of quality Sourse of ideas Research speak spanish download freeware from annon FTP sites - big time! Do research nothing Have a lot of fun... :) Read Daily Newspapers check the weather swap music with musician from holland Research market trends surf Tour the world (Browse and surf) I'm on several woodwind instrument discussion e-mail lists. 90% of my work! Browse for useful Internet marketing information plan vacations send newletters and recipes download pictures (NOT erotic!), find maps, locate stargazing groups, searched for old friends, etc., etc., etc. search for jobs and recruits Have fun - edutainment. You wouldn't wanna know. Besides, i live abroad I do various levels of activity which you don't include product distribution Waste time. A lot of time. :) Return to theHome Page. Copyright ©1996, /InterCommerceCorporation, All rights reserved worldwide Send comments to Webmaster@Survey.net WT02-B22-18IA060-000333-B025-279http://www.survey.net:80/sex1c3.html 204.107.221.240 19970115055906 text/html 54325HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 15 Jan 1997 05:52:39 GMTServer: Apache-SSL-US/1.0.3+1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 54142Last-modified: Mon, 25 Nov 1996 20:26:46 GMT SURVEY-NET - SEX Survey User Responses (ARCHIVE IV) Your source for information, opinions & demographics from the NetCommunity! ANNOUNCING: The Internet's finest interactive, totally-automated,immediate survey system. We can take any form and instantly create adynamic demographic database and show you the results as soon as youcomplete the survey! User comments [ARCHIVE IV] What do YOU think about Sex & the Internet? it's great!! If it wasn't for adult chat lines, I never would have met my boyfriend (Who's great in bed and very good looking by the way) not enough diapers are great :) I would have had seriusly psychic problems without the supprt of the Adult/Baby Infantilism community on the net. disappointing wonderful Interesting. should be taken off It gives me a hard-on!!! i think it is interesting great! it�s wery fun and interesting it is pointless I think it's great,and I would like to know how to get conneted with more of it. It has opened my mind. It makes me feel all warm and fuzzy inside...and out!!!! everybody wants money. I might as well go buy a magazine CAN INDULGE A FANTASY OF PEDOPHELIA, NEVER APPROACH CHILD I haven't really found what I'm looking for. boring Absolutely the best thing that ever happened to the PC ponography is in the eyes of the beholder.if you don't like,don't watch I t is the greatest hting ever it's COOL but i can't find animal sex pictures :( I think adults should be able to do what they want on the Internet; however, children should be supervised by a parent when they have access to this type of materia......everyone should not be punished! Educating Pedophilia and bestiality should be removed; sites rated; parents responsible. ISPs should be able to limit access to triple-X sites/newsgroups for specific accounts. I think it's great, but some of the links are misleading because you don't find sex on them. Also, sometimes you can get some good ideas. I think it is interesting I learn things every day It is very good. found my husband on the Net.......sex is great!!! Some of it is pretty sleazy but the net is a fabulous medium, underutilized for the promotion of healthy sexual attitudes. I believe that sex on the internet should not be regulated. I is a good source for some people to let out their sexual expressions. i think people should have free access to it It costs money for the real good ones the more the merrier Sex on the Internet is why I bought a modem! I think that the internet is a cool place to find information on things, talk about things,or expierence things you wonder about. As long as it is not hard core pornography, I don't see anything wrong with it. I think that sex on-line is a option for sex in real life, and with all those STDs out there, sex on the Net should be promoted I hate censorship. First they censor sex, they tell you what you can and can't see, next they tell you what you can say and not. And don't give me the "it's to protect the children"-crap. If you have children, look after them, talk to them. Don't try to educate someone else his children. It's not for kids...Netscape & others could build in a "blocking" switch. Adult providers don't want kids and would gladly insert code to correspond with blocker switch code. Not a bad thing. it is a little educational. Anonymous mailing programs promote people to say and do thing that the normally would not. I think it's very disturbing that people turn to computers for sexual outlet when there are so many other ways to do it. cum on the keyboard is a pretty gross idea but it happens. there is no absolute way to stop kids from seeing it--my little siblings Sex on the Internet--it's better than sex with my wife. She cut me down to once a month for sex. I'm lucky, though--I know two guys she cut out altogether. I'll tell you, strange things happen around my house. The other night I came home from work and found a guy jogging naked in front of my house. I asked him how come. He said, "Because you came home early!" I said to him, "Who told you you could fool around with my wife?" He said, "Everybody!" Sex, sex, sex. I remember the first time I ever ad sex--boy, was I scared. I was all alone! But getting back to your question--sex on the Internet? I think I prefer sex in bed, thank you very much. Its great to view pictures of hot chicks, but I would like to see more wild stuff It is real opened-minded i like it Enjoy it. Great lunch time entertainment It's a new way of exploring one of the most natural aspects of human life. I suppose it can be fun for whoever likes it It's freedom of speech - it's up to parents to control it it is cheap I think it is a good idea sex and the internet is fantastic. I wish it were easier to get to the good stuff! I like it alot 'cause I don't get it no where else!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!! futuristic, not real Amusing for those who can't get it elsewhere. I think that it is great that I can have acess to all of thi and more naked maless great matieral. I just wish that more of it was free. faddish So far I have'nt found it offensive, but it could very easily become offensive. If you don't like it -- quite simple don't tune into it! not enough porn relating to fellatio wich i love to give Sex is human nature and there is no need to stop the development of Internet. It is great. It's fun to access Part of life. Pervertyed for some, normal for the vast majority Not all that connected! No wonder there's so many perverts out there! Instead of being an intimate act between husband and wife, it seems that everything and anything is a go-ahead. One day, God's gonna get all perverts, just like he did with Sodom and Gomorrah! Good forum where people can interact freely and openly Answer to 16. Sexual material is very easy to find. There is noting wrong with sex on the internet. Even if sexual matterial were banned from the internet that still doesn't help solved any of the problem that we are currently facing. I think anything should be allowed on the internet I am glad that the Internet and Usenet are open areas of discussion. My girlfriend and I wouldn't have met and we wouldn't have been able to develop as healthy a relationship without an open area to talk and question. fun those who think sex and the internet should be regulated should look at our constitution and our freedom of speech, the internet is just a new way of transfering information, there should not be any regulation on it whatsoever because what you find on it is what you are specifically looking for and nobody's fault but your own. I WANT TO FUCK EVERYTHING IN SIGHT!! just came online today. kinda hard to find. Keep up the good work! Hopefully there will be some strange stuff to come. cool eh I said it all already I feel that other medie such as the internet to obtain sexual information is great as long as parents do realize that older kids (starting at age 5 or 6) can and will find out how to use the internet to find the sex stuff. Everyone with children should buy the parental block software. I have a month old girl, and when she gets older I will install blockers on my system. I Love it !!!! Information wants to be free! Sex must go on! I think it's great, it's simply fun to read and view the sexual stories and photos on the net. It's better than being repressed. Sex is normal, it should be open for anybody. I think there should be more communication between potential partners I wish it were organized better. do it do it do it if you are of age great It's not a problem. I personaly like it. How different is it from Compu$erve and AOL, REALLY? MORE OF IT AND MAKE IT EASIER TO ACCESS AND DN LOAD i THINK IT IS GREAT BECAUSE YOU CAN ASK QUESTIONS YOU NORMALLY WOULD FEE UNCOMFRTABLE ASKING IN PUBLIC. It shouldn't be regulated. Parents should be responsible enough to purchase proper software and not put the burden of "baby sitting" their children on the rest of society. Its Great!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111 It's there. looking forward to exploring Its great nothing NO CENSORSHIP ! Sex is cool.... and so is the internet... together they are pretty cool. People should have the right to do what they please... censor yourselves, not others I really have found sexual material on the net, but then again I haven't been looking for it. It's not near as big a deal as the media's made it out to be. In the end, parents, and not the government, need to do the babysitting. SEX:I like it, I want it, I need it! Sex on the Internet should be treated no differently than any other subject. The beauty of the net is the lack of censorship. Just like television, it IS the responsibility of Parents to censor what their young children view. Blaming others for porno, rebellionism, or whatever on the Net is blatant immaturity. Parents should be parenting (I am a parent, so I feel as though I have the right to say that) show me your pussy!! Sex is the ultimate entertainment, always has been, always will be. Why should the net be any different. Phone sex, adult movies on cable and nudie mags are all allowed, why victimize net users? Lets all get off! It is interesting to see what is avalilble on the net. I have become more open to other people's sexual orientations. I think for people my age sex on the net is a good thing. I enjoy it although I understand the need for some control over what can be viewed by whom. When I have children I wouldn't want them to be able to find this stuff so easily. Entertaining Very few sources which portray sex as a beautiful and personal act between two people in love I LOVE IT! Thanks for presenting material that is not cencsored! seems to be a lot of fun... ;-) Internet sex sucks because I'm wacking off to a bunch of fat whores and little kids. it"s pretty cool. I still cant find a homepage on body hair, my preference ! I want to see more...it is a little hard to find anything really good Porn is very hard to find on the net : all is soft ! I love it I think it's empowering for people to see that they have peers. The net provides that. Keep it that way. I enjoy having access whenever I feel the need It opened up my eyes to what is out there and has helped me to better understand it. should have more access to hard core porn cool I think for older people it is fine but I do not think it is appropriate for children. I believet that censorship of anykind should be discouraged. I monitor my kids and they know that if they get into an area that is off limits, they leave. Interesting still looking All the best sites require you to send money `i think that sex sites on the net are harmless, and should be available to anyone who wants them. Uhh...It rules. Its great! its actually very stimulating adult entertainment N/A very cool paid site everywhere I think that kids learn lots about it on the net. I like to look and listen but it's harmless. I think it's a great learning exspience. I find that it is an outlet for me and opens me to different types of sex and helps in my marrage as far as our sex lives. I wish it were easier to access. It is a good vent for frustration and boredom. Let's face it, SEX is fun. Why not be honest with human nature and teach respect instead of repression. It blows my mind . I like it, I don't think it should be banned, but you must take responsibility for your own actions! remarkable none I am offended that the US government thinks it has a right to limit my access to ANY kind of information. it is the best thing this century! I like it Crazy Brazilian Boy more more more but filter it from kids I DON'T KNOW ABOUT IT VERY MUCH BUT I WOULD LIKE TO LEARN I have not looked for it that much and am a new user. Maybe will reply again later with a more precise feeling. But initial reaction I don't see the problems that all have been talking about. I love it its interesting Satisfied a great deal of my curiosity - ironically, I've lost interest in many things - becoming more "normal". Go figure! I like to use the internet as a source for sexually explicit material pity we are sitting in a library Reflects the values of its users I think is a great place to increase knowledge without embarrassing. I think in terms of regulating sexual content on the net - there is a very thin line between censorship and regulation; I think it's up to parents to monitor what their kids are exploring through the internet. I enjoy exploring the different sexual arenas available on the 'net. I think it's scary that governmental agencies are trying to control what information is available online. go v-chip! it O.K It's all a bit hyped up really very cool! great There should be more We like it! very erm?... explcite- if you know where to look its briliant.. i love it. It's pretty imformative I think it's terrific! boring Everything should be open to children. Cool People need to become open minded somehow. Maybe this is they way. If you don't like it, you don't have to see it. It's a choice that should be kept open. it's great BORING!! There is nothing too tell. What I've seen is webpages set up like Playboy magazines, and after age 16 that shit is tired. cool I love it, wish I could find more. I think it is a good thing, to get people aware of what sex really is. There should be more hard core stuff available. great Ain't nothing like the real thing. fascinating i think its a great way to finding info on subjects that turn you on. and to connect with others that have the same interest People seem to spend too much time having this 'virtual' sex stuff. I don't see the point. more pictures Nothing wrong with it. I do believe there should be some sort of security measures taken so children are not able to access certain areas. As far as how to accomplish that, I don't have a clue. it should be available for consenting adults. if people dont want to see it they don,t have to, but they do not have the right to dictate my morals The time has come for people to manage their own sexual activities and desires(in the privacy of their homes) without being shamed or belittled...I am talking about adults ,children have fewer rights,you can't child proof the world..that is why they invented parents...Keep up the good work I was so so. I don't think there should be any censorship of sex on the net. It is a-okay. It is good, as long as at stays out of childrens hands great I think it's great It's Great I think that sex on the internet can be very enlightening, interesting and fun. I wish I knew where to find it and it could be downloaded quickly. I think that it's not abig part of the internet, but it is there It's there because people want it. keep it going until I find the real stuff. I am new to the internet, but so far it has been difficult to find sex on the net. I think I will have to try it out before I can give an honest answer. havn't found it yet IT IS GREAT!!! CUM Keep up the good work sex belongs to every aspect of live No comment at this time. There are many people who have nothing better to do than to push their will upon others. Freedom of choice is still the best thing about being American, or sentient, for that matter. too open, need id system??? I think it is great that people are so open . But they probably short our many a keyboard. ;) Fuckin' awesome!!!!! I think it is fabulous just one more piece of information in the jungle I THINK IT IS GREAT AND SHOULD BE ENCOURAGED The Net sholuld be completely open. Information is information and should not in any way be restricted. There is nothing wrong with it. It sucks because you have to pay for everything LET IT STAY.... The Internet should be a place without rules.. If you are smart enough to use the internet then you have the right to do what you please without the pigs getting into your business Basically I have found it to be very mild and inoffensive. Good adult entertainment of kind. There isn't really a whole lot going on I Feel. wish people were more mature about it. Certainly cheaper and closer than adult newsstands, but, like them, gets boring fast. I think the availability of this kind of material on the net is itself not a bad case, though it should be handled in a responsible way. I don't believe in censorship, bur I do believe that it is the responsibility of the parents/ responsible parties (Teacher, administrator, etc) whoever it is that is giving the child access to the internet, to monitor and restrict access to innapropriate material. I think it should stay and be accesible 100% of the time. i want sex, hard sex not much a kind of relaxsation, take out our stress Sex in the internet is okay, you can learn about different lifestyles and explore about yourself more sex is great and so is the net I want more....more.....more sex on the Internet Leave the Net be. It's the last stronghold of True Freedom in this world. If people want Sex they're going to find it no matter what ie. magazines, movies etc I think they're letting it get out of control to quickly. A rating system would appear to be a must. I like to read the sex articles I think it's great. STD's aren't an issue. Life is too short anyway for "the gift" that keeps on giving...HIV... thanks. . Sex=Sex; Internet=Internet It's my choice and I want to keep it that way. Gives one an outlet to find out things regarding weird subjects. ie Foot Fetishism I tink it is great for releasing sexual frustration!! Keep it up!!! I have only been on for 2 days and i intend to fully explore Great! I am new here Interesting and educational The internet is a fantastic place to fantasize and engage in totally safe sex. no problem i love sex I wish there was a way to keep kids from it. I like it. It's like having sex without actually dong it. Let People do what they want. Don't fuck with our rites!! No Comment :-> I would like to get access to more of it It serves as the physical needs satisfyer to the human being This Is Good Shit it's the best I know there is not that much. there should be more I think it is our right to do,say whatever we want!!! lotta talk little action Sex is already shoved aside in society the net lets it out I really like the idea. It is harmless and fun It has enabled me to explore my sexuality safely, wisely, and affordably. it can be good and bad at the same time..but depending on your purpose what do you want from it!! People want government to take responsibility for raising everyone's kids, except their own. I THINK IT'S GREAT,THERE SHOULD BE MORE VEDIOS.I'M NEW AT THIS. People do on the Internet what they really want to do deep inside but they never would do off the computer. I like what I see on the net, however I am concerned about confedentiality, especially since I am not the only one who has access to my computer. I am worried about someone stumbling onto to something that I don't want them seeing. Other than that I think sex on the net is great. I think there should be more chat places Haven't really thought too much about it... from what I've seen, it's more hype and advertising than anything else. Keep up the good work I want more it burns up alot of time Not enought its good very interesting and could be educational love sex, love the internet, people should use them to stay happy and healthy If a person want it and they are of age, if its on the internet it can be available to them. Complete Freedom is Needed. cannot find what I am looking for It's great Lots of hot and horny pictures I enjoy sexual material on the internet because it allows privacy. I am a happily married man, but I am curious about bisexual relations. The internet allows me to fantasize privately and view material which could be embarrassing to purchase at a video/ma It's there, but you have to look for it. IE Erotica is not thrown at the user, and it takes effort to find it. But it's easy to find. It's fine. I like it boring More More More! Absolutely fabulous. Informative!!! Fuckin' Hard to find It's okay Good idea! I think sex on the internet is cool, as long as you don't just get off on your hand.Geta girl Grrrrrrrrrrrrreat!! I find all aspects of the available information to be interesting. I will continue to visit the NET and learn more. Thanks for giving me a chance to say my two cents. I am a sexual person and the NET offers a variety of subgects. Although I have had great dfficulties in accessing much of the sexual sites, and hate having to pay to see pictures and stuff. A cultural treasure I view some pornographic material on the internet. However, I do not believe that it is healthy. It definitely is not necessary. not enought sex material love it Sex (in all it's forms) is a natural act. One based on trust, openness and sharing. Personally I would perfer to see violence and commercialism controller on the net. I think the services that help people with their questions are great. Even things like the dirty jokes and R rated stuff don't bother me, but the XXX stuff must be stopped for the sake of the kids. it must be intertaining; no bestiality's, no kid's porno it must be intertaining; no bestiality's, no kid's porno this is quite fun and i like it Best shit aroung. It was through the Net that I found another Hermephradite to have sex with. We sucked each other, and also fucked each other's asses and pussies. It was great I luv it like it I don't like those sites that say "sex here" and then there is nothing i would like to see it easery to talk to people about sex To each his own...If you want it, you go there...if not stay out... I don't go looking for sex/porn on the net, but if I run into it, I might check it out. Dandy. its really not that bad, people make more out of it than what is really there I believe that the internet is a wonderful way for people to express themselves. I think it is also a great learning tool, and it lets us explore our interests, and broaden our horizons. Wonderous. fun to look at, but the real thing is so much better It's good. I've had fun with it like sex is supposed to be. I'm not opposed to it, and I look at some pictures once in a while, but I think that there is a bit too much of it on the'net. need more FREE pornography Sex on the Internet has made me very open-minded. I know the truth of some misconceptions about sex, disease, and sexuality. I have learned more about myself. love it I think it's great. If people are worried about seeing "controversial material" on the net then I feel they shouldn't look for it. It's a free country and people should be able to access what they want. i feel that there is much more talk about it than really appears on the net. most interesting things require membership or a fee. Sex is the beginning of and a part of life. The Internet is a new culture which is also a part of life. Violence is more damaging than sex! Ban Violence from TV, if you think something needs to be banned. It is a fantastic vehical of self exploration- It must not be govornment regulated Everyone does it, why not talk about it. However, children do not have sex and should not have access to sexual material such as pornography. More and more this society needs an uncensored uncorporate influenced media such as the internet offers -- true democracy! I think it should be at the descretion of the user weather he or she wishes to connect to a sex site or not. It's Private and my business and it hurts no one includeing me I love it! I'm always horny and ready to have sex. Anywhere. I think its what we want and each person should decide Sex is the most basic thing in all our lives. It will be on the "net" and anywhere else people congregate. Censorship, in any form, is dangerous. Open, honest, presentations of all forms of sexuality should be MORE available to everyone if social stigmas are ever to be exposed for what they really are--a means of propagandic mind-control to force people into tired stereotypes favored by facist conservatives. I love it,it fun IT rocks!!!! I find sex and the Internet go well together. Sex is a good thing and should not be hidden. i can be fun, but step to keep out of little hands should be taken Since I'm curious about bi-sexuality, it gives me a chance to find out what I like about wemon, and if really makes me "Bi-sexual". I think that it is great, I have learned a lot about that people's interests from other parts of world are no different than anyone else's Think it"s fun if kept in prospective. I think it is an exercise of are rights to gain access to sex on the net. It's overrated. Folks are too obsessed with it. The net provides a forum for _antbody_ to post any type of perverted material and be assured of a potential readership in the millions. give me more! it's great its great! it's good Interesting and educational It's great of you're in the mood; if not, it is still tolerable. It is a wonderful form of free expression!!! Do not let the government mess with it I like it, you can learn what you need to know with out beeing embarrased No problem with it. I like jizzing on the keyboard. The issue of porn on the 'net is highly exaggerated. If parents don't want their kids to access "porn," they can always unplug the computer! sex: don't know, haven't tried yet.internet: cool.both:ok Who jerks off at work? Not I! stupid Sex is cool. It's alright with me It's fun but can become obsessive. Too much, and in the same time too little. It's hard to find what you search for. Have not found very much so am not qualified to say. Like anything else, it is capitalistic I think if an adult is curious about this area of the internet, that it is a very good source. It is also very helpful for self-help subject matter. The only thing I do not like is that child pornography(from what I understand) is on this and that it is I like it. I dont think child porn should be allowed. but other than that, its like everything else, it harms just as much as it helps. I like it. Most of the free stuff is pretty tame (Playboy, Penthouse) and the really raunchy stuff appears to be mostly pay-for-service. I don't subscribe to any paid services, and my kids can't get into those areas, even if they knew how. Besides, the process of searching for "bad pictures" is a GREAT way to hone your searching skills, and become more computer-literate. I'm sure that kids will do this (after all, I did), but what they're likely to find is no worse than I'm sure they've seen from frieds at school. i think that as long as you are very dicreet about what you bring up in publicc it is o.k. Parents should monitor their own children at home but a comittee should appeal to the public on what is moral and what is not, than take it from there. surveys are a good idea I think that it is informative Anarchy prevails--long live anarchy! all sex it's not good enough... links say "free pics here!" and I'm lucky to find a single lady with her bikini off... that kind of sucks and if links are going to advertise "100s of free pics" then that's what should be whether the surfer is a member of the link It's ok for adults, but it's too easy for children to access!!! overrated i love it. everbody should look at at and read the material and none of it should be censored I think it's too easy to run into, when you're not looking for it. Like, I searched "Toys" and the second reference was for sex toys. I wanted to look at kids toys. I figure so do most kids. So what's up with that? A rating system is a good idea, coupled with parental supervision. much ado abount very little. . .those who would ban what little there is. . .get a life! sucks it is harmless i don't know I like it it is safe and know one needsto know you are on it's ok It sure can waste alot of our/my time, but sometimes informative. Aside from personal curiosity and interest, it has helped with my research paper on bisexuality. good Gay links are hard to find!!!!!!! It is great. n/a if you type sex in a search it returns every home page its awesome i wish my parts matched!!! its awesome its fine, the parents should be responsible for their children and all hard core porn cost money (credit card) anyway. I believe that it should be available due to the fact that it will promote safer sex, and masturbation if you will by providing erotic material to all those that just can't get none. :) Fascinating... I really try not to think about it:) its cool as a mature adult i like to be able to view what i want, sex or anything else. I hate paying for it. FREE PORN! get rid of it!!!!!!!!!!!!!1 IT KICKS ASS (but it isnt as good as the real thing) sincerley Jerrin "Wesley" Frabrello I Like Boys girls are o k but Jacking off with wesson ismy favorte cool i have been trying to find pictures to download and I can't. I'm 22 years old and want to get aroused.. I anonominity of the net promotes honesty I LIKE IT. to tell the absolute truth, I haven't really seen any at all and I woulb be really curious to see what all the hype is about. Most sexual sites on the internet are expenseive or just cost for something that is supposed to be open It is not as heavy as it would be, I thought I would be impressed, but didn't happened that way I think it's very good that there is sex on the internet because it gives people anonymity so they can feel comfortable to say or do what they want while on the net. I think it should be easy to be accessed because marriages can be saved by steamy, sexual pictures. I thinks it fine just as long as its rated and maybe some sort of clearance code needed to access the material. It's ok It's cool as long as the Children do not get into the areas If someone doesnt like it they dont have to read it. i think it's arousing and fun i think it's arousing and fun Sex and the Internet go well together... Very interested to get into IRC and e-mail domination Can be a useful source of information and exchange, as well as an avenue for the more inhibited to act out their fantasies, in the private/comfort of their own environment, without posing a threat to anyone. You can always logoff if disinterested. I THINK YOU CAN FIND SEX ON THE INTERNET IF YOU LOOK HARD ENOUGH. ALTHOUGH IT IS NOT OBVIOUS TO PEOPLE. Sex on the Internet is something that everyone should have access to. Anyone getting on line knows that these areas are available. If it offends one, one simply stay away from the sites!! I like it. I particularly dont care about it but some people want it let them have it. very interesating Sex on the internet opens people's minds to new and different ideas. People who don't like the fact that sex is on the net should simply not access that material. To each his own. Love them both! People who don't like the fact that sex is on the net should simply not access that material. To each his own. it should be real. I have never encountered 'sex' on the internet, though I have sought it out. Nudity is easily accessed and I feel that nudity should not be censored. Keep in mind that sex is the only way that the species survives and at one point or another, almost everyone engages in sexual intercourse. Lousy i think that it's interesting to have access to this stuff. I think it's great, there should be more! k-r4d It's okay. I'd like to see more harder-core type stuff. Need more ads. I think the Internet is not so attractive without Sex. could be better organized i think it's a good safe otlet for sexual relations As a matter of fact,I have not found any "real" pornography on the "net"! But if I should find any "porno",on the "net", it's no one else's "business"! its great I believe it is opening up new areas of sexual expression, and that is a good thing. i LIKE IT You can't stop people from talking about sex, either appropriately or inappropriately. But I think that sites that have pornography and sexually explicit material should have a page that warns users before entering. Also, I think that these sites should voluntarily put some sort of switch or HTML code on the warning page that when recognized by a browser will not permit the user to enter that area if the user or the parent had that option checked on their browser or security program preferences. Persnally, the internet would be better if there was no pornography on it, but I guess that there's always going to be perverted people out there. I think sex on the net is very stimulating. I haven't real tried anything yet, just seen some pictures that's all. Keep it up, er, I mean good job. it's a turn on Its OK It's only a curiosity right now wHERE DO i FIND IT? I think sex is unavoidable. Computers are a way of life for most people . If this is going to remain so, censorship is obsolete. I belive in freedom; if you don't dont look. It's been a new and exciting experience that both my wife and I enjoy. It's a psychological and socialogical revolution. more,more,more, Its ok with me I don't think that there are enough places on the net that specifically deal with fettishes that I have, pedophilia for example. uncertain I think it's a good way tolearn more about especially reading other peoples experiences. digital sex? boring. I' a virgin on net As an adult, I love it. boring commercial I think that sex on the net is great. And it is everywhere! i like it If you like sex then the Internet is one area amongst many that are available. There are minority groups, individuals and governments who feel it is there right to interfere in the lives of others, the net to a small degree helps to curb their interference. GREATTTT! Nice way to find new things... IT'S O.K Its ok I don't forsee any problems with it I think that is very healthy & brings out open-minded feeling The internet is for everybody and must not be censored No Comment I think it's stimulating, interesting, and fun for adults to be able to interact in an open forum. I personally do not want my childern to be able to have access to this on the internet but I want them to surf and learn maybe freedom has to given up for the greater good of society/everyone is looking for one special thing to keep sacred that is what keeps us going for me it is a purpose have people stop degredating other people if people had more respect for others who knows what would happen maybe utopia its the best thing since penthouse We like it a lot!! I hope more open-net. Great !!! Why not? We all like it or life wouldn't exist on the planet. A fun and safe way to fulfill some interesting needs I believe that the internet is like a TV, if you do not like what you see, turn it off! if it is pormoting safe sex then I am for it, but if the perverts that I read about in the papers have acess to children then it is going to far. I've seen some very degrading images and statements on the internet regarding sexuality and women. However, I do not believe that the internet should be regulated by the government, for the government would commercialize the internet, and promote a milder form of oppresion of women. The need some groups and individuals feel to denegrate the sex act, and especially the place of women in that act, smacks of fear and self hatred. It is unfortunate that they get the reinforcement they are looking for on th internet, be it positive or negative. Its there if you want it I think it's easy to access commercial sites of pornography rather than get a private honest talk to someone of your age. I'd like to find more people to talk to. Keep it up everyone, support voluntary rating scheme IT'S FINE I've just seen Webs such as Playboy or Penthouse, nothing else really interesting It's nice that you have it and it has helped me through times Internet is a good way for adults to explore sexuality, and I think that sex on the net is OK, and just about as available as i t should be. it helps me find new ways to pleasure I feel that only parents of children should have the final word on home net-use. If a provider says no to porn, then you still have the option to goto another provider. As for kidie porn, I have no idea how that should be handeld I think it is just harmful to kids LOVE TO SEE MOVING PICTURES RATHER THAN PHOTOS ONLY. it's alluring, but you can't really get anything!!! it's good should be more ways to find it Sex on the internet is like sex in life, it's everywhere if you want it to be. We are all in control of what we do or don't see. WAnt lots more of it not interested it's a good outlet for adults, but not minors open and creates a the loss of innocence big deal. the government needs to keep their nose out of it. if these groups want some type of control, let the parents have it. It's novelty. It's all a joke. SEX,SEX,SEX,SEX,SEX,SEX I WANT SSSSSSSSEEEEEEEEEEXXXXXXXXXX It's gives the new meaning too life in the sex lane. New to the internet-not enough information yet to have a worthwhile opinion Thank God! As a new user, I wanted to see how easy it was to to access pornography - real simple, just type anthing remotely close in the net search box and you are there. Also, inappropriate conversations in almost every newsgroup to "stumble on to." I watch my 11 year old closely. i love it Hm... nothing really. It's been fun so far, though. free minded I have nothing against sex on the net. I occasionally read alt.sex.stories, and have engaged in cybersex a fe times, but thats about it. As a 16 yr old, I htink that its normal to have some curiosity, and the net has helped fulfil some of that curiosity. i have yet to see anyinternet sex...very easy on AOL it's grown alot since the net first gained popularity I have not had much experience with the internet. I am not really sure yet what the internet has to offer. uncontrolable I fuck the monitor!!! The mouse strokes the prick. No real opinion, I get bored from time to time, so I browse and I'm not dissapointed when I find it. i don't believe in any form of censorship, but regulation?... children need to not have access, etc. it is one way to conveniently view sexual material Its wonderful Access to the masses and the sex drive being second most important only to eating to avoid starvation in humans, is anyone really surprised that sex is so popular on the Internet? Think about it, instead of having to buy a porn magazine at a store and risk someone you know seeing you or going to an x-rated theater sitting in God knows what to watch a porn movie, people can now get this on the web in the privacy of their own setting of choice. It's kind of like porn videos becoming available for home retal. Nothing that you havn't seen or heard of before!!! It is cool and interesting trying to find it but at the same time I am morally opposed to it and afraid that the children seeing this will be injured for life. I think that it is fun and gets people to let out their inner hibititions out.. i think that it's o.k. live and let live, if you want to pull up pornography it is the individuals choice. It is no big deal It's OK, fun to read but there are lots of really, I mean really sick people out there. I hope the things that they write about are fantasys and not real life. Just another vehicle for entertainment/expression it's great! not enough clean hot naked women, too many ugly girls The more sex, and the more openness, the better. just like everything else, it's there, so what? I can watch you masterbate through your computer screen! Boring I'm pretty new to the net, so maybe I should keep looking, but it seems to me that there isn't a whole lot of really good, juicy, information sources about sex on the net, mostly alls I see is porn, which can be informative and educational in itself, but sometimes I'd like to learn something, instead of just just jerking off. it's another topic that can be found on it; if people are interested in it, then they have the option of choosing it; essentially it's on the net because an interest is shown for its availability. It's what everybody is looking for so it should not be restricted too much. It is disillusional. I think it is a great thing, you can other people just like you through the identity of the computer and later decide if you want to lose your identity and come in contact with a certain person. Just new to the net, but I am searching for more info and details Yawn! I like sex in general. My favorite thing to do is use a dildo while looking at pictures. I sometimes speak French because I am the French teacher at PPHS. More hipe than anything. I want it all the time I don't think the net needs policing action. Sexual curiosity is natural and healthy. It's better than pemiscous (sp?). GRRREEEAAAAAT!!!!!! sqish sqish mmmm It's cool!!! Love it! it�s wonderful i think it is a ver good place for people to meet other More sex on the internet please!!! Explicit and sometimes extreme even for the open minded. It possibly gives vent to the repressed needs of a society that needs an outlet. Rather have the repressed getting off on the 'net' rather than through criminal expression. You won't see anything shocking unless you're looking for it I'm exploring; I'll tell you if I have any. What Ihave found has been great. I get a thrill out of finding sexual information by typing in certain key words. i believe there should be a book with all of the information's locations. not enough puritanic Some regular information is needed for sex in Internet only one part of a vast amount of interesting material I wish there was more It's a-ok and extremely entertaining. wank wank wank wank wank SPLUT It is not everywhere like the media likes us to believe. i love sex, ITS HORNY Not a problem. Don't really know enough to answer. I will looking for the erotic pictures and sex stories i wish there was more!!!!! I think it's healthy to a great extent. Government doesn't belong as a moral policeman. Individual control at the micro (PC) level (parental or otherwise) is a better solution than Government telling me something is morally degrading . Its silly. WHats the difference other than the children in the net and the sex shops and strip joints etc? should be more activities back in my day we didn't have things like this to make people look at sexuality as a form of porn. It was a bond between a married man and woman. The world would be better if people went back to that way of life. I think that SEX on the INTERNET is an outstanding forum for those who want and respect it . There is not enough access to hard core stuff. It's a lot of wasted space and stupiid links to other links to about 50 sites that really have pictures I wish I knew how to find more of it. (Gay related things) Since surfing the Internet is very much a one-person activity, it is ironic that sex has flourished so enthusiastically. I'm sure masturbation is riding an all-time high in popularity. a great opportunity for one to express their really sexual feelings in the privace of their home. Censorship is wrong I believe that it is a safe way of venting sexual frustration. I also think that there should be more sites on the net available for free. it allows for indiviuals to see what is out there and to ask questions and hopely find a correct answer to their questions. The internet provides a unique outlet for many people to express themselves in a safe and open manner. As a learning tool there can be no match. watching people masterbate It's a new form of safe sex. Prevent the kids form seeing it, but don't take it wawy. Answer to #17 resumes all. I think that sex is a great way to have fun an experiment in different ways. As for it being on the internet,I see no problem with it at all. great. A cheap thrill! How would you deal with the issue of regulating sexual/offensive content? limit minors from having access I think the Net is the last anarachy in the world, and I would like to keep it that way no government intervention--user can choose not to Not a damn thing if you donot like it donot look at it if you don't like it, you don't have to view it! Parent key lock on rated sites There are other channel that sex can be access through. I think that internet is just a part of a problem, if there is one, but not the major part of the problem. there should be an ID number that you had to submit that simply showed you were of a legal age to view certain topics, it had no other function, certainly not discrimination or censorship sex on the net is for losers create blocks parents should regulate their own children. Build net interface systems with censor programs that either censor recognized words (user-specified words or pre-programmed lists) or do not connect with sites that contain said words. An established "Internet Police" find the jackasses that give the net a bad name If it is OK on phone lines, its OK on the net! Get a life buddy! Ya gotta love it! if you do not like it do not access it password sites Let private industry provide for the needs of the conservative. some sort of parental lock illegal: bestiality, kiddie-porn, violence should be gone allow free market to "create" products to allow a parent regulate usage Action against the Net based on pornographic and terrorist activities is much more about political power and the preservation of the status quo. provide free filters to prohibit child access find out their religous views and then we can see where they're coming from. tell people to shut the fuck up and if they don't like the sexuality of some URLs, don't go to them. You should be able to "lock out" undesirable sites by ratings. Parents should be responcible for their kids..I damn sure am! providers should be required to screen, on request by the individual customer Parachuttes are like minds they only function when open!!!(: personnell software restrictions Have a content rating encoded into HTML Programming and have a programmable content configuration option included in future versions of Netscape, and other popular browsers. In this way, adults, and parents could set a rating level within their viewer that would automatically monitor and restrict the viewing of HTML files that exceeded the pre-configured rating level. no governmental or corporate control let it be Each user should be responsible for ensuring that Minors and those offended should not have access This Is Good Shit open but protected to people 18 or over However, parents should be responsible for keeping very explicit material away from their kids the more the pictures the better What subjects you explore on the net is personal. People should be permitted to view and discuss any and all subjects. If something is not to your liking, don't view it! should be monitored by yourself at home. personal censorship programs Parents should be the ones to censor their children Install parental lockout capability Have warnings If they don't like it, why are they looking? don't let the kids seen a sex picture If they don't want to see don't look Fuck them. They are fucking losers. I would like to fuck their noses and come on their brains. establish universal site locator for adult sites. These could be used by parents to limit access by children Make it easier to block the things you don't want. No censhorship mof any kind on the net ! Sex for all: everywhere anyti kill the fascists comletley open offer these people a way to block sex sites, like call block through the telephone company people have to make up their own minds. tell them to turn it off Allow parents to regulate use by children. Post warnings on explicit material LET PARENTS DEAL WITH THERI KIDS, NOT MY PROBLEM fuck them all damn it!!!! retail "sex-safe" software browsers If you are interested you should have the chance to use it.unsure enforce US laws where site is located, then make *sure* all other sexuality is restricted to legal, choosing adults. (more than "go away if you're too young" messages. Offensive advertising outside of this area should be removed. Self Regulation by site ops I feel the only way to reulate the net is on a hosehold bases, parents being in charge. If parents don't fell the need to monitor the kids that is their busness and still legal responibilty users must have a code to acsess let the parents deal with it. It's up to parental guidance. who cares Some sorce for "locking" kids out of certain areas Nothing done at all at any level. with the freedom of speech, comes the freedom not to listen. put porn everywhere These newfangled contraptions will be the downfall of us all!!! Create private software to censor material for super anal-retentives to install and repress only themselves. should be open to small children He.He.He more sex on the net Promte software censor agents that become part of the service providers provision of products. leave it up I feel the Net should be open w/individual control Return to theHome Page. Copyright ©1996, /InterCommerceCorporation, All rights reserved worldwide Send comments to Webmaster@Survey.net WT02-B22-19IA060-000333-B019-62http://www.survey.net:80/license.htm 204.107.221.240 19970115053329 text/html 4880HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 15 Jan 1997 05:27:17 GMTServer: Apache-SSL-US/1.0.3+1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 4698Last-modified: Mon, 25 Nov 1996 20:26:44 GMT SURVEY.NET - Public use of survey data Your source for information, opinions & demographics from the NetCommunity! Use of Information Terms Survey-Net is a public service to the Internet Community. We hope you will encourage peopleto participate and share the information accumulated. We encourage third parties, individuals, media and other groups to re-publish the informationproduced via this system. All we ask is that we be given credit if you use the information: If you re-publish the information in any form, please keep it within the context of what itis proposed; this is a rather ambiguous term I understand and probably will not bestringently enforced, but we're not interested inhaving this information statistically-manipulated to be used in some politically-motivatedpromotion - which is a radical departure from our goal of sharing information for benovelentand educational purposes within the community. If you re-publish the information in any form, in whole or part, please credit the sourceof the information as: "Inter Commerce Corporation", "SURVEY.NET", or "Mike Perry/SURVEY.NET". If at all possible, we would appreciate a listing of our WWW home page URL (http://www.survey.net)as well, so we can encourage as many people to participate as possible. If you re-publish information on another site in the WWW, please add a link to our homepage at: http://www.survey.net Our definition of re-publish applies to any presentation of information based onany of our surveys, that is transmitted in any form to other parties. This includes, but is notlimited to putting information in newspapers, magazines, newsletters, online WWW or otherinternet sites, broadcasting or recording in whole or part. We would also appreciate that any publications that contain references to our data, besent to us (primarily for our amusement); either e-mailed to wisdom@icorp.net, or mailedto: PCS, PO Box 7638, Metairie, LA 70010-7638, USA That's basically it - we simply want to be acknowledged, encourage others to participate, andbe aware of the variety in which our demographics are being used. We are also entertaining the possibility of licensing the engine to other parties (our engine isdeveloped in ANSI C and can probably run on a wide variety of platforms). If you wouldlike information, contact Inter Commerce Corporation. Return to theHome Page. Copyright ©1996, /InterCommerceCorporation, All rights reserved worldwide Send comments to Webmaster@Survey.net WT02-B22-20IA060-000333-B026-110http://www.survey.net:80/sex1c7.html 204.107.221.240 19970115060143 text/html 41918HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 15 Jan 1997 05:55:14 GMTServer: Apache-SSL-US/1.0.3+1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 41735Last-modified: Mon, 25 Nov 1996 20:26:46 GMT SURVEY-NET - SEX Survey User Responses (ARCHIVE VIII) Your source for information, opinions & demographics from the NetCommunity! ANNOUNCING: The Internet's finest interactive, totally-automated,immediate survey system. We can take any form and instantly create adynamic demographic database and show you the results as soon as youcomplete the survey! User comments [ARCHIVE VIII] What do YOU think about Sex & the Internet? Only perverts will look up the most perverted sights, so if you don't like it, don't look! It should be more. In every aspect. sex should be available to adults (except unnatural se peds etc.) Children should only be exposed to what they can handle Everyone is charging something and all I want to do is surf... I don't think it's bad or anything. It's a natural curiosity. It should stay!!!!!! I think it provides a safe and somewhat anonymous area to exchange sexual ideas and fantasies. ok for mature adults Leave it alone! Don't fix things that aren't broken. i think it is adult fun to browse and find sexually explicit material it keeps me out of the strip bars..which is a good thing.. I have found vey little about people sharing my concerns I enjoy looking and reading the stories,the relastionship I AM IN THIS HELP ME SERVIVE ,iSTAY WITH MY FAMILY JUST FOR THE KIDS,AND YES I KNOW THIS IS WRONG but maybe in the near future I can correct this. I am the forum administrator for two religious discussion groups on the internet. I believe offensive material is difficult to find, unless you are specifically looking for it - outside of Usenet, of course. %:^) I don't believe the government should cen I like it I like it I wish there were more sex chat lines that I could get on. please fell free to let me know about any other sex chat lines that you know about at snr@westworld.com thanks for all:> I think the openess and availabilty of sex on the 'NET is a definate asset. It seems to work more as an outlet to sexual tensions etc ... i think its great i think that it is okay becouse sex is all around us every day It's on the net and your not going yo get it off so sit down and shut up very good not what a lot of people believ it to be {not much there} ;] I think its great safer and less degrading than anything else I love it....wish that some accesses were a little more user friendly good idea Porn is immoral, no matter where it is. too much pornography, too much pedophilia.....it should be auto-regulated I think its informative. I have certainly learnt a few things here on the net. very overated and boring I love it! I just keep falling off! just kidding ;) I think sex on the net promotes safe sex. I would rather someone masterbate than go out and rape to get it. should be more Morals campaingers exagerate internet sex content. Voluntary restraints only need apply (parental guidance, etc). Externally enforced regulations (laws, etc) control much of our lives - let the internet be a place of freedom. With freedom comes responsability - be responsible for yourself and your actions. It's not as much fun as a real live body . . . sex has noting to do with the net. people do what thay want. You can't regulate that, People wont stand for it. Wich has been proved agian and agian. Good for people who want it...too much there for people who don't! THERE IS SO MUCH SEX ON THE NET FROM GAY TO STRAIGHT PICS. I GUESS THEY ALL TURN ME ON. If you're looking for it, sex may be found everywhere, so why should the Net be different. Humans are by nature sexual creatures. Yet, some among us would have us deny this. What children do, see, hear or read is the business of parents and guardians, not government! Not too experienced on the net, need to know more. pornography is far less offensive to me than violence or people who would shove their religious values down my throat. I think it is dam cool I LOVE IT so it's there, big deal. If you dont like it turn it off.... I can't Stop!!!! Love the erotic stories..... I love it because I think it improves my sexual stimulaton, it encourages me to masturbate; which is good because I need to know my body a little more. It shows me all the different "sites and scenery" that is out there other than my boyfriend. I think It's great. You can have everything and it costs nothing I do not like having sex with the internet, cause the internet is an inatimate object. I am not. What happened to the days when parents were totally responsible? I find that the Internet is much more valuable as a tool for links to others who work in the same field I work in. Sex is, at best, available only by proxy (in that it has not, for me, ever led to any actualy physical encounters.) I have been able to search for information of a wide range of subjects, more so than I could from my local library. Sex is a part of what seems to be available, but for me it is hardly the most important reason for access in the Internet. its cool From what I have seen, it is adults interacting no differently than you would find in any bar type situation it is too expensive STILL TRYING TO FIND URLS nuthin much.....just lots of it....im a nympho!!!!!!!!11 FUCK YOU !!!!!!! its really hard to answer this one i have new comp. and still exploring no comment they are both GREAT but sex is the king!! Since I was 15 I have had sex in many different styles, I did it on bus's in fact the is not many places I had not done it. I thought I know it all untill I got on the internet it told me things I did not think possible. its good OK I like it. great, wish there was more of it nothing it would be good I still don't know It's GRRRRRATE!!! I love it Good way to understand and learn about society and sex If Adults want to view fine, but keep your kids off!! I want sex I think that the Christian right is just using this as another smoke screen. They don't go together. any resource is a good one Bad thing. Good thing. Funny thing. I think it provides an oppurtunity for those of us who are curious to experiment before any serious reprocussions wish we could actually access it. Sex is great fun and make me feel good ok Oh yes! PS I wonder if all the people who want to so-called "protect" children from one of the most natural areas of human experience were abused when they were children? Like passing a bloody car wreck Its safe!!!! Highlu overrated. Not a major problem to anyone but the most Puritanical minded people. I prefer the real thing! not a big deal... I wish everyone would grow up... The internet is a good outlet for sexual expression, whether it be viewing sexual explicit material or talking to somebody else about sex the internet should be a community without the interference if the govt. and in which people can express themselves freely I think it is great, just like frosted flakes! I like to download jpeg, it's exicting, you never know what you get, the men are usually great pics, big cocks, hot scenes, nice build, like to be really free and talk dirty I think sex is great but it's a new experience on the net The internet is a safe place to explore one's sexuality. You don't have to worry about committing yourself to a situation that might be dangerous, and you can discover others who share your issues, concerns. Often, you can learn how to express your sexuality in an appropriate manner and be responsible for the consequences. People should not rely on or let the gov't to regulate the I'net. Most people oppose sex on the internet because of kids. Well, parents need to take responsibility of their children!! Besides there is all the sex and violence you'd want on cable TV. I think it is interesting and informative I feel that it is safe play for adults. Like an interactive porno book I' m born FREE and I wanna be FREE Sex on the Internet is a turn on and informative too! whats the point!!!is our culture so obessed with sex that it permeates everything-get a real life!!! yeah there's plenty... but you have to pay by credit card for it so under 18s cant access most of it anyway. it is ok I'm concerned about dangerous characters on the net ... otherwise ... whatever! Not the best, but it helps I think that sex in the internet is cool, because sometimes people have nothing better to do so they want to see dirty pictures Should be for adults 18 or older. Should have password to go into pornography set by the owner of the pc. Nothing better I want to know where to find someone to talk to It's really to hard to find. I wish there was an easy way to get a hold of it. Please try and correct this. Mail Me!! schr0009@metnet.edu It's good entertainment I think it has given me new ideas and if parents don't want their kids to see sex on the internet, then they should keep a closer eye on their kids or have the kids ask them to put in their password! Haven't encountered it. Interesting and exotic,something different,this makes it what it is. I don't agree that minors should be exposed to sexually explicit material, but I do agree that the internet as a sex education tool could be very useful. It is ultimately the responsibility of the administrators of sites which contain sexually explicit material to ensure that all reasonably necessary security precautions are in place to make it more difficult for minors to obtain access, and the parents of children have a responsibility to ensure that those children don't have easy access (because let' face it, it's out there and if a kid REALLY wants to find it, they will.) IT'S GREAT! I CAN SEE ANYTHING I WANT. In general : Tasteless, and too damn easy to find. I want more! More and more good Too many sites have been blocked or require "membership" fees. I paid for online services. I should be able to see anything I choose without having to fork out additional fees. It's a sham. The real vulgarities are violence, weapons and cruelties human beings perpetrate on one another and nothing much is ever said about that. Curious that the "evil" is one of the few brief pleasurable events in the course of a lifetime! Encourage sleeping around, speed up the spreading of AIDS!!! Not enough gay stuff! Relax, Everything is working out as should be. I personally feel that it is blown out of perportion!! Yes there is alot of adult oriented materials out ther but if you look at it proportionally it is a drop in the bucket. The amount of general information available is staggering and comparitively the pornographic stuff is only a small amount.. I think it's just big media hype...you can find sex anywhere anyway anyhow...not just on the net, besides all the pedophile cases happened on AOL "the safe online atmosphere". Parents should pay more attention to their kids rather than plopping them down in front of some screen (may it be tv or computer). Not to mention the fact the rules for strangers apply online too! The government should stay out of it. TOO MUCH PUBLICITY all naked pictures and things pertaining to sex should be restricted to a separate system It's all about open mindedness. If you don't like Sex on the net, don't look for it. That easy. You probably don't have a sex life to begin with and need the Net to redeem yourself. :) (no specific targets for my allegations) there's not nearly as much sex on the net as so-called "moral guardians" cliam there is Sex ok sex and the internet is a good place for people in general to learn about many aspects of sex. Iif an individual can find some information on the net, all the power to them. If tbe information is available, take a look. you may even learn something. It's fun and kinky! great I ENJOY HAVING THE ACCESS WHEN I WANT AND WHAT I WANT I think it's GREAT! I think that sex on the internet is a good outlet for people. It can discourage other methods of sexual outlet Keep the damn government out of it! I like it, however I belive it is overrated. Personally I think if someone has a problem with the net they do not have to use it. I also think parents should be responsable for what their childeren can view on the net. Promotes violence towards women & children. It's a harmless passtime, but it shouldn't become an obsession. Seems like a good way to contact many to find the few! Those who are interested will find "it" on the net or elsewhere. An excellent opportunity to explore, and perhaps sometime, experience my own personal fantacies I think there is a lot of sexual material on the internet; but I think that it is the Parents/Guardians responsibility to monitor what their child is accessing. a breath of fresh air net enough experience as i look for information on my own particular fettish and try to understand it, i was surprised at the amount of hard core pornoghrapy i ran into. infantilism, or adult babies is what i need information on, not to have a partner in it, but to understand my own sexual patterns. hard to find good FREE sites, I wouldn't mind paying but won't bother sending 5$ subscription from where I am (Europe, no credit card) Pretty harmless. You're able to be a bit more open in, say, the IRC and it's fun. Harmless and fun!!! If you want it you should be able to get it. If you don't , don't go there. It's great for adults. Need to do something about childrens access. The sex on the internet is mild in comparison to what is readily available at the local newsstand. think it is great and hate censorship..if ya dont like it dont look at it..dont ruin it for rest of us like bread and water its A new medium for expressing ones desires i dont desire Frankly, I wish it were easier to find, and wish it could be more open. But then, maybe I do not know the proper keywords I believe it gives people a chance to be more open, to be anyone they want, and to explore fantasies that they would not in real life. give it to me NOW While I'm not particularly offended by sexual content in mild form, some people are. It's hard to please everyone. I dislike lewd and foul language on the net, people using foul language should be warned and if repeated could face expulsion from the net. Other than that there is a time and a place (even on the net) for such things. Parents should be responsible to black out questionable material to protect children. Its out there, but that's the way it should be. non-harmful fun pastime Too much emphasis on sex and Internet! Let people be who they are... I enjoy it because it's just recreational and totally safe. Sex on the Internet dont bother me at all. Love IT should be here as long as people want it. americans need to know the diff. of nudity vs phonograghy! I think the Internet has opened an entire new level to sex - a new place to go, new sexes to taste, everything there is you may never have known about...just like all information no answer It's been overrated as a subject would like to find stories of voyeurism and group sex it's ok COOL...two thumbs up!! I feel that sex and the internet are a good combination! I can't find real hard core it gives me a good chance to fufil fanticies and masturbate It's the best thing since sliced bread. It is a way to explore my fanticies It is GREAT! Overrated I wish I could find hardcore pictures and stories Ithink that sex on the net is cool. It is a learning experience for everyone who uses it. I know that I have learned some new ideas and answers. It's a great way to unwind. more is better It's great but very expensive! Looking at it keeps you awake and going during the day. It has helped have sex with many types of people, therfor I adore any thing on th e net. i think it opens horizons We all have secret fantasies, it just that some people put themselves above that do to the way they were raised. I am a resectable adult and I actually have fun on the net. And I haven't been corrupted or hurt in any way. I find other opinions very interesting.:-) i think it is great, it relieves stress and most of the time gives me a good laugh Its a new world. i think that the the telicommunications bill SUCKS I THINK IT'S GREAT.... I like it. I like to be able to chat about it whenever I want to. We should be able to but at a regulated way. sex is good, so is the internet, but sex is better. EITHER I AM NAIVE OR JUST HAVEN'T BEEN LOOKING IN THE RIGHT PLACES BECAUSE I HAVE SEEN LITTLE IF NOTHING ON THE NET THAT I WOULD CONSIDER TO BE "SEX." I think if someone wants to watch trash thats ok, but don't have it avaliable for young people. So keep it off the net...... Not aproblem until you make it one... I love the Net! I DON;T NEED THE INTERNET FOR SEX quick Similar to TV and radio -- Too much will hinder the net's ability to prosper in a "business" world. There should be a mechanism to lock children out of sites with sexual content. Very much present, but not confronting. I thing it would be hard for children to find hard core porn, and their parents should control operation anyway! sex is great,the internet is great,we're all great,and some of us are damn good. I think that it is my right to view pornography and as long as there is away to keep children from it, such as nanny, it should be allowed on the net. very interesting I don't mind it, it's a good brian walk I don't have a problem with people wanting to post stuff on the net that is sex related. Its great nah i will save it for myself Online sex is a way of dealing with sexula frustrations that allows you to have a sexual experience with another partner without the home wrrecking side effects of having an affair. I really enjoy making love to total strangers online and then when it's I am writing a paper on sex on the internet and enjoyed this its fun. it makes me hot! I don't particularly care! I think that looking for sexually explicit material can help to alleviate boredom... I see no reason to censor sexual material because it can easily be avoided if one takes offense... The only people that I think have any sort of right to censor are parents of children using the Web, and even then, the kids are going to find it if they want it anyway, so why bother trying to hide it? They go hand in hand, but they are NOT the one and same. I wish it was easier to search for what you are looking for. Great safe and enjoyable It helps me to understand who I am. I think it should'nt be forbidden on COLLEGE campuses!!!! Sex is a part of life that people are facanated by. The internet should not be sencered sence it is just as esy to go into a bookstore and find materals about sex. i don't konw much about the internet yet, so I can't really rate it. Groovy We have no right to censor other peoples personal choices, however I feel it should be subject to multiple passwords to ensure no unauthorized use occurs. Perhaps as clubs? The internet is for everybody. It CAN be shared responsibly by everyone! I don't think there is anything wrong with consenting adults having access to sexually oriented material. I think we should take more responsibility for policing our own families' values, and less time whining about other peoples' interests. the government should keep their noses out of the net and the net should be completely open I think people try to impose their own morals on others when they don't want in. Sex is what YOU make of it, not pictures. Pictures and communication satisfies curiosity. It's the parents that need to get more involved, and stop blaming others for their screwups. As I have stated previously, I believe that the parents/legal guardians should personally limit or completely eliminate the possibility of net access (or use the programs available to block pornography) for the ones in question. I also think communication should not be limited for those of "legal age." Parents have nothing worry about except their own teachings and time spent with their children. i wish too find more hardcore photos for free on net It is an outlet. It is good for those who need something Not a problem at all, if parents take their role seriously. Can be an educational experience! I think it is great. There should be complete openess about it. not enough------more more....and a lot more If you don't like it, come back when you can't stay so long i think it's fine. when my child is old enough i will be there to monitor what she has access to... I don't believe in censorship of any sort however I do believe in parents monitoring their children to ensure they don't encounter inappropriate material It allows me to engage in things I cant anywhere else. I think sex on the net promotes safe sex, rather than being out there actually fucking, people are at hom masturbating to pictures on their PC. I think its fine. I don't believe the government can enforce morality they tried it with proabition.. That didn't work. So they should leave it as it is and let the parents montor it. A kid can call a 900 # or steal their parents pornos and its much easier... Only recently purchased PC so I'm not qualified to have an opinion. However, as for porn, I believe parents should have the common sense to know that a kid will look for items related to sex. its for sad people with no life. It helps to understand Met a potential partner to explore homosexuality... outrageous Good motivator for real erection and masturbation by this old fart. everything should be open and only rated It's OK. I think it can help some people. It's also a safe outlet in this diseased world. It is a very good thing. Not everyone has a computer. It's a medium like magazines and other mediums. Sex, like everything else in life has to be dealt with carefully. We should be taught to deal with it responsibly, not to avoid it. Sex is wonderful! Good potential for distribution of opinions and information It ok some of the material is masked as to what it really is. Somewhat concerns me with small children in my house. Very Good! I feel it is impossible to keep it off the net but it can be regulated by ratings and s/w that restricts access. It is not a plcae for government intervention. I LOVE IT KEEP IT COMING!!! Sex and the Internet is NO BIG DEAL. I think it helps you to keep an open mind on all issues. I think, for single individuals, it is a way to vent their sexual frustrations. I feel it is ok so long watch it in the privacy of your home... The topic is overblown but a real concern. The net needs to learn that with power comes responsibility, and freedom isn't license. I don't think everyone will learn that. nice, hhhhhhmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmm Find It is private and safe to do in your own home, but kids should be blocked from the really bad areas of the net and parents should over see their kids experiences with the net. Sex is a must� Like all issues bordering on social Acceptability, I beleive Fringe groups portray the overall situation incorectly I like it, I love it, I want more of it. Waste of time It gets tiring If it feels good... Sex on the net is fine as long as degrading sex acts and child porn is kept off! It's really like a more available porno store, and most of the time it's free, unless you subscribe to online Hustler and the like. The internet is still a relatively new form of media, so the regulation I believe is yet to to come. I like the sex stuff i wish there was more masturbation themes and beastiality i love it Considering the huge number of people who log on to the various Porno pages, it appears they are fulfilling a need in society.fillings that it is satisfying a need I don't feel that it is the governments place to censor the net. I feel that any material that could be obtained elsewhere should be available on the net. If parents have a problem with this then they should assume the responsibilty for their children and monitor computer activities. Technology has gone too far now that people can have sex on the internet, that is why I am choosing to write a research paper on it. Ruined my marriage - my spouse found a long distance lover. Later it turned a long term relationship/marriage (22 years) into divorce - you maybe next - its starts very innocently and gets out of control. good survey. Glad I could help. I think taking away from anyones rights, just for a minority, is what the Constitution was made to protect us from. I have a right to look at pornography, and someone else has the right not to. Maybe some kind of rating system could eb set up, but there are programs that could be written to make sure that a child couldn't look at pornography. Why this isn't done, I have no idea. It's free, it's everywhere! I'm grateful it is available if I want it. It is difficult to find exactly what I am looking for for the project I am doing in my understandind human sexuality course you need more perverted stuff and stories Let it be. It is a part of life so why hide it! i think it's great. i only wish i had a computer in my bathroom., I think it should not be there to tempt people(me). Maintain moral traditions in this country. Can be very helpful to a couple sex is fun..internet too... Internet with Sex is good, like life with sex is good. Should be accessable to adults only by registration. It's a free country It is a shame that the same perverts who prey on children in our society have caused serious consideration for censorship on the net. do not infringe on my first amendment rights.you will not get my vote!!!!! clinton do you hear me!!!! sex on the internet has to be looked for and found. parents stand up and take responsibility.!!!! thank you. i hope this survey is put to good use.... Oh gosh, it's fun and kinda boring all at the same time. I think it has been enlightening It is a great communications medium... Oh gosh, it's fun and kinda boring all at the same time. a new experience for a new generation Never been involved in looking for sex sights until now. Hope the survey proves worthwhile Everything (esp. pics) on my service is censored. This is ridiculous. It is extremely frustrating. The net is some peoples way of learning about sex! it's taught me a lot it is fun(the internet) I think it's great at times, the best is because you don't know who the other person is. It is great! If you want it you can go get it and learn about the real world out there. You cannot hide our inborn drives, as hard as you may try we are still bilogical creatures and no matter how much our minds grow our bodies will lag behind AND control our behavior biologically! It's there if you want but noone forces it on you!!! anyone can search and find what they are looking for as far as sex is concerned. can't get access; think it would be great I beleive in total freedom of expression. It is up to each individual to screen out what offends them. Harmless anonimity could be a neat thing for some,but useless for others. I prefer skin in most social settings, but I am very moral in my approach to my marraige. It might be a "harmless" thing, it might not. It's ok for adults but not for little kids who are just "surfing". Personal responsibility for oneself or family. But how possible is that concept in America's Blame Someone Else culture? very entertaining Sex is GOOD The government is too big already, they need to leave the net alone. How do they think they could regulate pages from foreign countries, anyway? It's really not that big of a deal i don't have a problem with it. it helps people express themselves in a safe way. it shouldn't be monitored in any way. those that have a problem with it should just not go to those sites, or leave them if they happen to end up on one. with regards to chi it is a new medium to teach and learn about sex i like it i think it is a way to mindlessly surf the net. i look for xxx rated sexual material on the net as a way to relax or past the time its ok I wish I could see more Sex on the net rules!!! Fun! I think it's "all good" and I have sex on line whenever I can. i think it is a great learning experience Sex appears to be a part of everything in our lives so it is only natural that it would be on the internet. I don't believe that any laws will prevent this I also don't believe that it is any more difficult or easier to obtain then in printed form. don't have to much to say on the subject right now. Available, but parents should monitor/restrict access with a password or encryption (pgp?) I would like to chat with hetero guys & gals. I am new to the Internet, therefore, I cannot make any valid comments either way. It should be more I think sex on the net is another form of adult entertainment. It is similar to viewing adult movies and reading adult magazines It is a good that it can provide sex information to anyone whose have questions about sex i have no problems with it. I think sex is best left between two people who love each other. can get new ideas and fantasize without risking anything I haven't been lucky enough to find any good pornographic pictures on the net. All I hear is everybody else finds it and I can't . There should be some info service that tells anyone looking for sexual videos or pictures how to find it Thanks I think it is fun for adults only. As a sex writer on the net, I believe that humor and honesty is the best approach in ANY subject matter. I relay experiences (personal and those related to me from friends and outside sources and none of it (in my mind, at least) can be construed as offen There is no such thing...while there is sexual material on the internet, don't confuse the internet as being sexual..if u do, u have problems!! i've really enjoyed having net sex. it has tranlated into much better sex with my partner and we both are enjoying the new change. i like it it's great Sex and th Internet? That's an oxymoron. Its an improper forum. The internet should promote morality not sexuality. time consuming I feel that the internet is a WONDERFUL way to meet people and practice safe sex. Much of the posted erotica is highly stimulating and fairly easy to access, considering I never have to leave my home to get it. I think that minors should not have easy access to it. it is very intriguing, would like to experience cybersex Whoever wants porn can find it. Why restrict it here? It's no different than picking up a magazine in the store. When the parents are into it, the children will find out. If it's restricted here it must be restricted everywhere. Parents: keep your kids out of the back of the closet where your mags. & videos are & keep an eye on you children when they are on the net. I am horney Over-rated! People must understand that this is done by many, and hasn't hurt anyone yet. Pornography is just Pictures, it's art. Just like art stimulates you visually and mentally, so does pornography. It helps when I need it. too censored I am against censorship on the net. Children should be supervised by their parents while they are on the net. The media in America has over blown this subject and it has gotten very old, "cyber-sex" and "porn on the `net" are just a bunch of rubbish. I'm sick of the American public being spoon-fed everything they should thin from the media. It makes me sick... it provides a specail service! Internet is a very hot place. I like it !!! I think sex is a natural part of human existance. Nature is a very diverse thing and therefore so are things that are a product of nature. Therefore different people have different thoughts on what is or is not ok sexually. My feeling is that as long as they are not hurting another person, what two or more consenting adults do or talk about doing is none of any other person's business. If diverse sexual topics are not of interest to you, then you should not be looking for them on the net. For thoe people that are interested, there should not be censorship!!! Sex on the Net, while I haven't experienced it, can in no way, shape, or form be as good as it is with my current partner. I only hope that whoever is reading this sentence has a partner 25% as good as mine......then they'd never even know what the hell the Net is (sexually speaking). I cannot imagine how repressed and angry one would have to be to want to deny even adults access to what is, after all, a perfectly legitimate adult interest. Parents do need to have the option of guiding their childrens' exposure to sexual material on th I've already said sex is ok as long as there are safeguards No Answer I think its fine!!! Cybersex is the safest sex for kids!!! It is a place for the curious to search/discuss/ and maybe meet others of similar tastes. Fantaballistic!!! I think it's overrated. Real life is a WHOLE lot better I would like to find someone to have sex with online. Hey, it's safer than anyother kind of SEX around! Alot of bait and switch techniques are used to get you to join certain clubs. Most of them are a rip off ! How would you deal with the issue of regulating sexual/offensive content? teach about the problems abour seuality if you do not want to see it turn it OFF adult registration sites children should be locked out All services must be subscribed to and age verified! our freedom of choice make people give ID net should be completely open with restrictions applied by myself Create software for parents to restrict certain sites. Let the parents police their own children There should be more porn tell those opposed to turn off pc have a smart card that can only be acquired by adults so that children cannot access, becoz these restrictions are mostly meant for their benefit. democratic system based on 80% disapproval means banned, no less, or very active "minority groups", such as miltant Christians would be able to dictate what we could see. Let existing laws handle Users should be informed, and choose (manually or via software) to participate. I don't know ... what is dangerously perverse ... needs to be regulated in some way though. If you don't like it, don't look! establish age certification checks The maturing process that is happening now is as should be. The control should be in the home, in the hands of the individuals you know there is software out there to keep kids from getting to certain stuff... Shut down the Government teach your children values If they don't like it turn it off. Use a filter Parents should watch over their kids on line Should be open but, need to limit childrens access I'm damned tired of being protected from myself by the Government & it's agencies Find a way to exclude children from viewing Parents should monitor what they and children see Have an access code, provided by the sever Have parents watch their kids and not depend on government! "We pay for it. It's none of their business!" yes, the net should be open, i feel it is the responibility of the people or parent to lock out any services that could influence children. And hey, if they disagree with the contents, DON"T GO THERE!!! The Government will control how we go to the bathroom if we let them!!! The Government should fuck off. self-policing, involvement of parents and teachers in what their children do on-line, etc. they should show how to find sex on the net on public television Educate parents on how to be parents and educators The web is world wide it should be ran by the people of the countrys on the net. The government runs enough of our lives. make use of passwords, etc. with a rating system. Provide a lockout mechanism that individuals can use a their own discression. It's an active part of life, deal with it in perspective Parents should recognize the fact that sexually explicite material is available on the net and therefore should focus more strongly on the development and increase of moralistic values in turn personally monitoring and/or eliminating the availability of net access to the child. educate PROPERLY and de-stigmatize sex age verification by outside company like first virtual ex. Everyone has there own judgement put security codes on really bad rated stuff password access make parents responsible for their children everyboddy should be required to use net sex Things like surfwatch if you dont like it, dont look at it!!!!!!!!!!!! Create applete for parents to lock out sights Under 21:locked out...Over 21: NOTHING censored The Net should be open and Parents should be responsible for their children!!! if people don't like it....don't go to those sites! Independent rating, but no censorship if a rating system was implemented, it should still be completely open Parents should control what their children see. No one else is responsible. Parents should monitor their kids let people decide what they want to see people should control their own lives Be issued an internet Id to go anywhere sites allow you to go Educate the masses on proper morals and let them handle themselves. This can best be done by studying the most popular practical religion of all time: Scientology A combination of a rating system and some kind of acess program for each individual set to levels of sexual content by an appropiate person that should be setting the values for this individual (such as a parent for a child, or an individual for an indivi Let each individual police his/her own computer and it users with the appropriate software!!!!!!! Site-rating (or voluntary self-rating) & subsequent coding of sites in tandem with software allowing parents to block access to any site coded as "adult", and ANY site they deem undesirable, at their discretion. No need for censorship then! Open with various safeguards. Questions, comments, suggestions? Contact us. Return to theHome Page. Copyright ©1996, /InterCommerceCorporation, All rights reserved worldwide Send comments to Webmaster@Survey.net WT02-B22-21IA060-000333-B020-304http://www.survey.net:80/inet1r.html 204.107.221.240 19970115054023 text/html 7442HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 15 Jan 1997 05:34:06 GMTServer: Apache-SSL-US/1.0.3+1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 7260Last-modified: Wed, 15 Jan 1997 05:03:27 GMT SURVEY.NET Poll Results Your source for information, opinions & demographics from the Net Community! Internet Survey #1 - Current Results Total Respondents: 6853 Age Group [ 1652]  24.1% - 26-30[ 1120]  16.3% - 22-25[  959]  14.0% - 41-50[  923]  13.5% - 31-35[  636]   9.3% - 36-40[  582]   8.5% - 19-21[  336]   4.9% - 51-60[  275]   4.0% - 13-16[  255]   3.7% - 17-18[   67]   1.0% - 61-70[   26]   0.4% - under 12[   14]   0.2% - 71+ Sex [ 4998]  72.9% - Male[ 1847]  27.0% - Female Educational Background [ 2234]  32.6% - College[ 2135]  31.2% - College Graduate/Bachelors Degree[ 1260]  18.4% - College Graduate/Masters Degree[  445]   6.5% - Some High School[  441]   6.4% - High School Graduate[  304]   4.4% - College Graduate/PhD+[   25]   0.4% - College Graduate/PhD Is your business associated with the PC/Computer industry? [ 2721]  39.7% - Computer industry-related Occupational Status [ 4214]  61.5% - Professional[ 2161]  31.5% - Student[  320]   4.7% - Blue Collar[  149]   2.2% - Retired Related Industry/Classification of respondants [ 2418]  35.3% - Education/Student[ 1658]  24.2% - Service[  841]  12.3% - Publishing[  523]   7.6% - Other/Unemployed[  421]   6.1% - Sales[  376]   5.5% - Government[  368]   5.4% - Manufacturing[  240]   3.5% - Arts/Creative Primary use of the internet [ 2784]  40.6% - Research[ 1856]  27.1% - Entertainment[ 1143]  16.7% - Communication[  674]   9.8% - Sales/Marketing/PR[  385]   5.6% - Education Best feature of the internet [ 2432]  35.5% - Size of the network[ 1196]  17.5% - Quality of information[  874]  12.8% - Multi-cultural/world-wide[  706]  10.3% - Array of features/client applications[  628]   9.2% - Lack of regulation[  594]   8.7% - Communication speed/performance[  414]   6.0% - Cost to use Second-best feature of the internet [ 1783]  26.0% - Size of the network[ 1096]  16.0% - Quality of information[ 1082]  15.8% - Cost to use[  858]  12.5% - Multi-cultural/world-wide[  770]  11.2% - Array of features/client applications[  665]   9.7% - Lack of regulation[  589]   8.6% - Communication speed/performance Most-used internet application [ 4138]  60.4% - WWW[ 1663]  24.3% - E-Mail[  383]   5.6% - Newsgroups[  145]   2.1% - IRC[   96]   1.4% - Telnet[   49]   0.7% - Other[   39]   0.6% - Ftp[   19]   0.3% - Gopher Second most-used internet application [ 3630]  53.0% - E-Mail[ 1720]  25.1% - WWW[  743]  10.8% - Newsgroups[  253]   3.7% - Ftp[  166]   2.4% - IRC[  122]   1.8% - Telnet[  121]   1.8% - Gopher[   90]   1.3% - Other Respondants use the internet to: [ 2936]  42.8% - Write/setup web pages[ 2090]  30.5% - Have a personal web page[ 1961]  28.6% - Promote a business[ 1712]  25.0% - Decode binary images in newsgroups[ 1646]  24.0% - Download/decode erotic imagery[ 1323]  19.3% - Send/Receive Video[  997]  14.5% - Develop software/applications[  664]   9.7% - Run a network[  157]   2.3% - Moderate a newsgroup Respondant is a: [ 4237]  61.8% - US Citizen[ 1171]  17.1% - AOL subscriber[ 1026]  15.0% - Subscriber/other service[  872]  12.7% - Compuserve subscriber[  843]  12.3% - BBS caller[  480]   7.0% - Prodigy subscriber[  307]   4.5% - BBS sysop Respondant has: [ 4447]  64.9% - Been responsible for others getting on the internet[ 2105]  30.7% - Used a Shareware program/not register[ 2099]  30.6% - Registered a Shareware program[ 2067]  30.2% - Bought a product advertised online[ 1956]  28.5% - Purchased a product online[ 1208]  17.6% - Seen illegal activity conducted/promoted online[  678]   9.9% - Dated somebody you met online[  662]   9.7% - Downloaded a pirated program[  435]   6.3% - Tried to hack another system There are also User Specified Comments on this survey available Questions, comments, spelling corrections? Contact webmaster@survey.net. Return to theHome Page. Copyright ©1996, /InterCommerceCorporation, All rights reserved worldwide Send comments to Webmaster@Survey.net WT02-B22-22IA060-000333-B026-63http://www.survey.net:80/sex1c6.html 204.107.221.240 19970115060050 text/html 103675HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 15 Jan 1997 05:54:21 GMTServer: Apache-SSL-US/1.0.3+1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 103491Last-modified: Mon, 25 Nov 1996 20:26:46 GMT SURVEY-NET - SEX Survey User Responses (ARCHIVE VII) Your source for information, opinions & demographics from the NetCommunity! ANNOUNCING: The Internet's finest interactive, totally-automated,immediate survey system. We can take any form and instantly create adynamic demographic database and show you the results as soon as youcomplete the survey! User comments [ARCHIVE VII] What do YOU think about Sex & the Internet? pretty good It's all a matter of free speech and expression. Let Parents regulate not the government! i like it It's good It's had better days. I don't like this scensorship. i enjoy sex on the internet its fun and easy to recieve too many sites which have no other goal other than to make money. This is turning sex into a commodity which is far more morally degrading that the content. How I learn to use?? I think its great!!! I thinkthat people shopuld be able to put up and read whatever sexual materials they want There is more out there for men than there is for women to enjoy. I think it is a very good thing! America needs a healthier outlook on sex. Any "witch hunt" by government officials should be put down immediately. If anything, truly democratic surveys (perhaps such as this one) should deem what is or isn't appropriate. Life and let live guys and gals, but try to be honest in what you do. I think that it's stupid for people to try and have internet sex. But, everyone is entitled to do as s/he wishes. OK wonderful resource i like it a lot i think it is good I like it! still exploring I think sex and the internet go hand in hand! I love it. over-rated What's with the scantily-clad women? where are the pictures of men? I love it. It's a stress reliefer in my opinion! Leave it alone. People need to make their own decisions. I do not want to pay taxes for the government to make everyone decisions for them! it's fine Useful Too public. Disapprove. Too much access for minors. it's great this is america land of the free ! Please keep the government out! I like to see pictures. i like to peruse all content at my discretion No comment It's a great way to communicate your sexual desires... I think it has it's value. Love sex, can not get enough and want to be able to contact someone to talk to without strings attached. its there if you want it. but so are books!and drugs,if you want it you will find and get it. i like it. i've never heard of anyone being "Net-Raped" great It is impossible to stop so sit back & enjoy it I think for adults its find but keep it away from kids Not much is know yet, it's too new, and can go many ways... tamura@legno.interzone.or.jp Much of it is sick. I can't believe the number of freaks that use computers. I've not found anything really "offensive". Its been a lot of fun and if anything is really offensive to you you can always "squelsh" them. I think that parents need to monitor their children, and let the rest of us RESPONSIBLE ADULTS choose for ourselvs. I also believe that the government should not censor things that special interest groups don't find to be politically correct. I think Republican blowhards should raise their kids, not mine. I don't think it is doing anybody any good, it's not going to hurt them if they can not acess it. And you would protect the people who really should not see the stuff. I think the flirting is fun and it really is no harm if you don't give out your real information. There are alot of uptight people in this world who have nothing better to do except bitch about others. If their kids are smart enough to use a computer, then they should know when they're doing soething against their parents wishes. Besides, the parents are probably looking at it too when the kids aren't there... Phew! THE INTERNET SHOULD BE AN OPEN AND HONEST FORM OF COMMUNICATION easier to by a mag... I use it I think it is ridiculous for the govt to try to take over for parents. Kids have "access" to pornography at newstands, and they should be monitored by THEIR PARENTS! I love it WICKED it is something that is there for ppl who want it others should shut the hell up if they do not like it and get a life not enough of it Sex rules i think there is no problem we are all adults and have a right to look and do what we want on a certain level, i am against child porn and all that garbage but what is between a man and a woman or two consenting adults is their business others don't have to contribute It is part of the world it sould be part of the net Not much to say, really... I think there should be more oppenness about sex, period. There isn't enough sex on the internet as is. How can people sensor it?! MORE SEX!!!! I think it give people a chance to see other things, while being anonymous. In a society that looks at people for what they are rather than who they are, this anonymousness is very improtant to devlopment. This is a free country and everyone of age should have the right to it. Like anything, the Internet can be a haven for explorations and informations if it is not misued. I run an adult web site so of course I like it :) http://www.xsource.com Nice pic (bottom of this survey page) i think internet its a free net...sex on the net... why not? yes I feel that if an adult feels the need to explore the realm of sex on the internet, have fun. But keeping a strict guiadance on underage children is very important. Sex should be a part of the internet to be viewed by consenting adults The regulation of sex on the internet by state, local, and governmental entities should be considered nothing less than censorship, and is not appropriate I think that if people want to look at, read about, and post sexually explicite material on the net the should be alowed to. There should be more free viewing costing nothing i believe that it is beneficial to some, but in other respects it has been damaging i.e. children having access and those who become addicted to sex and the net. male Great! I Think sex on the Internet is fine, actually I enjoy some of the things I have come across. And find some things, though not for me, interesting. But I do think that Web Sites should be "Net Nanny" capable. There are some things I have come across that I don't think younger children should have access to. love it!!!! GREAT Likely to become more regulated Okay, I think. It doesn't seem to be obtrusive. i think that if it is entertainment for some people, then so be it, that is their decision. i am not turned on by it, but i don't see why someone else shouldn't have access to it if they want... I think it is great, the internet should have everything. I am an adult and know what I am doing. it's great for people who wish to engage them selves in things like this it is wonderful, for me personally i think it is pathetic and demeaning! Much ado about nothing It has helped repression... I do accidently run into it occassionally, however I'm not offendned. It should be monitored to a degree for others who stumble upon it. It some type of rating system were assigned then you can view what you liked at your leisure and not worry about children or other stumbling upon graphics or stories that don't interest them. fucked up mostly a waste of energy It's hard to find, and most of what I have found is in the form of teasers for a pay service. Bestiality rules I think that more parents ought to have a password and watch their children if they don't wish them to view . Not the governments responsibility-parents should raise there own children!!!!! I think sex on the inernet is great, It keeps me company when i'm lonely. It is safer than going out and finding these things on the street. It is much safer and you can do it in the comfort of your own home! More stories "articles" to teach people to be more open. I think its good only for people with open minds. Anyone who can't take it don't look at it. Its that simple. huh... It's GREEEEEAAAAAAATT sex is a natural thing if two people no matter how they engage feel good ,thats the best thing very interesting but takes too long to find any good pictures. Safe release of perversity. more locals on chatline; more hardcore porn sites i want to see more dick sucking and ass licking. I think that it is just great. I wish it was easir to find it !!!? I wish there were more... I'm curious, simply that. I think it is good, healthy and should be easily accessed by those who want it. it rules everybody in the world should f**k eachother every day\night i dont think there is anything wrong with it. its a form of expresion No child access to the internet. Parents responsible. Prudes prosecuted for denying other adults their constitutional rights. nobigdeal I am able to see things that I probably wouldn't see elsewhere. I think it is great i want to know more. It is not as bad as it made out. People of age should be allowed to decide what they want. I think that parents should monitor their children's participatation with sex on the internet I feel that it is very over rated and we should consider that we have more interesting things to learn and do to make this a better place to live. its dumb to have sex on the internet when you can just go to your girlfriends house and bang her Whatever gets you through your life,it's alright. It's no different than violence on T.V.. If you don't want it, don't request it or turn it off, but don't tell me what I can or cannot watch or participate in, so long as it doesn't hurt anyone, or breach any laws. i love to look at hardcore fucking the net is just the world we live in be it electronic or not I feel that parents have the ultimate responsibility in monitoring what their children see. I also have always been proud to be an American where there is freedom of speech. As adults, we are able to decide what we do and do not wish to see, just like television, if you don't like it, turn the channel. I feel that adults have the right to view what they choose-however I myself would like to see a lot less hard and deviant areas on the Net. I think regulation of sex is an excuse for monitoring the Internet for other reasons. Newagents are much worse. i think sex is fun and should be enjoyed by anyone who wants to. I believe the new communications bill is unconstitutional. I enjoy the sex on the net, and believe that if you want to see anything of your chosing you have the right i live in liberal-minded finland and i really can't understand the US governments new laws. i always thought YOU were the land of the free etc. now it looks more like united soviet states. The government has no right to regulate. Also, I've read many articles promoting safe sex. This is a good thing! It's great I feel that sex belongs between two married individuals. It does not belong in stores, in the movies and certainly not on the Internet. Part of the problem in America today is that we are teaching our children whatever feels good do. The family unit is becoming a rarity and as you can see by the numbers this has given us a high crime rate, divorce rate, sucide rate, and look at the diseases that are killing our children. Maybe if everyone took the time to be more responsible for what they bring to he net it would clean itself up. Sex is what you make it. Celibacy is it's own punishment. Sensorship is an extension of the desire to control others. I'm not a avid "looker", but occasionally it's amusing. Should be harder to come by for the youth. I think it sucks to have to pay for it all. Sex is ok as long as you use good judgement and have selective sexual partners. I am married, have had sex with at least 3 different women younger than me and this is while I am married. One just has to be disciplined and to have the ability to use good The access should be restricted, but no other regulations. I believe that we need to educate our children on the sex and internet issue. It is part of us. It is only natural for us to enjoy sex. Its one of Gods greatest gifts. We teach it openly in our home. Its not looked upon as sinful but as a beautiful gift to be enjoyed. Education needs to be taught - not censorship. I think software manufacturers should perfect products which will allow parents to set up controls to monitor what sites their children have been to and to block certain sites from their access Open forum for people to express their sexual preferences and communicate with others without inhibition. It is an expression of our free society I think the government should start worrying about some real problems like the economy maybe. I think the finances of our counrty are a little more important than people jerking off on the net. Give me a break! There is a lot of "dead-ends" which are previously thought to be sex related. ok I had a few 'hot' moments with people in chat rooms. It's a bit of a laugh really. It is very interesting how everybody is so worried about the porn on the net. Granted, childeren should not see it, but they should also not see pages with violent content and nobody seems to care about that! Also, if there is one thing I hate, then it is where is it? No interest at all. it rocks internet is last haven of free speech on the planet where the hell is it???? ok, could be better To be able to access sexuall content on the net is better than going out into public and asking about it from someone else. I think it should stay!!! interesting. keep it on,you can see it in movies on the street etc. its great I would like to find someone with whom i could have a sexual relationship with. The net may allow me to do so. I think sex is an integral part of human life, and nothing anyone does will ever change that. As the Internet becomes part of human life also, sex will be there. Its Good There should be minimal, if at all, regulation..parents should monitor their kids activity. It is a global concept and no one nation should be able to impose it's law or moral code on others. Don't know yet -- new to the net I don't care. There are far more fascinating, not to mention worthwhile, things on the 'net. good Too Soon To Tell Not much out there, you have to pay for everything. I think that it is good, it promotes safer sex and people have open conversations about it. I don't have a problem with sex on the internet. It should be letf up to each person if they choose to access sexual material on the internet. Doesn't really bother me. I don't look for it, therefore, I don't have to see it. Too much for pay. Would like to see more open forums. It's just like sex everywhere else, it's there it's always gonna be there it's part of life. i like keep it sensual but in good taste COOL i think it's a very heathy way of expressing hidden desires, and appeasing curiosity towards 'taboo' subjects---i commend you! it's fun, but in small letters mmmmmmmm Would like to see more. it's cool it is fine with me aslong as the people using it are not to about the email adress and nameyoung. like i said earlier There are warnings before you can ever get to any porn sites. I feel it is the parents responsibility to watch their children! Wish it was easier to find and get to!! Parents need to moniter their kids. Adults should be able to do what they wish as long as no harm is caused to others. it seems fun part of life, therefore part of the net :) I find sex on the net very exciting, very stimulating its great I think it's a good idea and should not be forbidden. I think that the pornographic area should be cut down but other than that it's alright To damn hard to find For most people, like my husband and myself, sex on the internet is just a novelty. We've both downloaded nudy pictures and browsed around some explicit web sites, but that's about it--no big deal if you ask me. I've seen worse stuff in direct mail catalo Shows lots of examples of failures and what not to do. sucks Cool!!! not very exiting Damages computer keyboard. I FEEL EVERYONE SHOULD BE ABLE TO GET WHAT ONE IS LOOKING FOR WITH NO RESTRICTIONES with good also comes bad. children should'nt have access tp pornography on the net not enough Normal, fun, entertainment FOR ADULTS! Very open communication. Easy to find diverse or special interests. I think sex is good, I also think the internet is good. Why? Personal is a whole lot better! derulate it! I think that the net should be left alone by the politians. There are plenty of programs like Net Nanny, etc. to keep children out of sexually explicit sites and areas. Also, parents need to be more vigilant about what their children are doing when logged on to a service or on the Internet. A simple thing to do would be to establish a log-in password before you can even get into the computer. SEX IS A NATURAL THING. IT SHOULLD BE VIEWED AS BEAUTIFUL,EXCITING. FUN THING FOR ALL ADULTS. IT SHOULD BE SOMETHING THAT ALL ADULTS SHOULD BE ABLE TO OPENLY VIEW, ENGAGE IN, DISCUSS, ETC. PARENTS SHOULD BE THE CENSORS FOR THEIR CHILDREN UNTIL THEY ARE OF AN APPROPRIATE AGE. I think it is grat I think that parents should take more resposibility not the government Sex, just like any other topic should be available on the net. If the gov't censors sex then what is to stop them from censoring any other subject they choose profane. Best thing on Earth you can see sex not just in the net so wy not on the net its just a fantasi sex is natural ,god did it i really like sex on the net, i like to talk with people that have the same sexual fantasy as I do, and i like to talk to guys who have the same drive as i do, i am horny twenty-four hours a day, seven days a week, and I can't get enough sex at home, so i turn to the computer. I think that it can be bad if it's taken too far - but it can be fun too! You can't really interfere here, so to each his own. I think that it is wonderful. People should be able to express their sexual desires on the internet. Everything else that you can possibly think of is on the net, why should sex not be? Too much concern about the web. Don't know about chat lines. I like looking at naked people, but it's kind of hard to do The Internet is a mass of information where people can gain invaluable knowledge about anything and everything, there is nothing wrong with sex on the net, although I draw the line at kiddy porn, that is totally sick. You can walk into a shop and purchase porn, so why not on the net, if parents/gaurdians are worried that their child may see this stuff then they should not le them on the net !!! sex is limited !! GREAT! Good honest survey need more!! It seems to be a big waste of time. ---- Good way to exchange pics ans ideas about specials phantasms I realy enjoy sex on the net. It has opened my mind as well as my spouses. We both enjoy sex on the net and hope that futher restrictions are not placed upon it. We don;t have a credit card so we have to depend on open free material for or viewing pleasure.This is the main area I hope is not taken away. This is very useful for all users It's great. Need more channels on "personals" and individual interaction. Needs to easier to meet others with similar needs so meetings could occur. THE SURVEY IS TOO SHORT, I LIKE DETAIL. The time required to download makes it a drag it's amazing the things that's out there for us to do. It's good for those curious kids out there, better than getting AIDS I think it's a great outlet for closet masterbaters. I fell sexual related topics ought to be available on the net. It is a great place to share differing viewpoints. sucks An Erotic New Way to enjoy one's own sexuality without inhibition! Incredibly Great! the government has no business regulating the net. IT IS THE MOST WONDERFUL THING I HAVE EVER SEEN. THERE IS NOTHING LIKE GETTING OFF WHILE TALKING TO A HOT HORNEY WOMAN I think that it shouldn't be censored....I am trying to currently learn how to Masturbate, and the Internet helps me to let out sexual tension(if I can find any text explaining this...) Its great and our right to view what we want i think that it is great and that it should always be here. I love it! I want some more of it! I firmly believe in the BILL OF RIGHTS! I also belivev that sex should only be between a male and a female who are married. not sure it enables me to learn more about sex It's everywhere, some of it quite disturbing. But as long as it does not break laws it should be left alone. Voltaire said something to the effect of I may disagree with what you are saying but I will die defending your right to say it. That is how I feel It's hot and exciting. It's a turn-on! I like the idea of finding what interests you and contacting the places that you woud not ordinary find Not bad i think its a free country and what two aldults do is their right Sex on the internet is a way for people such as my self to look and listen without leaving their home and getting into trouble. i.e. I would like to see nude pictures of very young girls but would not dream of trying to see them in any real life situation. I am only fascinated by the thought of the taboo not the bullshit that pedophiles pull with minors. I am a on-line looker if I ever find some of these pix, otherwise I have no desire to see it. If your looking for sex on the net you'll find it just like anything on the net that's why it's called the information highway, you can find anything, but the keyword is find/look I don't pay any attention, and rarely encounter it I think it is very educational and has helped my masturbating come alive at least once every other day. thank you fun its real good I not sen soo much of sex, so i cant give any answer There's too much rubbish stuff about sex online, not enough real erotica or pornography i really dont think it is a problem. Its just a computer with words and imagase, but should be over 18 to veiw the sexual material sex sex sex sex sex sex sex sex sex sex sex sex sex sex sex I think that sex should be allowed on the net provided there be some way of restricting younger viewers. I think it's a good way to get off (relax or have fun...) let the user decide what to view lots of fun-- makes me ready to leave the lab and go see my girlfriend It is fun and exciting down loading a picture and waiting to see what it looks like I enjoy it. I LOVE SEX interesting I enjoy looking through it, and would be more involved if I had a access to the net through my home computer! I like freedom it shows me that "normalcy" in penis size, and body shapes, and peoples basic desires, have a much wider range of activities (hence within the norm), than Bob Dole would like us to believe. Sex on the net is entertaning . it is full of puritanism As a female that was afraid that I was one of only a few women that wanted sew with another female yet remained married and in a fairly good hertero relationship, I was extremely pleased to find so many people on the net with similar feelings. Yes, there are perverts on the net, but from my experience, there are truly some great people out there. Thanks to who ever invented this safe way to get it on and to meet others of similar interests. oh well it is the penthouse of the 1990's just like i first saw in the 1960's. the same scene just different more mature viewers. kids grow up faster and have more freedom yee-hah! Can't find anything "hardcore" I would like to know more about it SEEMS LIKE A HARMLESS WAY TO GET OFF. I'm all for it Its a blast I think it's underrated, with the access that I have to it. I don't mide sex on the net, but I do think that there should be a rating system and with this rating system you should need a pass word to access the porn material. It's cool ! Consenting adults should not be monitored or restricted. If you can't control what your kids watch or check out, maybe you should pay more atention to what they are doing ! It's no big deal, the computer like the television shouldn't be resbonsible for baby sitting children Sex on the internet is for lonely souls who should reconsider the use of any hard-core sexual material. its intersting its fun and why not!!! It should not be regulated in any way. Control the reaction, not the act of observing. Parents must prepare their kids for what's out there, not close their eyes to it. Teach them to deal with reality, not hide from it. They should show more to the public according to a system of pass words and confidential numbers. I think it is wonderful. I gives me the opportunity to meet people who share the same interests as I. I think that it has answered a lot of my questions that I never wanted to ask other people about. Sex should not be referred to as a bad thing but it should be discussed openly amoung people of different sexual orientations, age, and sexual background. FUN FUN It has been fun exploring sex on the net. As more experience is gained surffing, hopefully the sex will get better. Well i like to find a site with good pics every once in a while just like any normal guy likes to flip thru a porno mag to look at the girlies. It gives me something to do in the slow parts of the workday. I dont think the government should have controll it rocks The internet RULES! wonderful It has explained many questions I had. Improved my understanding of my personel sexualitty just exploring Inevitable. The more attention is given to it, the more desire there will be for it too. IT RULES i like it It rules!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!! I DON'T THINK IT SHOUL BE AVAILABLE TO ANYONE! Great! I like to be on top love it, gets out alot of frustration and curiosity I don't have an opinion. If some one wants to look at it that is their business. It can be informative or it can promote 'perversion'. I like it and I like it hard. The best place to have sex is in the home, with your loving partner -- gitta real life cyberpeople! I don't think it is an issue at all. great it's better to have it here, than having pron shops across the road Sex on the net is a good thing. I think that it is a good that sexual matters can be discuss openly and without censor. The impact of children is probably an over concern. I doubt what they will see on the net is more corrupting than the mindless violence they see on the television. It has always amased me that it is Ok to should a man shooting a woman but not OK to see him pleasuring her. No big deal. Here that, Newt? No big deal! Cool Great. I've found much better erotica here than at any bookstore I'm willing to visit! The net should have the same freedom of speech that any other mag./paper has. I AM NEW TO THE NET. IT IS STILL HARD TO USE. It's a double edged sword(OHH BABY!!!!) No Comment I Love BIG CHESTED BITCHES, WITH HAIRY CUNTS? I think that it should be easier to find nothing for free GOD Bless America!!!!!!!!!!!!!!! Amen Brother!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!! interesting... I think it is ok the way it is and it should not be limited by any government intervention or service providers. I think the internet COULD be a useful tool to help those who are curious about sex and who would like information about the subject. It's boring to me but anyone who's into it should have access, except for child pornagraphy. Free speech! I prefer the real thing. My wife and I learned some new techniques...We get "turned on" more...We now have sex every day! I think it's the parent's responsibility to monitor children's activities. If the government is allowed to regulate the net, it will infringe on our constitutional rights and set a dangerous precedent leading to an eventual "police state." fuckin great until the feds fuck it up I met my boyfriend on the net and i am totally in love so I am all for it! =) It has it's place. After all, it is natural. But let the user decide what is right. Good but could be made easy for assess I LIKE IT a easy way to have fun without getting into trouble at a bar or with a strange dissease amazing how prevalent..how much fun it all is I think it is interesting, safe, and an outlet for many people who would not experience sex any other way. Sex is a lot different than "making love" with someone. I like to explore areas and the Internet lets me do this in the privacy of my own home. However there are some people out there that use the Internet for more than curiosity, i.e. pedophiles. im 58yr male married 28yr going on 50 enjoy surfing have sex w/wife 2-5 times wk, masturbate 3-5 times wk IT'S A LITTLE TOO RACEY-ESPECIALLY IF A CHILD IS ON THE INTERNET I think the Internet is a great way for people to communicate about sex. Sexuality on the net is less harmless than real sex. I don't mind it at all. I find it as a healthy output for sexual desire. It has made me more open to new experiences. exposure to other people's ideas NOT ENOUGH OF IT! HARD TO FIND AUTOFALLATIO/FISTING ETC...GOOD SITE & PICTURES LIKE THAT! sex is great, if you need the internet to get it(and if you are old enough)well then, take what you can! The things I've seen made me terrified I am curious, what is a future of that Better than looking at dictionaries for stuff (joke) fascinating, sorry to sound like spook. Sex on the internet is great.I dont want it to go. informative and there!!!! The internet has helped me realize my sexuality - and has actually made me more comftorble (SP!) with some words i normally wouldent use... :) Hey life is good! not enough In the short few months I have been here I have seen a lot of sites from graphic hard core to informative and useful. I like both and dont wish to see either go, however there should be some mandatory rating/ blocking system in place to protect those who are easily influenced (minors). This would include not only sexual sites but also some of the other materials which are unsuitable to minors. I think that it will be influential in electing Harry Browne of the Libertarian Party President in '96; if you fave no taxes and less government, check out http://www.HarryBrowne96.org/. Primitive it's great. Lot of good times. 'safe sex' I don't know what the big hangup people have over sex is all about. The way it's talked about in 'public' way too often is that it's a bad/dirty thing. It's not. COnsensual sex bewteen educated partners can be a wonderful thing. I'd still much rather have my child hear talk of a sexual nature than hear of a murder... Personally, I think that a person cannot, as I said in my last answer, it is virtually impossible to accidently run into sex online. I think that it is a personal issue that needs to be resolved within the home and not to be cheated out of a freedom because of the government. It's my new greatest source of orgasm and pleasure I do not know havent seen it. It's Everywhere Its not as good as the real thing! Thats for sure! i like it Sex on the interenet is good. too many sites ask for money. Not as good as the real thing, but better than nothing! I'm not sex-mad, but I must admit it is something that I could not be without. I'm married to a very open-minded, sexy woman but only see her for about 6 days a month due to my job, therefore I try to find ways of relieving my frustration. This I do by masturbating, a lot, I would like to see more free hard-core porn on the net, I realise that it would make it easier for children to view it, but it is up to parents to restrict their children. but unless you're loose with the credit card, forget it! it is cool Swinging is what we are into,without our bbs it would be difficult It is fine, just don't let children get to it. It is a little too easy to access it. it is TRASH I THINK THERE SHOULD BE MOVIES SHOWN interesting I don't have a problem with sex and the Internet at all I think it is up to the parent s to watch out for what there kids are looking at. I think pornography is cool. nothing wrong with it as long no one try to put unrelated materials inside of the net. It is a safe alternative to real life sex.... No AIDS to worry about while you are doing it. it's interesting I believe that it is just like buying a dirty magazine but there should be some way to protect the children It's an outlet, more than anything else. Something should definitely be done to regulate it and the parents should be responsible for blocking sexually explicit sites. I believe I have never even heard of sex on the internet It has replaced expensive men's magazines. I save money. It can be entertaining and infiormative. It can also be very enlightening because it helps others get over the stigma that sex is unhealthy, evil or just palin dirty. Nice to have the option!!! I would like to see more, its fun. It's OK i think its stimulating, only problem is i realy dont know how to acsess sites properly nand end up mostly seeing nothing. Sex on the Internet is awesome and i want it to be more graphic, without a price, and so graphic that you could cum on the spot!Fuck everything!!! I think that there should be a self-policing organization. Children should be protected -- they are so vulnerable & abuse is so prevalent. It is a great resource and outlet. PARENTS, not the government, should regulate their children's access. It is way overrated. If you are not interested in it it is simple to avoid and easy enough to keep children out of it. So let it be. help stop the government's attack on the first admendment love it some are too much but in general,it's okay with me I think parents can purchase Cyber Patrole to keep their children from viewing adult material. Why should the rest of us be punished? Why can't the government treat adults like adults and let us decide what to do about children accessing sex on the inte FREEDOM OF SPEACH Get rid the the damn child molestors, the loser beatiality pictures/movies/stories, and burn all of those F-CKING faggots i think it's great that it's available to me but at the same time it shouldn't be available to anyone under 18. kids have a hard enough time growing up to be infleuenced by porn it is great and mind stimulating. great I think sex is fine. Personal taste and choice are the imperative words. When a person has reached the age of majority. let them decide for themselves. Frankly, more sex is shown and known about in the third grade than is shown on most sex sites. WHY not!!!! i love having sex, and i like x rated pictures and movies I feel the internet is an extremely effective communications and educational tool. People today are researching an ever expanding palette of subjects , therefore any censorship of such aa all encompasing text ,a world-wide forum for information and feedb sex is great and there are so many ways to express it.I am very broard minded however there are some sickos out there. I love it. You don't have to worry about aids. I really get off on it if the guy it right. A mildly amusing, passing fad. Far too much has been made of the issue by religious zealots who cannot tolerate the idea of anyone enjoying himself. The U.S. Is extreemly backward & fearful in this area. We create secondary trauma & fear in anything we bon't understand. We ignore the natural drives of all ages. At the same time, nothing should ever be forced on anyone. Sex on the Internet is no different than sex on the street, you find it if you want it, or ignore if you dont! its great It makes me horny. Me and my wife and husband have orgies while looking at pictures we got from it. to have recently lost my internet virginity i find that everything is censored and boaring I havn't seen much or read much. You can find things out but, nothings free to see porn. sex is o.k,in any way it should not be banned.this should be no censorship! parents should take more responsibility. sex is o.k,in any way It's fun I like sex on the net. I think there should be more. I feel that everyone should have unlimited/uncensored access to the Net. Parents and ONLY parents should have censoring capabilities. Great way to start out and learn more about your own sexuality The Net provides honest and mature people a safe outlet to make the sexual aspects in their life more enjoyable. I've been fortunate to have had a great childhood, a good education, and a job as a Systems Analyst which I like very much. I happen to have a foot fetish, which is not very common in the mainstream media (they always talk about Breast or Butts, for example). The Net has let me see that my sexual interests in woman are shared by many other normal, healthy people too. mostly banal THis nis My first time I think i will like it Sex on the Internet is the best thing in the world!!!! I see this as an opportunity to widen the perspectives of the large number of people who are in general (in my opinion) rather closed minded. You dont have to look , but dont stop me (or anyone else) from having the chance. A O.K. Would like more. I think it is harmless Sexuality has been corrupted by most religions, The net allows for an opposing viewpoint. sex is natural & I'm against censorship I think sex on the Net is good for the hormones! It gives losers something to do when they can't get a date. It also can help the shy people meet someone. It also can get you life long friends, and hard ond too! ok Great - I only wish there were more on-line live sex using cuseeme Decreasing since censorship went into effect. It's only a small part of it. It's much easier to go to your corner store and find it than it is to get it off the net. It`s great to have sex on-line, to see tons of pics. I would like to see it there if I need it Ienjoy female nude pictures on the internet I enjoy it tremendously If we had a rating system, it would be easy for parents to censor what their children see. I would like to see that it is more clearly marked and that the services provided are listed more clearly. interesting and fun outlet. Also source of information great!!! I have not a lot experience with sex on the internet but im very intrested in it great substitute if your a inquiring young adult w questions regarding "what jane looks like", it's a goldmine. as far as sex in "chat rooms", i've found that if someone is harrassing you, that person can be blocked from talking to you and most people are ligit. There's more than I know What i have seen is fairly difficult to access, but what there is covers a wide variety of interests. noop ! too hard to find what I want I dont understand people who do net sex. Ive spoken to people who do it, but id find it rather frustrating myself and no replacemnt for the real thing. cheap thrills, some of it scared me, I find it harder to find "dirty" pics of women than of men or shall i say slaves? Good place for anonymous exploration of taboo subjects... There isn't enough free material!!!!!!!!! It's everywhere, and it's bigger than ever..IN a bad sense.. Keep it open It's all good. :) I feel that there is nothing wrong with it at all Doesnt bother me And if people dont want kids looking at porn that is why they have parents I'M NOT GROSS OR ANYTHING BUT I LIKE PORNOGRAPHY,AND WISH IT WAS EVEN MORE ACESSABLE. It's my favorate pass time. i think if you are looking for it, you can find it on the net. It�s great, it�s safe and clean. i like it Been there, Done that.leave it be. Benign and fun I like it I think we need more of it for we who are waiting until we get married! I think it's a great platform for open communication should be more difficult to get hardcore Good for the curious and (another) outlet for the more involved. Maturity will eventually cover 90% of all aspects of Sex and the Internet. very vage but you have to pay for everything!!! ok, as it is.. I think it is a good idea to have it It's ok for adults who want to participate. I enjoy looking at the women, but get tired of all the rip-offs It opens up people so they are able to talk about how they feel. Well... It is very enjoyable. The interenet has allowed me to express the true feelings I have had all my life without worrying about what other people think about me... THIS IS DISGUSTING THE WAY THE FEMALE ARE SHOWED;LESS THAN DOG!!! I enhoy it vewry much. It should not be up to the government to decide what I am allowed to look at. I promote the use of cybersitter and other such control programs. I should not be censored because parents don't watch their children. I think its a lot of fun and should increase its content! it gave me a hard on everytime no comment I think sex on the Net is a lot of SAFE fun! No chace of diseases, and nobody gets hurt. Let parents censor what they feel their children shouldn't see. Don't give immature children access to the Net! Sex is dirty, so it must be banned. Need more of it It's not that big of a deal! not interested I realy dont know but A 10 year old child can get into porn with Afiew clicks of the curcer I think it is both fun and educational. But it should be monitored so children can not get into it with out the proper people around. If people want to prevent their children from accessing sexual content, they should use filtering software, not the government. ISP's should not be any more responsible for electronic content than telephone companies are responsible for what people say on the phone!!! It's not that easy to find uncensored perversion one may look for!... No problem if that is what you like Hmmmmmm The Net should not be censored. Parents should be responsible for the actions of their children. I think it's great. I wish all of the religous fanatics and irresponsible parents who want the government to take care of their childred to simply shut up. Much more fun in person. I would like more direct access to other sex adicts There is a wealth of knowledge out here. It is not all dirty pictures and sexy stories (I don't even have a graphics browser or a GIF compatable machine, so I don't even see the pictures). I have been able to find out about alternatives to intercourse, which my Girlfriend and I use to remain celibate before our commitment. I have also been able to find great amounts of information regarding STD (sexually transmitted diseases). When I do get married, I hope that the sexual advice will still be here or my use. The fact that some people cannot take the time to figure out how to use software to limit internet access or how to controll their children should not be taken out on my rights. it�s ok! RELAX..... Dont be so Fucking uptight!!!! People should have a choice of what they want to do and look at on the Internet. Becides most if not all of the "SEX" areas of the internet are PAY areas. I WANT MORE!!! It is crazy that anyone would not let someone else not be exposed to sex on the internet. I think more problems come from violence, but nobody cares about that. Sex is beautiful. America should be open with sex of all races, gender, and ages. I really think that things should be removed that are not educational in nature. Pure, open pornography is just a way for sick perverts to get off when they can't get any in real life. I think the major issue involves minors. This is, for the most part an issue for parents. When I go to a bookstore, I see Playboy and Penthouse within an arms reach of most teenagers, much more accessible than content on the net. Parents need to talk to their kids and deal with it in their own way. One concern, I see is in IRC. Mostly it is self policing, but kids can lie, if they think about it. A rating system would be great, but technically how it would address all protocols might be a very dificult problem. I do not believe in censorship.The net should remain free. I love it- gives me a chance to explore!! Carry on my friends! Leave "Free Speech" alone! I really think that people should just mind their own business and let people do as they please. it is important to have some rating or self-imposed regulatory body to watch for people misusing the services to hurt someone. Sex on the Net is Here to Stay I love it. It allows me to explore other sides of myself. I feel that it is good to the point of giving people a safe and entertaining means of releas.I am all for it providing the parents should be aware of what theire children are doing and with the help of service providers keep it all adult and all uin good clean fun At this point, it's completely open. There's so much porno and sex material, officials would probably find it surprising. I've never had any trouble getting material or finding people like me. excellent Sex is natural, and I don't think it should be censored I think it's great that it is so accessible, you can enjoy erotica in the comfort of your own home, with out ever leaving! Sex goes hand in hand with everything we as humans do. It's a way of letting off steam and tension and having fun. I think it is fine! We are people free to do as we please! Mmmmm Mmmmmm Good Like Cambells soup (heheheheh)<---Perverted laugh not graphic enough I enjoy getting adult material over the internet. My husband and I do it together as well as alone. It does take too long to get pictures though. I prefer to get material right in my home than to go to the shops that sell the kind of material that I am interested in. Helpful in unveiling humankind's true sexuality, removed from societal stigma. Since the net is very annnymous, it is an outley for taboos, it will die down once people get thier fill. I think it is helpful with my girlfriend and I. very educational I think it is great for adults. Helps answer questions about a sexual nature without being ID. I think it's wonderful Good place to find pictures,movie clips, sound bits It could be a valuable resource. There are some real weirdoes out there, and it has redefined my definition of "normality." But I believe that talking about sex on the internet probably helps debunk a lot of myths and also helps improve acceptance for people of non-traditional sexual orientation. I think your borders are really tasteless, though. Either find something more aesthetically appealing than a generic image of a bimbo with a huge bustline (Venus de Milo would be an improvement) or alternae it with an equally tasteless image of a musclebound stud. I think they should not charge for access. It should be easier to access what you really want! Its just another avenue of expression found in America this will also answer number 9...these are mutually exclusive. sex must be between two people who are separated by nothing except themselves. What could it be without touch?ithing but themselves The more the better!!!!! suck my pussy To the degree that it may help people connect with others of a similar bent to discuss/meet, I think its a good thing it is never free, exept on usenet The interconnection of people with common sexual interests over a world-wide area is important in promoting personal freedom of expression while allowing normal social discretion. It's gotten blown way out of proportion. Besides, the more you tell someone they can't do or see something, the more they want to. Parents, NOT the government should take responsibility for what their children see. Just interested in exploring the subject - no comment Sex is natural; the only thing unnatural is repression of sex. I think it is a cool place to LEARN about sex. It has helped my self life tremendously!! I have learned ALOT about my partner's needs thru the net. Love it! GOOD! It's a free world so why not it is still harmless It rocks I don't think there is enough of it. I just don't see why people are getting so upset. There is clear evidence of open honest conversation about sex as well as pornography, niether should be censored. However underage access is worrying, but I still believe I should be left to parents to regulate childrens access. i like sex on the net and promote it, there should be more of it Where will the censorship stop? It was very interesting, and provided some interesting insights. just curious blown way out of proportion by policitians who are preying upon an unsuspecting and computer illerate majority. It is censorship which has been cloaked in the disguise of protection of the public from pedophiles and perverts. I fear that it is in reality the thin edge of the wedge. I think it teaches people more than parents Still have not found what i am looking for. There are so many choices, iwish there was a guide to direct me to my interests. For now, sexual related subject is too accessible. I don't really care what other prople do, as long as MY rights aren't infringed apon! In other words I think that parents are the only ones who should regulate, if at all I love it a great way to get your dick off Yet another set in the discourse on sexuality. What would Foucault say? it's good if you're horny I think that from where I have been as far as participation in cybersex, it does promote dishonesty with spouse...I think people in sex rooms lie and that bothers me, I think they should figure out a way to have women only room unabtainable to men. I (we) love it! All for Free Speech SEX?! WHAT SEX????!!!!! I think it�s good that you can look at it if ya wanna new to it and it is great!!! i think sex on the net should be available to those who really want it. it is not fair to sanction it so no one can enjoy it just because some people "can't help but bump into it". great Can't be enough. not much I think sex is great. I,m married but I still enjoy looking at women. I also think that it's my bussiness to what I look at. I fucking love it. I beat off to it every day twice. love it but not for kids or people easily offended, but if you are that cool just dont bitch because if u are off ended dont go there! I think that the internet should be a world that is free of censorship, where people can get together and express their desires, fantacies etc. without a governing body. The Internet gives me lots of information. I like that. It will always provide an avenue for decption but I have made many great connections thru IRC and CUSEEMEE. Only wish people would be honest at all times and realize we each have our flaws! I think there should be more sex on the internet! Just not where kids can find it. All the old congress people that don't like it should not be on the internet! love it It is a good way to see how other people feel about some "taboo" issues It's the greatest thing since whip cream!!! Sex is a huge part of human existance, so is the internet these days. The best place to have sexually oriented material is on the internet because it is very accessable and needs to be in a time when have unsafe sex can kill. Totally harmless and safe. It's there if you want to find it. Sex is life, to each his own. We are all different,education and chilhood experience are of great value. The US considers violence acceptable, and sex as shameful and harmful. That's totally backwards! It's a personal choice and should not be censored. I love internet, use it everyday, My kids both use it everyday, I watch there activities, I'v shown then what's there, and told them there not allowed to access it, when I see it accessed, I revoke there passwords for 1 week the first time, 1 month the second time.. and so on! .. Free speech on internet.. It's all information. what you do with the information is your own business/problem! I have found Internet sex a safe way to release my sexual frustrations and am glad that it is available. I believe that it is/will become an important part of human sexuality in future. Its Great Have found none as yet as my provider does not allow access until a copy of driver's licence is posted. I have no problems with it. free speech Everybody talks about it, but nobody wants to do it with ME! I think it is pretty cool It gives me a hard on! only a problem if you let it get that way More Porn. it's your thing;do what you wanta do on chat lines you can talk openly without regard to what people think and can be more open....but the hardcore stuff needs to be taken off I'm not sure. Yipee! where, when, and how? It's FANTASTIC!!!! I believe that sex and the internet can be a very cool thing if you are careful. I have had good and bad experiences. cool I am quite surprised that there is as much available as there is..BUT...it is the wave of the future... Its OK as long as those participating are concenting ADULTS Fine with me Both are good fun THERE ARE TOO MUCH DISGUSTING PICTURES ON THE NET. Sex on the net is awesome It gets me horny and makes me want to go out and try new things. It is no worse than what you could find at a book store if you knew what to look for. It's good if is not there excess(ex:pedophillia, animals...) No comment yup. Overated. I think it's great, and safe great, I really enjoy what I have seen Great disire what sex, I can't seem to find much! that is nice amazingly erotic! I use MUD environments to have a kind of sexual life with my boyfriend who lives in another country. So I don't think it's a bad thing at all. :) it is very safe and can help satisfy some curiosity without going through the actions I enjoy it, and want it to stay. No Answer. Sex should be on the Net! Let freedom ring! FUCK YOU Give it up! If you want to have sex, pay a prostitute! Sex on the internet is a crock of shit! is good ! I would like an opion on my choices too many sites say FREE (but then you pay a "one-month fee" This is FALSE ADVERTISING safe but unexciting This is the first time I use the Internet and of course I go straight to the sex information. I think so far it's been educational. I think people have the right to look at what they want to. Even though its difficult to control, the availability of sexually explicit material is as basic a need as food, water, air, and any other desires that nature has endowed the human species with the ability to enjoy. keep it free and innocent I am married and I don't have much of a sex life. I'd love to have a sexual relationship with any female, either on-line or actual contact. Too much convern, typical North American problem of focusing attention in the wrong area, focus sensorship on violence not sex. Create a more open, less violent society. The more sex is sensored the more perversions will grow! Just another avenue for exploration and enjoyment but no juvenile or under age of consent material should be permitted,no exceptions!!! I believe it is a healthy forum for the exchange of ideas, materials and fantasy Like it I feel that it should be up to the parent to install the proper programs to moniter their child's page jumping. For those adults not interested and/or offended - tell 'em not to look. Its great and helps relieve tension! I am of the opinion that there are better uses for such fine technology that these. To each his/her own... Lets people be what they want in a harmless way. Two great tastes that don't really fit together well... Bummer. I believe that pornography should not be regulated by the government. I believe that it should be left to the discretion of the viewer. Not sure, it seems that most sites want to charge for access. This seems somewhat bizzare, why would someone want to pay for these types of pictures. Ideally they could provide a dialogue forum which could discuss these items from a more intelluctual perspective I PREFER THE REAL THING i like it !! nice makes one really horny I feel that it can be used for the wrong reasons To me it's entertaining. Something to read and learn about. I think that it is great and should not be censored. i loved it i want more of it It's just one more 'area of interest' on the net. As usual, sex is a controversial subject with most, and if you think sex is dirty and are embarrassed by it you don't think ANYone should have access. So, in finally addressing the question - I like sex on the Internet. Let's cut it out for our kids sake Good for a glimpse, but destructive in the long run! I think there is too much garbage since everyone reveals in the anonimousity of the internet. It would be fine in special section or rooms, fine, but it is all over. I have no problem with what other people do, and I do not believe in censorship, but you I beleive we have become somewhat socialistic in our thinking. This is one area that no governmental entity should rule. Next it will be a punishable offense to have sex without a condom. Things have gotten way out of hand due to the media. Internet *is* sex. The rapid growth of Internet is not due to the US DoD or the exchange of data between University scientist, but rather because it is a means to discover other (as much as cyber allows), in particular sexually. Let it be. This is freedom. I love Sex and I love the net keep up the great work If censorship continues, it will no longer exist...I'm still in America, aren't I? not bad most real hardcore has gone to pay entry I like the freedom and availiability of material with sexual content in it. It has its place on the internet and should not be targeted for censorship. It's alright Sex on the net is generally a form of entertainment. It should be regulated by parents. cool deal The Internet allows a freedom to openly discuss your sexual views, and after conversing with people on various talkers, IRC, MUDS, newsgroups, email, etc. my life as well as my sex life have been enhanced for the better. It has made me more open minded, more confident, and better educated about sex and its various aspects. The internet is a useful tool, but people need to think of ways to regulate content within your _own home_. i think it is great Internet is a cultural engine that may allow the occidental world to escape the rising power of bigots and right-thinkers (who often are the "real" dangerous people when it comes to sex deviations. Open-minded, all kinds, good, clean fun I believe it is OK it is gooooooooood I GET BIG BONERS i have been triing to access pornography for the last few min. and have had no luck i think it is wonderful it is cheaper then bying magazines and although i may not be 18 i can pass for it I think the freedom of speech and thought should be preserved, therefore it is important to fight to keep sex on the net. As with all things parents should be there to keep kids out of the areas they are not supposed to be in. If so that they don't then it is there failing as parents and that is no ones fault but there own. There are no excuses. I have no desire for sex on the net, but I see the need to keep the freedoms that we have and if the Government steps in on and sensors material THEY thin is inappropriate then who is really in charge of what we see and do? The freedoms that we have will be a thing of the past. I think that there is not enough out there for those of us who are really looking for it. I have an 8 year old son, and I don't worry about him running across something he has no business seeing. Its no worse that what is on tv and in the movies and even commercials these days. No censorship!!!!! I thnk that it is a good thing to have online ok :-) There is nothing wrong with consentual adults "livening up their lives". However the danger lies in the hands of those who promote and/or support immoralistic and unlawful maierial. Singling out topics such as child pornogrophy, beastiality, rape, et al. These sights should not even exist, in that I see the server being at fault as well as creator, and seeker of such material. ITS AN EXTREMLY GOOD EFFORT BUT IF U COULD MAKE AN INDEX E.G IF WE TYPE SEX THEN IN THAT WE SHOULD GET 1.NUDES 2. STORIES 3.BIOLOGICAL 4.SAFE SEX 5.VIRGINITY ETC SO THAT WE CAN GO DIRECTLY RATHER THAN SCANNING EVERYTHING Woohoo! No one has yet defined what is obscene. I think you shouldn't have to pay for sexual material on the net exept for specific companies that make their money from pornography. Its everywhere. You can't cencer it!!! Sex on the internet is great! It just needs more naked famous women. iTz g00d!!! I think parents should use a program called SurfWatch. It monitors children's Internet sites its just a bunch of machiens I beleive it is a person CHOICE, no one should monitor what I want to see or hear. As for my son I WILL be the one to monitor him, NOT THE GOVERNMENNT bEST LEFT OFF TO BE HONEST I think that sex and the internet are great!! it should be free and open to consenting adults i love it I'm an adult so I can view anything I want within limits. I'm not a pervert but I enjoy looking at beautiful wemon. I don't think there is anything wrong with that. As for the more perverse stuff, child porn is sick and offenders should go to jail. Beastiality is a curiosity for meany and I don't see anything wrong with it if the animal doesn't get hurt (but it is NOT for me). i love it I think it's great! It's super! I think pornography should be legal for anyone who is old enough (18 according to U.S. society) to view and download. It is ridiculous that certain groups feel they have a right to tell me what I can and cannot do. no opinion Ithink the internet should develop a rates system I'm glad to have access to "safe sex"! could be better organized Parents should be responsible for monitoring their children. NO CENSORSHIP!! Keep censorship by any agency out. It's up to parents to censor their children just learning I enjoy doing what I want. Don't need Gov't telling me what is good for me. At 57 I think I'm old enough to decide for myself. The internet is just one of many sources available for sex and sexually oritented material. great The government should not censure it. It should be left up to the individual. An anonymous alternative to those of us who do not have a sex life AT THIS TIME I SEE NOTHING WRONG WITH IT. IF SOMEONE DOES NOT WANT TO SEE IT DONT BRING IT UP ON THE WEB. FREEDOM OF SPEECH AND ETC. IS WHAT I BELIEVE IN. harmless, unless you want to pay for it..but if willing you can pay for sex anywhere.. Where can I find sexual CU SeeMe broadcasts? IT is a graet source of information and stimulation. It is an interesting diversion, and a complete waste of time and money. I have spent quite a bit of time downloading, assembling, and converting binary images only to discover they couldn't be viewed due to some error or another. It is much more arousing to go rent an adult video tape from a local video store, than to try to get a thrill on the INTERNET, Its Fun and Intresting sex and the net are good and fun Cool Its pure entertainment for adults. very nice !!!!!!!!!!!!! Internet is good! Lots of sex will destroy it! I like it! IT's GREAT!!!!!!!!! It's a great outlet for the little pervert in all of us. Let all over 21's have a ball. I think it is a bit "free" but with supervision leave it alone. I think that it is a great harmless form of expression, given that the audience is mature enough to handle these sex related sites. its ok freedom of expression.....safest sex possible ITS FINE FOR THOSE INTERESTED BUT IT S/B PASS WORD CONTROLLED IN THE HOME, OFFICE, ETC. often too slow for full appreciation Sex is a natural thing and should be allowed on internet its just interesting, just like anything else that's new Do NOT forbid it ! Let US decide what we -and our children- want! it's great I believe that if parents would exercise more personal control over their children and quit abrogating their responsibilities the world would be a much better place to RAISE children. I have an adult child who was raised under these standards and he is doing quite well, thank you. ist super ich kann alles sehn was ich will The net gives me a boner. Internet is the way to freedom, all sorts of freedom. cool I didn't know there was sex on the internet I didn't know there was sex on the internet I THINK ITS GREAT I want more hardcore The internet is in my opinion a place to express your thoughts and opinions without regulation. I love it! And keep up the good work! It is everyone's responsibility to ensure that sexually, perverted material is distinguished entirely. What happened to intimacy and an imagination? It is really pathetic that people have to turn to such demeaning behavior-what are our children susposed its great we need more of it Ok, as long as you don�t take it to seriously Wish it was free (hee hee) I find it very invorgating and sometimes really enjoy it. I think it's very appaulling. I love it . I think that i does provide some kind of release of sexual frustrations and i enjoy the photos I like to masturbate while looking at photos on the net. I think its entertaining. i love it Still exploring - hoping it's a real satisfyer! When will someone release the sex organ equivalent of a mouse? Need to find a reliable way to screen out minors responsibly. With all this technology, it should not be as difficult as many are making it. The network community has not taken any steps toward self regulation which is why we see the government doing it for them. it seems relatively harmless and over all entertaining I feel that it is fine for adults but when children get involed it is wrong! Less commercial providers, more free exchange,no children,no animals ! it gives me a woody I love to screw women, other than my wife, I like to meet them and I beleive that education (mat)only leave the other for the married bedroom I don't think it's harmful. Adults can decide if they want to view sex on the net. I think parents need to take a more active role in the things their children do and they wouldn't have to worry about the things the kids shouldn't be doing. Can't replace the real thing! i enjoy being able to experience it not much new out there Maintain to adults only its great. i wish there was lots more!!!!! The computer gets in the way getting harder to find I like the surveys! Recently it has become harder to wank online - not enough material I love it. matter of fact i got a woodrow right now Good for mature people who know how to really use it. I think its cool but definitely overrated. After all, this is a computer not a partner!!! i think it's a lot of fun reading and trading messages cheaper than Playboy :-) I think it's great. I wish there were more stories that were free. It is a safe way for ADULTS to explore their sexuality. I do believe that it is the sole responsibility of parents to keep their children from accessing pornography on the Inernet. Sex is cool! I think no one has the right to censor what information I have access to. sex on the internet is important for sharing knowledge and experiences, but the sites should be rated so that minors of age don�t get access IT'S A SAFE WAY OF APROACHING THE SUBJECT, YET PEOPLE CAN GET CARRIED AWAY AND OVERDEPENDENT. AS FOR CHILDREN, THEIR ACCESS SHOULD BE LIMITED, BUT WHO'S TO WATCH? THE INTERNET SHOULD BE FREE TO EXPLORE ALL SEXUAL ISSUES FOR ADULTS, BUT LIKE ALL GOOD THINGS THERE WILL BE ABUSE. Most of it is all pretty tame. The hard-core stuff usually seems to entail subscribing and is not particularly cheap for obvious reasons. rawsex.com is a good site tho!! ;-)) it is no substitute for the real thing I feel it is a way to express sexual desires. But for those individuals who get off on it may be sick. I've enjoyed many forms of sex from the very first time when I was 14. I've been sexually active ever since. I love when my partner has a big dick. I like it. Great outlet i need it do me I don't mind it rules, keep up th egood work IT should be kept free of any bans or limitations. If something bothers an individual they need not use it. If there worried about children, the parents should deal with it themselves. The Internet is a positive resource and outlet for information concerning sexuality. It should not be allowed. Information on sex issues are ok. Don't think it hurts a thing. Parents should supervise their children. what people do in their own home is thier business, it is up to parents to regulate their childrens access to sexually explicit material. Great Sex i think can be fun and romantics. Internet is trying to duplicate it but will never, but may get real close fine Effort should be put in to developing software which can act as a gateway allowing access to mature audiences and restriction by guardian/parents to certain materials It is VERY safe sex! want more! in the last year there has been less posting of binaries and more "garbage" posts. nice It's free, it's online, it's secretative. I like it I think that it's great that there is a forum where people can talk and recieve informatio from. However, I do think that there should be a way where young adults under the age of 18 are not allow to get the info. from off of the internet. But, I enjoy this because I can get all of the information that I would like without having to be embarrassed about who knows what I am searching for. Hey, Sex is an important part of mankind, wherever we are it will be. I believe in freedom of the press, so to speak. I think the net is a nonintrusive way to access sexual material for personal use and should be available at the discretion of the user. This is like a radio or television. If you don't like what you see, switch channels. We as adults should have a choice as to what we want. Nobody puts a gun to our head to go into a sex section of the internet. I'm glad there is sex on the net and wish there was more and raunchier. I LOVE IT Governments stay out of it, its up to the parents! They should watch there kids, or lock up the internet access on there end of the computer! Its Stimulating, and lets you explore your inner-most desires without the fear of sexually tranmitted diseases or weirdo's Great.Do take all steps to ensure it remains available. Great. Its about time there is an openess about sex. Is best described like a never ending playboy magazine ... Don't regulate - this is not the Victorian era this is the 90's ! As far as I'm concerned, the Internet is just another medium for accessing information about sex. I find it very informative, interesting, and quite harmless. dissapointed. I find it hard to find interesting material but i have just started 8-)... I find it entertaining. Well, sooner or later the kids are going to be adults, so I don't understand, why are we restricting them now, if they will have sex in the future. The Internet is a global community and sex has to fit in! It's a fact of life, live with it I think that the Internet has opened the door to pornography beyond what it thought it was getting into. There has not been, until letely, any regulation against child-porn. It would be very easy for any child to get a hold of any pornography on the internet. Parents should be involved but the system must take responsibility as well. I think it's healthy but it should be obvious when you retrive a site what exactly is there. It should be left to the individual. It's like anything else, for those who want it they will find a way to get it. If they don't, they'll leave it alone. It's fun to watch i find no kick I think it's great I like it. Not only can people who are into pornography get what they want easily, but it's very informative at times. Parents should be the one's controlling their children. Not the government. I don't get into that much. However, I am concerned with government trying to regulate it. I love it It is good for an adult to get access to view sex materials in the net on his/hers own will, it prevents grown ups to have creazy (wrong) sex immeginations. Waste of time just a subset problem all programs people can purchase for navigation on internet should be equipt with built in censorship whose preferences can be setby the user. I think it is a positive way of exploring various activities and lifestyles in a discreet manner. It's there. It's bad. But gov't keep off. Leave it up to us(parents/schools) to choose a provider that does/doesn't censor I hope you make people aware we Netizens stand on the question of sex on the Net. between consenting adults i believe the internet and sex can be intertwined as much as they desire. but children shouldn't have access to sex stuff on the net i think its a free country what ever rocks your socks go for it If you have a problem with it, don't web to it. Not a big deal as much of it seems to require a paid membership to view For now, simply interesting. We should ban all gif formats. JPEG is the way to go to cut down on bandwidth I haven't bee on the net long but I despise any type of censorship. If you don't like what you see, go somewhere else. The Fed. Gov. already controls too much of our lives. it's great I don't believe it should be censored at all. I have children. I monitor their activities in the internet. I do not think its anyone elses job to, being resposible for your chinld is what makes one a parent. If a parent deem that their child should learn about and be exposed to sex, the it should happen. After all its the parents who andswer to god for thier children, not the government!! the government should stay out of it I love it I don't have a problem with it, however, I believe that parents should take a more active roll in thier children's lives and make sure that the sex that is out here on the net is not available to them. Parents should also take the time to educate themselves about computers and internet sights so that they can safeguard their children from the pedophiles and "bad people" that are out on the internet, waiting to victimize them. I'm at a remote assignment in Korea. Let's see some fine tight pussies!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!! I think the Net should be OPEN, only available to those over 18, and controlled by parents in a home with children. god bless america I wish the gays didn't flood the Net with their stuff. When I look for Hetero stuff, Gay shit always comes up it was part of the reason I signed up. Compuserve, my service, has chosen to restrict so I am considering change to America Online which I hear is less restrictive and lets subscriber chose what they want. I think sex is great and the internet is brand new to me There is no substitute for the real thing! knowledgeable I think that all pornographic material should have to be paid for. I also think there should be a waiting period to recieving the material. This would ensure that children do not get it, while at the same time, adults would be able to. Sex is not a problem. If it keeps the sexual deviants off the streets I'm all for it. What I have found has been linked to selling something, and not just sex for sex highs. It is fun!!! It's interesting!!! i love it I believe that it gives some people who don't know much about the subject a "crash course" in learning. I feel it promotes safer sex, and a little pervision. However, if we can distinguish between fantasy (Net) and reality; it is a great tool. It's great, but for adults only! don't have much opinion, i'm not into that more anal Thank you very interesting very good and good I'm not in favor of limiting people's access - but if parents want to control what their children see then it is their responsibility. I've met some good partners, especially Black ones.! I bought the computer for net use only.I hope to find more stuff on the net about sex for it will increase my knowledge. i have not had a defined experience with sex and the net, but it seems odd that the the two go together. i mean i am a physical type of person and would find it hard to be excited by the things offered on the net. not enough DO NOT REGULATE IT ON A FEDERAL, STATE OR LOCAL LEVEL!!! Make parents responsible for their kids in all activities including "net sex"!!!! i don't know much about it, but i am interested. i like it!! It is safe. I have stopped using the Internet for sexual conversation, etc... It was a personal decision. I don not think it is a healthy thing, mentally that is. It is fine for Adults, but the restrictions should be from the parents or guardians if kids are present in the home FREE SPEACH !!!! Its fun!! Great for healthy people to express themselves, but also a way for people to damage themselves if they are already sexually damaged (i.e. escaping from who they are) not sure The Internet is a valuable tool for sexual information exchange; it does a tremendous amount to help people understand what's really going on, rather than what they're spoon-fed. exagerated I enjoy the changes it has made in my relationship with my husband. homosexual contacts are easier than heterosexuals ... mostly males are on the net I wish there was more. I think adults should be free to express themselves. I am against censorship of any kind. Why does everybody make you pay so much to see naked pictures? I can't find any free porn! I don't think the internet should be censored. Sex isn't a bad thing. A great way to learn about materials about which you would otherwise afraid to ask. i have no problem with it parents should watch kids more and servers should provide rating system it is a merica let us choose what we look at I think sex on the net is just like sex in mags and publications. Vendors can check for age verification, why can't web-owners be allowed to do the same? The more the merrier, it's not exactly a new invention! It is out there but really difficult to find The Internet is a fantastic new tool for broadening one's horizons. It's unfortunate that some individuals choose to pervert it with what I beleive to be inappropriate material. Its exciting, but still new, doesn't replace the real thing! Good for a rainy day, or if a person has some extra time, but if you're getting any more involved than that, you need a good therapist and a life. I'm Concerned with 3 kids for what they can get into at home on the net more sex...less internet Like watching the bull fights, if it offends you change channels. sex on the net is ok and entertaining I have no problem with sex on the net!!!!!!! Sex is what makes us feel human Easy, fun, thrilling and good! For those who doesn't want to participate, go to another site, channel, page or whatever! It's educational I want to find very hard sex easylyon the net, it's too hard to find real sex!!! I, of course wish that the net was completely open. I do understand that parents and such have a real issue when it comes to the net and pornography. Sex is if not the stongest one of the strongest forces in everyone's life. I wish there was a way to have an open network and not risk exposer on those that are not yet ready for it. I think its a healthy and safe way to explore your sexuality, at whatever level you wish (meaning you can access hard or soft porn, or topics pertaining to a specific sexuality or whatever). It's all around - why try to should try to do away with on the Internet just because of a few Christian radical do-gooders! Pornography is the largest segment in the entertainment industry, with all other forms emulating it (i.e. music, film, art, etc.). You cannot avoid its pervasiveness in our society. It's a natural extension of being human and must be accomodated on-line as it is with most other communication sources (i.e. phones have phone sex, films have pornos, music has Madonna, etc.). Alot of fun it is great i have fucked more poeple becayse of the internet i think that it is a freedom issue... people should be able to view and read what they wish.. the internet is not owned by anyone, so the government should not restrict people on something they should have no control over.. i agree that children should no Absolutely Love it! I like it. I hate to think the government is trying to take that right away from me... I see no problem. If Parents keep strict rules for their children, then what's all the fuss? it is new and would cost alot of money I think its part of information you find on the net, like info you find in a library. I think Sex on the Net opens people to different experiences. Besides, It is human curiosity that has made me look for stuff on the net that I haven't seen before, anywhere. i think it is a way to keep from getting bored. It's all right I suppose. Love it! I think that it should be regulated for those under 18 by the use of the site you use. If it is at your private home then the parents should have the ability to have it resricted to use with a code (so young children can not see all pornography). Now fo it is not that easy to find sexual material on the net I like reading sex stories. Pictures don't do much for me, but detailed stories really turn me on. all types of photos are great but children should not have access there really is none! too much "for sale" , not enough FREE to see and try out Free market. Govt should keep out of the child bearing responsibilities of the parents. There's a lot out there but more and more of it is regulated by providers. it's a content that another I have no problems with it, wish people would monitor their children though I don't think that the government has any business regulating the Internet! I think sex should be allowed on the internet, everyone's gonna see it sometime! The medium encourages the unusual and by doing so makes the unusual all-too-common. On the chat lines 14 year olds are getting on looking for "chics" and acting like total jerks - using parents access to talk genitalia and bestiality and anything to just "shock". The parents aren't monitoring and these kids need a routing. Where else can a kid talk dirty and not get disciplined? Home with no-class parents and the internet. Tired of it, tired of the fear of what is becomingg to our youth. im an adult and like to surf and see!!!! Hard to find! i like it I think there needs to be some form of regulation, because the material is too easy to obtain. I think it is only natural that new technology envolves sex WOULD LIKE MORE sex in th net helps in satisfying our sex desires all for it It used to rule, but da gub-ment BLOWS!! Its too easy for anybody to access I just have to sit back and laugh when i see people having cybersex online, but i guess it's better than commiting some horrid things elsewhere. think it's blown out of proportion ok How would you deal with the issue of regulating sexual/offensive content? Parents should be responsible for their children while on-line, be it by supervision or Parental Control Software. Publish More Porno!!! let parents do there job screw em!if "they" think they can secure it let em!the net is world wide.different countries different laws.let em have there fun. itll never happen!! what are you going to do? put some kind of lock on particlar site from kids teell them to get a life and if they don't want to see ot...don't look and tell their kids not to look. parents need to govern kids...not big govt. Responsible, self-ratings; notify Surf Watch keeps little kids from having sex instead the jerkoff Make sexually"offensive" material harder to find on the net, so you really have to pur- Net nanny is a great idea-up to parents Establish personalised accounts for individuals contain access patterns Set Coding levels to be password protected passwords have users state their age before getting access parental lockouts Censor except to other people who want to see it parents should take responsibility and watch their kids! Have Sexual Sites "Net Nanny" & Such Capable, in case you have children... kill'em it should have some sort of user-regulator, like a password to get into certain types of sites. i don't think the government should regulate in any way, it should be up to the individual... it is up to the parents to buy software that blocks sexual material Self-regulate Encourage development of 'lock out' programs for the pc owners use. internet provider should id before purchase censure yourself The net should be open and those who oppose pornography should refrain from looking at it. Parents should be required to control children's access to pornography just as they are required to keep children away from guns. While I am in favor of allowing adults access to pornography on the net, such pornography should not exploit minors. If people don't want to look, they don't have to. Make sites better protected. Use of site better restricted leave all the pornographics on the net let them stop looking at the pages i don't know Parental Control software Blocking-Software and parents need to watch their kids Who cares? Parents/caregivers are responsible for monitoring minors. Parents have access to be able to lock thier children out of the internet and should do it!!! Everyone wants kids to know about sex and the dangers of it. They should be able to learn about it in the safety of thier own home. The net should be completely open, but with warning screens telling you what EVERY site contains, lest you be offended. Then you can know to leave. Pornography is not illegal, but I think things that could potentially endanger citizens, like the Terrorist's Handbook should be banned.. Install Parental Control software @ manufactor let the parents censor their children kill everybody Encourage social common sense, like with smoking. they should allow it but to only name and email adress so the ycan email them saying that so and so looked at porn stuff Let the user decide what should be seen and unseen! let parents with kids not of age regulate what is going on in there home. also if they dont like it they can just turn it off Parents should take responsibility Use parental control software to block sexually explicit pages from minors Have pictures of open sheep's anus. ammend the constitution (Freedom of.....) it is the parents responsibility to monitor their kids. parents should be monitoring childs activities The net should be open. We are resposible adults and it is the resposibility of the parents to monitor and sexual content that their children view The programs exist to aviod sites, parential lockout, it's the parent's responsibility Allow parents to screen out certain inappropriate things with some sort of screen blocker, like a v-chip I feel it is the parents resposibility to regulate what their children view and not the congress. develop security systems which can be controlled by adulty members of household individual sites can have a preview page with a warning posted Sex on the net is not thrown into your face, you'll only find it if your looking for it parents should control thier own children no child porn- or forced porn set up a lock out system as they have for tv First Amendment right MORE SEX CONTENT I feel that evry one has their own intrest and that its the pc owners responsibity to monitore or decide whats appropriat to view Develop better software to allow parents to censor their children's Net activities. if they dont like it dont watch it!its Let adults decide for themselves cyber patrol let parents moniter their children's use of internet People should police themselves. Let the service providers censor what they want completely open with voluntary rating system a nice little program in my computer to screen content. I would screen out all violence and until the kids are teens most hardcore sex. Kill all tight ass politicians Should be up to parents to stop children establish a rating system and a way to let only adults to view material.. if possible. Obviously, children are the concern here. I feel, as in most areas, if kids want it, they can get it. It up to the parents to regulate this, though to what extent is questionable. I suppose it depends on the kid, and how the parents have taught him/her what is right from wrong. require a special password or have software preferences like aol has fuck everybody Have some way of proof individual is over legal age limit for viewing pornography etc. If you don't like it don't go into that area fuck fuck fuck fuck fuck fuck fuck fuck fuck fuck "rate" the sites as in motion pictures and provide software to regulate accesibility for underage users close it off to minors they should put more to educate the kids I think that people can censor themselves. Establish a means for neutralizing those factions JACK SHIT Use at your own risk. If they don't like it then don't look for it. Promote Surf Watch & parental supervision for children.If you don't like what you see, you can should be adult enough to "Go Back" and stop viewing it More Sex!!! v chip the net,hey its a free country...isnt it? Introduce software that would control personal access to pornography Place the same responsiblity on parents as with all other mediums of information. Home-internet devices with an E-Chip (erotica), to block transmission of any undesired material. Give the parents contol over available sites Get rid of the child molestors, beastiality, and the goddamn faggots somehow prevent minors from accessing rated x material no one person has the right to say what is good for another self control I believe porno input only excites what is already there. It should be the parents descretion I've opened my mind, it's their turn! Allow only aldults into those areas Have open access once registering in some way that you are over 18 . If you don't like it, don't look at it. You dont like it? Change the channel Have some Quicktime sex movies all hardcore sexual material should be pay for view even ten dollars a year Let the parents deal with it find a way to censor properly those under 18 Let parents take care of their kids. Like abortion,tv, etc. if you don't like it then don't do it. make it illegal for children to be on the net without a consent form signed by their parrents. Let the person/parents be responsible for self-regulating there should be pornography everwhere! Parents should take more responsibillity with there children and there should be some means of locking kids out of such areas more Password Protection on computer being used. PC USers should sensor their children from using the Internet. They should be monitored by the parents not the government if they can't control kids, keep them off the comp if you oppose, then stay out people should censor from their own computers, not have it imposed from outside. Keep internet completely open, permit access to free "filter" software for parents, and make parents take responsibility for monitoring their children's access and their sexual education. If children are properly taught about sex, they won't go seeking information about it from unreliable, distorted, or dangerous sources. Damn parents should requlate w/ available software It should be left to the individual to decide. have what ever the hell you want with age/consent limitations Access based user eligibility (21 and over via ID) Place warnings on material that has a sexual nature. Make governers availibe for parients that wish to censor what their children see. banish the 'influential groups' Parents need to watch their kids- computer is not a babysitter I feel the parents of children should be responsible for what comes into the home. Anyone with children should monitor/block access. let adults come and go as they please Parents should protect their own children & monitor their internet use. Fine parents/schools if m enable parents to close certain sites parents should take responsibility for what their children have access to on the net. software like cybernanny parents should watch thier children Just be responsible identification of age /use of special card controls on minors getting in but otherwise free access. Those that don't want to see it don't have to look all browser packages should come with a "censored" configuration for those that do not want to be exposed. Let the parents deal with it. Self censored based on the individuals preference. Also parents should be responsible to supervise children/teenagers in respect to what they are allowed to view. Frankly, I think it's a parent's responsibility to monitor what their children are doing. Adults should be able to do what they damned well WANT to do (provided it doesn't hurt anyone else). Esablish special sections and ratings I fucking love it Rating system in combination with screening chips in personal PCs let it stay have a lock out ofsome sort if you dont want access parental supervision/"anti"-software progms Parents must supervise their own children. Pass codes affording limited access to minors could aid parents in limiting their childrens internet choices. It's got to be up to the parents to parent, not bit brother. Use blockers Parents should monitor their children it should be self governed by the individuals morality is a subjuctive opinion--it is not fair to have one's beliefs or subjectives standard given the right to choose what is right and wrong parental control use individual prog to prevent access to children The parent(s) and/or guardian(s) determines what the kids "see", otherwise, it should be completely open kinderporno and shut down hard-core pornography Censorship should stay in the home people who don't want to look at shouldn't Establish a parental "lock box" like cable TV has. tits and snatch is all that should be seen leave the internet open but place advisory for parents use banning software. i like fucking If you Dont like it DON"T SURF IT! Parents should watch their children Ifpeople do not wish to know, don't go Have some way for adults to log on to uncensored material. Minors to be unable to obtain entry. Educate; don't regulate. put all censors in jail (maybe they'll feel safe there...) leave up to parents and schools to choose providers with strict standards(ie AOL) parents could restrict sits ith some sort of monitor hey you dont like it leave Don't like it don't access it!! It is the parents job to teach morality and sex. NOT the government. If the parents feel that it is ok, then the government should not get involved let parents have a "v" chip for under l8 years software locks Provide filters and advice to limit access on an individual level It is a difficult issue. I don't believe in censorship, but do believe that cybersex is too easy (children can literally stumble upon very pornographic stuff.) A rating system would only encourage curious children. I don't know the answer. Too difficult for parents to monitor what kids are doing on the web. and establish an internet-based self-regulating body let your own morals set your standard of what you decide to view. Parents should be responsible for their children's activities on "the net" Parents, schools, etc...block access to certain sites...although you're never going to keep it all hidden. Ultimely it should be censored at home, by parents or at least by some authority in the home. leave it to individual responsibilty A computer is not a toy and it is the parents responsibility to moniter a child while online. Gov't allow websites to check DrivLic nums w/ Bday Restriction should be in the home the net should be completely open and parents should monitor their children Parent's Should be responsible for their Children Shut down all that many influential groups There are currently downloadable programs to protect children and there is no need for government to censor content on the net. Households, especially with children, should be their own censors! limit types of content (i.e. pedophilia, snuff porn, hate/humiliation.) I think the parents need to be more responsible for their children. Have Internet I.D.'s showing people over 18 Continue to develop software screening technology. It's the parents job to censor the Net. let the site decide, and at the site for those over 18 have a certain code the obtain with id Limit access from the client end it is a parent's responsibility people have their own numbers, depending on their age. When you apply for an access to the Net you get a number that only fits your computer. If you are under age for certain pages you won�t be able to access them. SIMPLE !!!!!!!!!!!! Rating system combined with shareware nanny utilities for parents. parent controll i can block the inter net better than anyone! I think there should be a way to control what minors can get to on the net. Questions, comments, suggestions? Contact us. Return to theHome Page. Copyright ©1996, /InterCommerceCorporation, All rights reserved worldwide Send comments to Webmaster@Survey.net WT02-B22-23IA060-000333-B027-278http://www.survey.net:80/pol3c1.html 204.107.221.240 19970115060717 text/html 109735HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 15 Jan 1997 06:00:58 GMTServer: Apache-SSL-US/1.0.3+1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 109551Last-modified: Mon, 25 Nov 1996 20:26:45 GMT SURVEY.NET - 1996 Presidential Poll #3 - User comments (ARCHIVE II) Your source for information, opinions & demographics from the NetCommunity! ANNOUNCING: The Internet's finest interactive, totally-automated,immediate survey system. We can take any form and instantly create adynamic demographic database and show you the results as soon as youcomplete the survey! Political Survey #3 User comments [ARCHIVE II] Who will be president in 1996 and why? Someone who will kill the beast of government and declare this nation again a Constitutional Republic A libertarian because we need the government impact on our lives to be dramatically reduced to it's ligitamate constitutional function. Harry Browne is only candidate who will reduce the size of government. Bill Clinton, he is good. Harry Browne. His policies will solve many current US problems Harry Brown Pat Buchanan because he upholds the Consitution/Bill of Rights. He is for less government intrusion in our lives. He is a populist. This is NOT a bad word. It means he is for the people, which the word is Latin for. Harry Browne: Eliminate personal income taxes, reduce federal government by 80%, increase personal freedom. steve forbes flat tax gets rid of IRS Clinton - has shown himself to be a real leader in all kinds of national, international, and personal crises. Harry Browne Harry Browne Colin Powell, Only potential candidate with common sense Harry Browne, because the government costs way to much and is continuously expanding it's power. This continued expansion of power will eventually lead to tyrrany and the expansion must stop now. First time I won't be voting...I've always voted Democtratic, but Clinton's been deciding too many things on his own. Turning the Tobacco industry over to the FDA for regulation! Whatever happened to the American Free Market! And putting computers in all the schools, so the kids can get addicted and not learn how to socialize with others. Okay for learning problems, but not every day use. I never agreed he could spend my tax dollars to ruin the youth of America! Bill clinton or someone liberal minded enuf to accept minorities and make them feel comfortable in the country. anybody but who's running at the moment, We need a change from the direction we are going, a lot! Clinton - Moderate, Activist, will not cave in to political pressure on major issues. harry browne - less government and more freedom - USA FOREVER! A man who IS a Christian who will bring back Biblical Standards so the country will again be blessed by GOD! Ralph Nader - on ballot, not on survey. Harry Browne, his philisophical foundation is solid Keyes - Strong conservative with Christian beliefs Pat Buchanan- Conservative, Pro-Life, Against Affirmative Action, Against Illegal Immigration Bob Dole because he is EVERYTHING Clinton is not! He or she must be ethical, honest, spiritual, practical. Willing to slash completely the psychological and psychiatric and pharmacological influence from national and local government paid for education or social programs and the fda. No one now on the national scene has the balls to confront that and do it. And they could not do it without similarly endowed members of congress. The only hopeful that seems to have any spirit at all is Clinton. We are facing the 21st century. We need youth, vigor, and new ideas. Despite Clinton's drawbacks, I see him as the best bet for the next four years. Bob Dole- CLINTON SUCKS Bill Clinton. Because he is the only candidate with the moral fortitude to do the job. Bill Clinton will be re-elected because the Democratic party is relatively united; whereas, the Republicans are too fragmented and the candidates are too extreme in their political positions. Whitewater scandals aside, Bill Clinton's record as president Harry Browne, Because he WILL cut government down to size.(period) Buchanan - He is vigorously prolife, he opposes corruption and self-dealing, and he has a strong vision for the future Anyone BUT Bill Clinton. I am originally from Arkansas and felt like Bill Clinton was the wrong choice the first time he ran. And as it stands, my feelings haven't changed for the worst president in our nation's history........ Anyone but the politicians who will see their soul for 1 more campaign dollar to the highest bidder Pat Buchanan - pro-life and anti-illegal immigration Bob Dole, because I don't think Clinton is serious about reducing the national debt. Pat Buchanon, drastic measures for drastic times Pat Buchanan he is not a lawyer, insider, socialist, lier and believes in "America First" and stands on his beliefs. Harry Browne. Individual Freedom & economic prosperity. bill clinton becuse its more and more poor and more latino who iare poor Pat Buchanan, Care's about this country. Harry Browne is the best Libertarian. Clinton, He's young,and has the right ideas. He only need dole,gingrich and a few other republicans out of his way to make this country work.Oh and lets not forget the ever so sick RUSH !! Harry Browne He is pro-liberty and will get the federal government out of our lives. Pat Buchanan because he aims to truly uphold the Constitution. Billary and Bob have blown it already. Bill Bradley; let's have some 'personal intelligence' Pat Buchanan. I believe he would be good for the country. Bob Dole, as he'll sign some of the Contract for America legislation which Clinton has vetoed! Bob Dole Alan Keyes - for once a candidate with whom I am in total agreement. You don't find that much nowadays... Harry Browne, because economic freedom is an essential requisite for political freedom. By enabling people to cooperate with one another without coercion or central direction, it reduced the area over which political power is exercised. Bob Dole, I can't vote for Bill Clinton for to many reasons to mention. Harry Browne, a return to our libertarian roots will allow the people of this country to make it great again. A libertarian. Then we would see real change. bill clinton-he will keep America free! clinton is the only viable candidate with somewhat of a vision for the future. since the crumbling of communism the focus needs to shift from defense to global problems like the enviroment and defense conversion. the only major party candidate with a hint of an idea is clinton Clinton any fiscal conservative, devolving power from Feds type I'd rather see someone like Newt than Dole. Newt has ideas, and can get those concepts across to the people (with fair media, not the kind we have) but dole just seems an empty shell. But he's still preferable to a left leaning, second term/lame duck pres Bob Dole, best cadidate. Harry Brown-I think freedom is important. Harry Browne-He has the right ideas-and the ability and will accomplish them. Bill Clinton, I believe that his leadership has brought this country to a period where it recognizes its strength. He is also unafraid of changing his position if he feels it is in the country's best interest Dole, he will clean out old Democratic programs Harry Browne because he represents fundamental libertarian change. Harry Brown-he favors reducing the scope of govt. Will end national debt, and privatize Soc Security Harry Browne. The only choice for truly less government. Bob Dole--He's an honorable man. The clown in the whitehouse is totally dishonorable. Clinton - Need to block radical right agenda Alan Keyes best represents my views. Harry Browne because the government is simply causing trouble as it is now. Dole � he's the lesser of two evils Someone who looks at financial problems rather than morals. A third party candidate because neither the Republicans nor the Democrats seem to be able to make any worthwhile changes for our country. We need someone in there who can role up their sleeves and get to work without having a political party to answer for Buchanan - the only honest candidate running. A true American Patriot and Constitutionalist!!!!! harry browne would systemically reduce size of federal government Harry Browne; he's the only candidate (since Forbes is gone) who has real ideas and a realistic plan for safely downsizing government. A woman, for a change. It is long overdue. Harry Browne because he's the only candidate committed to reducing the size and scope of Federal Government back to the levels prescribed by our constitution. Clinton, because he allows his opinions to change, keeps an open mind, and generally tries to do what the American people want, without sacrificing the rights of a minority(or the majority). Harry Browne because Clinton makes this Democrat sick to her stomach Ross Perot. I believe his participation would secure the presidency for the candidate I favor most. Bob Dole - he's experienced and a man of good character Alan Keyes -- He understands that the most important thing is where you are with respect to God. someone who has a sound mind... and not a flip flopper Harry Browne - Much less government, much lower taxes. libertarian Something new to America, middle of the road normalcy to everywhere else a real, but moderaite ture Social Democrat like Willy Brandt, Olaf Palme, or Francois Mitterand. Bill Clinton because he has shown an understanding of the ADA as a civil rights law for the disabled. He also recognizes the importance of IDEA as the only way for disabled children to receive an education in the least restrictive school setting. This represents a recognition that government is an inportant tool for controling tyranny of the majority for the protection of the socially and economically disenfranchised. Harry Browne, because I want the goverment out of our lives. Harry Browne Buchanan has a better chance than Chas E. Collins...so I Harry Browne because he truly has ideas to fix our government. Harry Browne Harry Browne because he truly has ideas to fix our government. Harry Browne: THe time is now to break to return to our American Heritage and Harry is the leader to guide us there. None of the current candidates, and I don't know who. Bob Dole. Harry Browne because he represents libertarian principles. Harry Browne is the ONLY candidate that believes in the Govt the founding fathers believed in. In the words of Thomas Jefferson, That government is best which governs least. Harry Browne is the only candidate for personal freedom Hopefully Harry Browne because we need a president who will actually do something to give the power back to the State governments.. Bob Dole I feel he is the most qualified I feel that Clinton and Hillary Are a disgrace to this country! Harry Browne - less government / non-coercive society Anybody but Clinton! I would like to see Ross Perot if he would make up his mind and stick with his campaign. bob dole In 1996 I would like to see Alan Keyes for President because he stands for what he believes and doesn't ride the fence trying to please everyone. He is a good thinker and has good ideas. Powell, he is a strong man that has proven his ability to lead. Clinton, to see that his reforms are brought about by a new Congress I'm not sure who meets these criteria: A visionary LEADER who will make reasoned choices considering the real needs of PEOPLE, both for the present and for the future. Harry Browne, honest confrontation of the problems, real solutions Clinton has done a good job (roughly B-), the Whitewater Witchhunt proves he's the first honest president in more than a decade, and the Republicans cannot offer anyone better. Harry Browne - He will end the income tax in the first year and replace it with nothing! Pat Buchanon Only candidate who can turn the country around Harry Browne, cause victimless crime should be abolished Bill Clinton, I believe that continuity and stability are important for this nation right now. There some things that Clinton has done well and will continue to do well. These are things that he can improve upon and build something with. He cares for t Harry Browne because he is the only candidate who wants to trim government back to its contstitutional duties Harry Browne- Would promote the only party theory in the country that has a basic belief and principlel Bob Dole, need cooperation between branches of the governmen Harry Browne - Less gov't involvment Clinton - bulwark against far right bob dole because I respect his no nonsense attitude. Harry Browne. Less government, less taxes, more freedom. Restore constitutional restrictions on federal government (10th Amendment to the Constitution) Bill Clinton Harry Browne -Libertarian, He is the only candidate that would significantly cut back the size and scope of Government, and expand individual Freedom&Responsibilities. Harry Browne I would like to see President Clinton re-elected, mostly because he will probably be running against Bob Dole and I would rather see someone Bill Clinton's age in the White House than a person from Dole's generation. Bob Dole, it doesn't seem like we're going to get any better. Not very positive answer huh? HARRY BROWNE -- he is the best Libertarian candidate. Bill Clinton, because Bob Dole is too damned OLD!! Bill Clinton, because if the republicans are ousted from Congress, maybe some good can happen! Clinton I would like to see HARRY BROWNE as our next president because he truly believes that our government is too intrusive and that it needs to be put back into its proper role. He is a man of principle not political rhetoric. Clinton - I fear the current Republican social & envromental agendas I had a hard time with this survey due to it's limited nature of selections for president, I don't know who I will vote for but it will probably not be anyone listed in your survey in Q3-5. The only way I would vote for Clinton is if the republicans put B Harry Browne Dole. He's the only one who can beat Clinton, and he is not a nut. clinton Bob Dole. He has morals that the U.S. needs to thrive for and character. You need to add "honest" and "integrity" to question 13, oops, but then they wouldn't be a politician. Bob Dole, he has good moral character. H. Browne because of his novel and interesting solutions to our problems anybody but clinton because he lies and we don't need that Bill Clinton because he hasn't done a bad job. Clinton: I voted Republican in 1984, but the republican party today 'scares' me. Especially Pat Bucannan! ross perot harry browne libertarian Bill Clinton - I think he is a good President despite negative press Harry Browne is the best man for job. He's honest, trust worthy, and stricked Constitutionalist Al Gore.Best mind with most progressive views. Bill Clinton, need someone to offset the radical right. Bill Clinton, because he seems to the candidate who will try to pass legislation that assists individuals who most need assistance i.e. the disabled population, also I agree with his views on improving our ecology, some individuals feel that Bill Clinton has made social mistakes but I think that his presidency cannot be judged on extra marital relations or whatever, but should be viewed from the perspective of the accomplishments of the Clinton administration. Harry Browne-We need to significantly reduce the Federal Government's, including many of its agencies, paternalistic control over the citizen's natural development, liberties and lives. Dole - best hope for improvement in govt operation A principaled, strong and moral statesman not bound by party limits - i.e. nobody presently running Clinton because he is doing his best with a lot of garbage from the republicans since day 1 and also Dole is a real loser--he could care less about his daughter from his 1st marriage and is being lead around by his nose by big business--they know they can use him, but Clinton will not be used. Clinton will hold tight on the beliefs of the people!! Frankly, I don't "want" to see any of the current candidates become president. I'll vote for Dole because I distrust him slightly less than I distrust Hillary Clinton, who *was* the president until she stuck her foot in it. She and the drug-addicted Mrs. Gore are all too involved in drugging our children with Ritalin and Prozac. Elect Harry Browne and end federal over-taxation Harry Browne for true change and principles. Bill Clinton, he will back the things that normal people need, like heath care, good wages, schooling, retirement, better roads, and he looks at the future of america and not just what Taxes a person has to pay. If we would do it right the medicare/social security would be taken out of the budget and made back into Social Insurance programs like our forfathers intended it to be. Bubba back in AR plucking & fucking chickens Harry Browne (Libertarian) - He promotes individual liberty and self responsibility. Harry Browne. He will free the economy and slash government regulation. Clinton best of the bunch None of the above...the system does not give us choices. Harry Browne - He has qualified for, but refuses to accept matching funds for his campaign. Both the Democrats and Republicans are using tax dollars to finance their campaigns. Someone who gives education and the environment priority a non-white, non-christian disabled woman, all the so called causes of the problems rolled into one person. This person would most likely have had to deal with and overcome REAL problems. Clinton..better than other choices Pat Buchanan. He has firm convictions and will not compromise them. Browne: End to growth of government Tax rerform and a real balanced budget, not 2002 heavy loaded balanced budget HArry Browne, so that government can be reduced to the absolute minimum. Bob Dole -- because he's NOT Bill Clinton Someone besides who is currently running! Harry Browne, The only candidate who is capable of making the Fedral Government constitutional. Harry Browne Harry Browne, to get government OUT OF MY LIFE! I do not value the self-serving republican philosophies of government Harry Browne! Eliminate the income tax! Harry Browne-cut govt. Dole-he has leadership abilities and paid his dues-CAN DO IT Almost anyone other than who is running now. Pat Buchanan because of his for the Country beliefs Harry Browne, It's time for a Non Republican or Democrate in the Whitehouse. Harry Browne... he'll reduce the Federal government Harry Browne, He's the only president to ever run in the U.S. who is qualified! Harry Browne is the most honest human being on the planet! Harry Browne would leave me free to run my own life. Of the choices Bob Dole although I don't feel any are good Harry Browne. He seems to be offering concrete ideas that other candidates wouldn't even think of because it threatens their power. Ross Perot or Colin Powell What's with all these Libertarians? They almost had me psyched into joining them. They sure know how to say all the rights things. As it turns out, they are a bunch of conservative gun-toting, paranoid, closet homosexual, racist, uncaring, selfish "whities". They are no different than the Aryan Nation, Militist groups, etc. It really doesn't matter what your survey outcome is since it is so obvious that they have "stuffed the ballot box"!!!! Harry Browne; because he shares many of my beliefs, most candidates don't. Everyone who's running is telling us what morals to have, what we can't do on our private property and businesses, and generally interfering in our personal freedoms of choice. There is no "fair" person I can think of that I would vote for at this time. It will be the first time I'm not voting for the Democrat (I am 48). He's making too many decisions about my personal life without my permission. Harry Browne - the only candidate with a specific plan for less government, and specific solutions for most of the country's current woes. Harry Browne, Only candidate that respects the constitution and the individual. clinton..he's pro-choice and not a fascist Harry Browne Gen Colin Powell. Leadership, knowedge, un-corrupted Harry Browne Anyone who is not a Democrate or Republican, Because it's time for some real change I'm for Pat Buchanan because he is conservative and he is willing to fight for what is right. Harry Browne, I want government out of my life. I want the responsibilities and rights for running my own life back. harry browne Harry Browne Less Government; much less!!!! Harry Browne-government doesn't work! It doesn't deliver the mail on time; it can't win the war on drugs, keep our streets safe or solve the poverty problem. All government does is to get in the way of those of us who wish to help. Ross Perot-Because there isn't a dime's worth of difference between Clinton and Dole. Both the democratic and republican parties are bought and paid for by special interests. Alan Keyes... because he is the closest I've seen to someone who actually can answer a question in full sentences, he has the right ideas and he's black...I think it's about time we got someone other than some old, stuffy, white anglo-saxon stereotype idiot in the whitehouse. Harry Browne will reduce government Harry Browne because of freedom personality & huge tax cuts. Bill Clinton - He is for education and is for fairness for the low income who are trying to better their lives through education Harry Browne...because he has a plan that I like very much for getting govt our of my life. PERIOD Bob Dole, because he has integrity and holds most of my views. PAT BUCHANAN Harry Browne, Libertarian -- Mr. Browne is the only candidate committed to the preservation of liberty as the highest ideal in government. Harry Browne, he and I agree on almost everything but taxes. Bill Clinton - I'm afraid of the Republicans. browne Bob Dole, because of his vast experience. Harry Browne/ we need someone with new and different ideas. Steve Forbes Bill Clinton, because he appeared to be open mind compare to the candidate who running for office in 1996. Browne, Forbes, or William Simon. Financially-astute/non-beltway/ Harry Browne gives more choice back to the people. Harry Browne--If freedom isn't free, then exactly what is it? Harry Browne. He would destroy the income tax which is a yoke around the neck of America that should be broken. Keyes, Like Buchanan, he says exactly what he means, but I agree more with Keyes viewpoints and from talking with him, he is sincere in his beliefs. Bill Clinton, he has done a good job and deserves to be re-elected clinton - he will protect the environment & create jobs. I'd like to see Bill Clinton re-elected. I believe that he has his heart and mind in the right place. A libertarian: the government is a tremendous threat clinton Harry Browne: He'll do what he says and I like what he says. Harry Browne would actually make a difference for individual liberty and, perhaps, save this country from the rack and ruin the Demo-publicans are leading us to. Harry Browne: the only candidate who stands uncompromisingly in favor of every individual's right to peacefully pursue their own vision of happiness; the only candidate who stands against the initiation of force as a moral principle to which government must not be exempt; the only candidate who would attempt to end this insane war on drugs, and act to rein in the whole catalog of egregious intrusions into individual lives that has been the nanny state run amok. Harry Browne, Most qualified, most honest, highest moral values, only hope to save America. Harry Browne, because he seeks a true Constitutional government, unlike both Democrats and Republicans. Harry Browne: Because Government Doesn't Work Buchanan, because he is for fair trade and says what the middle class would like to say Bob Dole Harry Browne -- Democrats and Republicans will never change the system they have worked so long and hard to create. Bob Dole Harry Browne - he would REDUCE the size and intrusiveness of government, dramatically. Gov. Jim Edgar running with Paul Simon Harry Browne. Republicand and Democrats are not the only choice. We should vote for our represenative, not a winner! We live in a Republic, and we should vote that way! Someone who will reduce government enforcemnt of morals Harry Browne (L) Should be our next president. He believes in getting the government out of peoples lives. We need to get out of all the petty little wars around the globe. We need to reduce the federal government to a size that can take care of the tasks stated in the constitution and no more. We need to end the war on drugs and free the prisons of non-violent criminals so that there is room to lock up those who really need to be locked up. Harry Bronwe = freedom and self responsibility Clinton, because he is the least facistic of those involoved. Forbes everyone else is a crook Harry Browne- He understands the proper role of Government and has genuine respect for the right and ability of individuals to make their own choices in their live colin powell I like him he is down to earth Bob Dole, the nation needs and experienced conservative leader. Harry Browne might make some mistakes - but at least they'll be honest mistakes and not politically motivated Dole, conservative, less govt. Clinton talks right acts left Bob Dole because he has won the republican nomination and electing a republican president and more importantly a conservative house and senate with a veto proof majority is the only way we will ever turn this country around ! Harry Browne - I agreed with virtually everything in his book,"Why Goverment Doesn't Work" Bob Dole Dole At this point - Bob Dole. He's the only one with a chance to remove Clinton... I REALLY hate Clinton. Any candidate who will implement National Sales Tax HArry Browne to cut spending Anyone that would eliminate as many fed and local gov programs including income, property, and death taxes, turn job training back over to skilled workers in the busiess sector, education vochures, and STOP labeling socialists as liberal, Bill Clinton will never swallow the idels in the constitution or the bill of rights, nor will most of the poloticians in DC. Harry Browne... He stands for what I believe in. Harry Browne; there is no difference between Dole and Clinton, they merely argue over the details but basically agree clinton, he rules Harry Browne - He is the only man who has ever run for President who is qualified. Colin Powell - He has minimal special interest ties, except for the military interests. Alan Keyes because he has his finger on the core problems of this nation. Harry Browne...we need less government Harry Browne, because we need to *cut* gov't Clinton, best of offered canidates, seems to have common sense and is willing to compromise when needed. Harry Browne/libertarian Alan Keyes for President '96! Any libertarian who will drastically reduce government spending, taxation and intrusion on personal liberties. my wife Harry Browne - No Government IS GOOD Government Bob Dole. Pro-choice, Christian, Military, Kansas boy Harry Browne. He is the only cnadidate I feel who will truly try to decrease government involvment in people's personal lives Sen. Tom Harkin of Iowa Pat Buchanan, Bob Dole, he is better than Clinton more sincere and honest. clinton only says what he thinks we want to hear has no convictions of his own. Steve Forbes. He is an independent, successful business man who has given great thought to the issues and has proferred some possible solutions. Colin Powell: he is the only truly moderate leader and could unite the nation Harry Brown, because he is the Libertarian candidate, and he stands for what I stand for on most issues. Bob Dole, so that there won't be gridlock between the Congress and the White House General Colin Powell Bill Clinton Bob Dole, because the only other apparent canidates are Pat Buchanan (Please give up and go away) and Bill Clinton, niether of whom hold the belief that "he should be given exactly as he earns" bob dole not clinton Clinton - he's moved to the middle, Dole should come out AGAINST Fascist Buchanan Bob Dole - Honest reputation and love in his home state. Seems more concerned with change whereas Bill Clinton seems lack the role model that I as american desire to see in my nations leader. I would like to see Bob Dole get Collin Powell as his VP. I want to see a president who considers the people before making a decision to please the powers that be As the GOP nominee, Dole. We need to restore honesty, integrity, common sense, stability and control to the Executive Branch, all of which have been lacking under Clinton. Dole isn't perfect -- he's not even my first or second choice in the GOP -- but the qualities he would bring to the office would be a significant improvement and return the nation to a steadier, more reliable course. Powell, because he can bring the counrty together and is a strong leader. Powell...he's a moderate with the most integrity. Clinton because all the others are unintelligent anyone but Bill Clnton...he is a liar and a big govt advocate Any conservation. The choices Or Dole and Clinton are virtually the same. Please give the answer of none of the above when listing Of the two or three for those of us who will not vote for either. It may open some eyes to see how many feel that way. Harry Browne(L) - he will eliminate govt intrusion Dole, because I hate Clinton Ross Perot Bill Clinton Bob Dole - continue the advances made by the republican party in the past few years Some one that will say what he stands for, with a plan for action to grow the country and economy. S. Forbes could have done this, but B. Dole is the only viable candidate at this time. Pat B would be a good alternative. Bill Clinton, the only reason things seem so bad with him in office is because the rich people are whining and hear a lot more about it. Harry Browne, he has consistent ideas on how to cut our government monstrosity Harry Browne - He is serious about reducing the size of Government. bill clinton - for lack of someone more qualified I don't like ANY of the choices/it should be a GOVERNMENT OF THE PEOPLE Perot,, he has the vision to see us through Harry Browne, because he is the only anti-government candidate dole conviction on the issues, not just the way the wind blows Harry Browne, because the Reps & Demos have been screwing us long enough! Harry Browne - He has a detailed plan to make the government MUCH smaller Harry Browne - "Huge Tax Cuts Now! Huge Spending Cuts Now! A Balanced Budget Now!" Harry Browne, Only person who will do and spend what he says for the people, nothing. Jack Kemp or Warren Rudman Dole, Experienced and trustworthy Mary Cal Hollis (Socialist) Because people are more important than profits. I want Harry Browne...we need a viable third party so that we can break the existing power structure and have more discussion of issues rather than party loyalties. harry browne Bill Clinton Browne, because the Libertarian approach is the only consistently ethical one presented by any of our political parties. BILL BIIL BILL BILL BILL BILL BILL BILL BILL BILL BILL BILL Bill Clinton Ralph Nader -- he is an intelligent, idealistic candidate Bill Clinton, he represents my ideals the best. Harry Browne - supports Constitution, stop the drug wars! Rick Tompkins because he would do everything a President can do Harry Browne. He is the only candidate who understands what is wrong with the country and how to fix it. Alan Keys - offers sane perspectives and correct priorities Bill Clinton because he has done a lot for the country after the two Republican Presidents have destroyed the economy of the country. All the good ones have dropped out. It will be a choice among the "lesser of evils" Patrick J. Buchanan-because he stands on high moral ground and is unswerving in his beliefs as to what is wrong with America and his very specific beliefs as to how to correct these wrongs. Moreover, he is beholden to NO special interest,although, causes that line up with his beliefs he supports viemently. Bill Clinton - man of insite and care Bradley. Clinton with Character Harry Browne-- I agree with everything he has to say. http://www.HarryBrowne96.org/wgdw/ch27-a.html Buchanon. Trusts the public. bob dole, if that is only choice dole Pat Buchanan - intelligent, perceptive, honest, sticks by his ideals Harry Browne - He really wants to reduce the size of govt. bill clinton...he's the best choice for the future of the United States of America... I would love Pat Buchanan, but because of the ignorance out there, the media influence, and the special interest groups including gays & lesbians, it will probably go to Bob Dole or even worst Bill Clinton, (the man with the ability to lie like I've never seen before right to your faces!) Powell/Bradly re: leadership, integrety bob Dole, he's a realistic leader who won't preach liberalism like Clinton has BUCANAN, BECAUSE,MAYBE JUST MAYBE HE WILL RAISE HELL I want to see Harry Browne's Great White Buns Harry Browne, Because he wants to restore the Constitution and the Bill of Rights Harry Browne: integrity; breaking the gridlock Harry Browne because he agrees with me FORBES HE HAS BETTER TAX IDEAS TO HELP THE COUNTRY Bill Clinton, He's alot beter than every one else. Colin Powell because I feel he can adequately represent all races equally Anyone except Clinton. He's a National Disgrace Bill, lesser of several evils Dole--A loyal, patriotic, conservative leader who sacrificed for his country Colin Powell, He is a great leader, and would build a great team of advisors. Afterall, the men and women behind the President are as important as the President. bill clinton Harry Browne, I am in full support of liberitarianism Bill Bradley PAT BUCHANAN The only true leader for the job !!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!! Bill Clinton, he's had some good ideas regarding health & education. Bill Clinton. I think people have been way too hard on him. If a republican were to get the nomination I think this country would lose all the elements that make it great. For example free speech, the right to practice or not practice your own religion James "Kibo" Parry. Harry Browne, because I agree with his positions on the issues. Powell, he seems responsible and capable. Jesse Jackson Bill Clinton. I think the republicans will wreck the environment and the economy, an HARRY BROWNE - SMALL GOVERNMENT, CITIZEN PRIVACY Harry Browne - a man dedicated to making America more free Harry Browne, because he has the right idea! Ralph Nader - he has a history of promoting people's interests over corporate interests. Please add him to the options in voting above. Harry Browne. Why? The U.S. Constitution. Harry Browne, he�s the only one who is running on principle. Alan Keyes says what he believes Harry Browne, for his small government beliefs. I want the $5000 + the government arbitrarily removes from my paycheck every day to stop. I want to see the Republican candidate, Bob Dole as President. With Dole as President, we can pass the GOP agenda (balancing the budget, and giving more power to individuals not government) which Clinton has been blocking Harry Browne/ But I think he should have kept his beard. BOB DOLE Clinton--He seems to be intelligent and oepn minded, as well as reasonable. He knows when to stand his ground and when to compromise. An 'waffling' that he's supposedly done I think is exemplary of his passion for the subject and that he's probably misstated himself more than once (don't we all? or are Presidents required to be above Humanity?---some times I wonder) Harry Browne, because he wants to re-establish the Bill of Rights Pat Buchanan, he understands the U.S. Constitution Harry Browne/ He is the only one who will cut the size of govt. Bill Clinton -- not because I like him, but because he's not a Republican Ross Perot-At least he has enough brains to have made a fortune on his own withoput being a politician Probably Harry Browne - since the GOP has moved too far to the far right on social issues and libertarians are more tolerant. Harry Browne. We need a genuine change of the guard, new ideas. Clinton - He's "acceptable" to the majority. Harry Browne, I want a president that WILL reduce US government to its smallest denominator Sadly this is a "none of the above year". Better yet, throw a dart! There isn't three inches of difference between any of them. Elizabeth Dole - she's proven to be a leader and has class. We might be in for a major change, like electing a woman. Dole because most of the time I can understand the motives for his actions. I believe that Dole would actually have the national well-being as his primary objective, whereas Clinton would have his own well-being at the top of the list. I see no one that interests me enough to vote for them - the VP choice of the Republicans may make my mind up. Harry Browne, because he has a proper, pro-liberty vision and direction Harry Browne. Do you need a reason? He's Libertarian Harry Browne, because he is the only candidate that will cut the size of the Federal government Harry Browne--He's the only one who genuinely believes in freedom. Buchanan - reverse Goals 2000 strategy Restoration of Personal Freedom and Personal responsabilty Harry Browne. Support his goal of returning the Federal Govt. to its Constitutional role. Dole Bill Clinton - a solid record of achievements Harry Browne, because he knows "Why Government Doesn't Work" nobody Dole-honesty-charicter-toughness Harry Browne - Smaller Government!!!!! Bob Dole, because he has experience in government and knows how to compromise, and his views are mostly the same as mine. Jack Kemp someone who really cares about the U.S. (a dream!) Harry Browne - for all the Libertarian reasons Dole, lesser of two evils Bill Clinton. Regardless of Clinton's past performance, the republicans will problablly nominate a candidate who is so conservitive (ie pro-live, idealic families values, let people with problems fend for themselves) that I will be unable to vote for him. Steve Forbes because he has the best ideas Bob Dole--He's not Bill Clinton i would like to see the continuation of clinton's policies Dole- experience in govt. and to pass a budget Clinton - 'cos he's doing a good job Harry Browne, he will truly decrease the size of government, and end the futile "War on Drugs" for good Bob Dole Right now he seems to be the Republican Presidential Nominee, and I want to see Clinton out of office. Buchanan/ I really feel that he will bring the nation together. Rich and poor, corporates and blue collar.Through his leadership we will become a stronger nation, and will grow more than ever before. Bob Dole has the integrity and fortitude to lead our country into prosperity with conservative fiscal policy, and business incentives. HARRY BROWNE THE BEST MAN HONEST, TRUTHFUL, & BRAVE Forbes. The United States needs a President who will approach the highest executive office from a business angle Harry Browne. We need someone that FIRMLY believes and is willing to stand behind a balanced budget and lessening the intrusion of government into our lives. jerry brown he sees things the way they are 4 most americans Harry Browne, Give governing back to the people A total outsider, Harry Browne i'd like to see noone as president. personally. Govenor Bill Weld of Massachusetts with VP Christine Todd Whitman Better candidates and more coverage of 'other' ideas besides Democratic/Republican. Bill Clinton because he is the only one so far who stands for the same issues I support I'd prefer Lugar but since he is out of the running, Dole. Actually, anyone running against Clinton. I think he is the nation's shame. Although he is not running, I think Jack Kemp would make a fine President. He is straightforeward, honest, and has sound intellect. He also seems to have the guts to disagree with party dogma he sees as being outdated or just plain wrong. Actually what I'd like to see on the 1996 (and future) ballots is an option marked, "I have reviewed all the candidates and find none of them acceptable." This would allow voters to send a clear message in elections as oppossed to not voting at all. It would be interesting to see in the future elections what percentage of people find none of the candidates worthy of a vote. This would give the percentages a whole different look and a chance for voters to voice their dissatisfaction. In the current ace I'd bet this option would get lots of votes! Patrick Buchanan. He stands up for what he believes in. He will stop immigration with fences. He will only trade with worthy countries. He does all this and more. Harry Browne, because he would really reduce government size & cost. Marion Wright Edelman-her priorities are in order Bill Clinton because he cares about bettering life for all Americans. Bill Clinton. After a rough start, he has matured into a fair-minded leader. I believe he is just reaching his stride. He deserves another term. Also, values he has voiced are more aligned with mine than are the other candidates. dole Dole- His experience and values. Buchanan. The only one who sticks to his guns. Clinton, because Mr. Dole, while a fine majority leader, is too old to commence a presidency of (presumably) 8 years, and has a mean streak a mile wide. "Better the devil you know..." P.S. I voted for Bush in '92, and would do so again, given the choice. Harry Browne--less government control steve forbes- government needs to be run more like a business, forbes is a proven businessman I'm Hong Kong people Browne-to abolish govt.corruption & give individuals freedom Bob Dole Ross Perot or the Reform Party's choice because I believe he will do what he says and can get people to work together. Humm...how do I NOT turn this into a "partisan/rhetorical argument???" I am supporting Harry Browne because he is the only candidate that is SERIOUS about reducing the size of govt. Although I supported Phil Gramm and Steve Forbes previously, Bob Dole is a totally unacceptable candidate. We now have a choice between two candidates who look to the latest polls for their own positions on the issues! Bill Clinton -- he is one of our greatest Presidents thus far, and we desperately need his statesmanship and integrity HARRY BROWNE-CUT GOVT. Dole...Clinton has screwed up everything so bad Dole can only do better Buchanan, he's got the vision Rick Tompkins or Harry Browne. Because the others are just a bunch of fascists. Harry Browne - He will reduce the size of Government, not argue over how fast it should grow Harry Browne, I want more personal freedom & personal responsibility An intelligent, moderate, socially responsible Republican - where are they? Harry Browne because he is the only candidate I have heard from that completely makes sense and whose ideas are backed by solid facts. I believe he will not comprimise any of his beliefs if elected Pres. Health care , honesty good relations with our nieghbors=Clinton Bob Dole BILL CLINTON...he stands for change...he's trying to change what the republican presidents didn't in the 80's...he's the only one who has a set of balls(still functioning) that will stand up against the republican congress...dole, on the other hand, will just bring back the good ol' reagan/bush years where we regressed a created our national debt on what? star wars etc...etc...dole, i mean the republican candidates have already proven that they can't agree on anything until one of them drops out of therace and then backs dole up when they were just criticizing him and what he stands for? hmmm, i really wonder what that is...dole seems to stand for all the other republicans who support him and his accomplishments...DOLE DOES NOT VOICE HIS OPINIONS, IDEAS, OR "VISION" unless you're as old as dole and soon to die, WE NEED A PRESIDENT WHO STILL HAS SOME BREATH IN HIM WHO CAN TAKE OUR COUNTRY INTO THE NEXT CENTURY BETTER THAN WHERE WE ARE NOW, BILL CLINTON IS THE ONLY PRESIDENT WHO IS CAPABLE OF DOING JUST TAT! Bill Clinton. Need to balance republican congress. STEVE FORBES - PRO-GROWTH IDEAS, OUTSIDER, NOT OBLIGATED TO PACS bill clinton...dole's a people pleaser(republican's only)...clinton will work with/for everyone towards the future... Anybody but Clinton Clinton, do not want any republican as president. I would like to see someone who has the backbone to stand by what they believe in and not sling the same old rhetoric or tell voters what they want to hear. At the same time I would want the candidate to be open-minded. I feel that the current candidates take stands on issues only after guaging voter opinion or party support. The two-party system reduces every issue into an "us" and "them" mentality. As a result good ideas get shelved simply because neither party is willing to compromise or give crdit to another party. Congressional proceedings have all the maturity of a third grade playground brawl. In short, I have no real idea who Bill Clinton or Bob Dole really are or what they believe. If forced to choose between the two of them I will probably end up voting for myself! me - i'm the best hope for america Harry Browne. Government is out of control and needs to be drastically trimmed. Dole.. Can't trust Bill and Hillary Robert LaFollette, but he's dead. We need a return to progressive government that returns power to the people that can best manage the peoples needs. We need money out of the political decision process. We need a safety net, but also opportunities for people to work at meaningful jobs. We don't need obsene wealth. patriot and has morals I have given up on the Republicans. The Libertarian Party is the only party with principles and foresight. I'm voting for Harry Browne. Anybody who will pull us out of the UN, GATT, and Nafta. Clinton. The republican party offers only worse choices. Bob Dole- Man of integrity Clinton, primarily because I think he'll do more to battle the growing disparity between the bottom third of Americans and the top 20%. DOLE, Because you cant believe a word Clinton says Bill Clinton, he is the only leader who can preserve the good things about our government and not bow down to the Republican Congress. bob dole. I truly feel bill clinton is a Liar. Pat Buchanan, He's the only noncompromising, honest candidate with morals who cares about the American people. Bob Dole, partially because he's the only ADULT candidate. Keyes - someone with consistent answers that does not change his speech depending on whom he's addressing. Harry Browne; the "ideas" of the others have been tried before and failed. If it hasn't worked in the past, why let it fail again? Harry Browne furthermore has the high moral ground without engaging in narrowmindedness as Clinton and Dole do. Harry Browne, he's the only candidate with something new to say. The others are for the most part, 'Part of the Problem'. I wouldn't have checked 'experimented with drugs in youth', except you had a 'didn't use drugs in youth' and I don't think it makes any diference, look at Pecabo Street, Tommy Moe, and Kerry Mullis. Harrb Browne, Libertarian, because he is the only candidate running that has a serious proposal for cutting (not slowing the growth of) the Federal Government. Harry Browne - less goverment = higher standard of living Harry Browne Thomas Jefferson. Shouldn't it be obvious? My top choices are all dead Clinton. I don't trust Dole. Dole Honest man Anyone but Klinton Pat Buchanan, He is Against Baby killing (abortion) and Will fight and likes to Powell Its clear now that the choice is Dole or Clinton. Dole is older than Reagan was when he ran, he has no vision, and has been around politics far too long. That said, he is a moderate (something the Reps. despirately need). Sad to say though, that electing Dole will give the lunatic Gingrich a free ride. We must elect Clinton. Harry Browne, Libertarian -- he's the candidate most committed to reducing government and strengthening personal liberty. Bill Clinton. He's not a Nazi Conservative! harry browne :FREEDOM NOW!!!!! Harry Browne as he is the only candidate who truly wishes to reduce government involvement in our lives. Patrick Buchanan because he is a christian Harry Browne (Libertarian) - He's the only one who has specifically outlined what he would do as president. His message is the same, regardless of the audience - unlike other candidates. At least he has integrity. RUSH ABC--Anybody But Clinton---the most crooked President in modern times; he makes Watergate look like an afternoonn tea party!!!!!!!!!!!!!! Pat Browne: Individual Rights, not statism Bob Dole, he is a proven leader with experience and sound ideals and principles. Bill Clinton 'cause all the others scare the shit out of me.... Harry Browne - To end prohibition of drugs so our streets will be safe. Harry Browne because he is very enthusiastic and has many innovative ideas Harry Browne, because he is the only candidate who stands solidly for removing the tyrrany of government. Myself, I can government spending and retire the national debt Harry Browne. He'll cut taxes and scale government back. Bob Dole because he is a man of entigrety pat buchanan takes a stand for what he believes and does not compromise on those beliefs. restores a sense of patriotism this country needs. gore - only one qualified pat buchanan takes a stand for what he believes and does not compromise on those beliefs. restores a sense of patriotism this country needs. Ross Perot: his economics are sound, he doesn't want to restrict anything. pat shroeder (sp?) she's smart, intelligent, ethical and a woman Ralph Nader Harry Browne, because he is the one who will make actual reductions in the size of government I hope the republicans can get into the white house and come up with a balanced budget that will work for all Americans, and help provide a better economy for all. Someone who will defend ALL of the Bill Of Rights, not just certain pieces. Bob Dole- Superior leadership skills/is for less government. Colin Powell other wise Dole, Clinton can't seem to make a decision. Jack Kemp, a kinder gentler eminently electable Republican Clinton. Good policies for economic growth. Colin Powell-Leadership/Moderate Republican like myself david duke (if he was running) B/c He's a RACIST [sorry-I'm answering #12 instead: attitude (reflected in decline of personal responsibility & increase in laziness & self-indulgence in every arena) is our society's biggest problem. It CANNOT be solved by government intervention.] Steve Forbes Harry Browne/His views are closest I would like to see someone with respect: for both himself and for the nation he/she will represent. I am tired of hearing about scandals and partisan squabbles. In its short-sighted and selfish way, D.C. has forgotten the real issue-- our nation's futu Bill Clinton - republicans represent only the super rich Bob Dole, who will, I think, change the direction of government in a more conservative sense, and get the economy flowing again. somebody other than the pathetic choices we have now! Pat Buchanan he has the guts to stand up for what is right! Browne -- I don't trust the government and neither does he! Harry Browne buchanan, he is the only candidate who says what he means and means what he says Bob Dole He has the experience to lead the country. Harry Browne, because he would actually trim government Phil Gramm , then Bob Dole and anyone but the Clintons. Browne - less government Harry Browne- His book sold me. He'll get my vote Bob Dole ,integrity,morals,and is not married to hillary Any Libertarian that will abolish the IRS, Federal Reserve and all government not literally specified by the Constitution, ie 90% of government. Pat Buchanan, I feel the same as he does on most issues. Harry Browne. Education that would teach love of learning not memorization. A real flat tax...No deductions, no reductions, no loopholes. Government gets out of our private lives. Common sense government and judicial systems! and Finally a look at zero growth population implementation! Harry Browne - because government does not work Harry Browne, the best chance the American people have for LESS government. Alan Keyes He hits the problem. The breakdown of the Family Dole. Now that he ostensibly has the nomination, we need to UNITE to kick the Clinton's butts out of the White House! That means speak no evil of other republicans, Pat, and don't split the vote in November. Harry Browne, Libertarian. Less government, more states rights Only Harry Browne recognizes the sovereignty of the individual. Harry Browne - He stands for less federal government. ABC - Anybody but Clinton, because he changes his stand on the issues and the truth means nothing to him. My firt choice, if I could pick a president would be Phil Gramm, he has never changed his position on the issues and he means what he says. H A R R Y B R O W N E From the current candidates, Clinton is by far the best choice. clinton, because he seems most capable of the job Unless Colin Powell runs, I like Clinton because he seems to care about people. Bill Clinton, he is the only candidate with a rational approach. rick tompkins this government is out of control Bill Clinton - best president we've had for a long time Pat Buchanan-he is a man with values and knows what he stands for. anyone but a liberal Pat Buchanan Harry Browne as president. Get government out of our lives! Pat Buuchanan. For no other reason than that if you go back four,or five years, he was saying the same things, and in five years, I'm sure he will not have changed his message. That's his strength. He doesn't waffle on the issues. He says what he means, he does what he says. clinton Harry Browne. The revelation of Dole and Clinton's dirty pasts and questional ethics will create a vacume which will aid in Harry Browne's efforts. Clinton, because he cares about everyone Clinton, because he seems to be the most moderate. Clinton More open to responsible change Jack Kemp, He's an honest, thoughtful, intelligent man who thinks for himself! Rick Thomkins... The right candidate from the Party of Principle. Jesus Christ Ross Perot Bill Clinton, He has shown he can do a good job as President Forbes...maybe it's time we ran our government's business the same way we run our family's business...in the black! Billy-Boy Clinton, because I believe that he will uphold what our nation is REALLY about: tolerance, peace, RELIGIOUS FREEDOM, and government involvement where necessary. In order for our world to step forward and progress into a full-scale GLOBAL VILLAGE, we need a president who will not try to establish US sovereignty, but who willinstead help other nations rise to our level, and help our nation improve so that everyone will be ready for a future in which we as a race of HUMAN BEINGS can expand our xistence into something more wonderful than anything you mere mortals could ever have dreamt of. Harry Brown, because his platform is based on logic and common sense and He's not a lame-ass polititon. Steve Forbes, he is presidential and honest Harry Browne. Because he's a rational man and not a politician. Some one who will cut the deficit, taxes, corporate lobbies, and grow the small businesses of American citizens instead of allowing forign companies to dump products made through environmental pollution and slave labor. Harold Brown. Other candidates want to eliminate freedom in America. Myself Buchanan -- pro-Constitution, pro-Bible, America First Harry Browne - Libertarian - I'm tired of government. Bob Dole, to restore integrity,dignity, respect to the position. keyes i think he is smart and cares. alan keyes or bill bennett: alan keyes is the only candidate that seesm to realize that liberal gov't policies of the last several decades are what has generated most of our problems today - the welfare state, crime, poor public education, etc. Bill Bennett would have been my choice had he run. Harry Browne - The libertarian platform needs to be implemented ASAP. The national sales tax is an execelent idea and much more workable than the so called "flat tax". Jack Kemp; He has an extremely sound economic & domestic policy Clinton - to avoid Republican critical mass Gen. Colin Powell, high integrity and leadership skill Bob Dole If Keyes or Buchanan won't be President then Dole is better than Clinton and he can get the Republican Revolution moving Bob Dole adopting lessons from Steve Forbes showing in primaries. Mandate is reject mainstream conservatism, find a way to reah people. Don't neglect the urban issues--criminal justice ystem is broken. That is nation's foremost issue. Jimmy Carter. He's been very effective in the last several years. Elizabeth Dole Buchanan, he has an old-fashioned toughness about him along with intellegence Powell Harry Browne. Less government now! COLIN POWEL, AS FORMER CHAIRMAN OF THE JOINT CHEIFS, HE WAS AND IS WELL RESPECTED BY ALL OTHER NATIONS, AND WOULD BE A GREAT BENFIT TO THE U.S.A.. Pte Wilson, big balls against morons that are stupid Buchanan - He is a leader who knows where he's going. Buchanan, because he will not put up with all the political corruption and big money men running our country into communism. Anyone other than a liberal Bill Clinton - four years is not long enough for anyone to have a fair shake in the whitehouse Harry Browne is our only hope! Repeal Federal Government! Steve Forbes wants to make positive changes that will allow Americans to take more control of theri lives to their ultimate benefit. Governor Weld,Mass. Rick Tompkins - principled defender of liberty I am sick to death of the status quo candidate...the whimpy democrats & the judgemental, closed minded, uncaring, environment destroying, holier than thou, extreme right-wingers. I also want a REAL flat tax. It is the only fair way to tax. EVERYBODY pays a certain % tax . That's it! No deductions or credits or deferals or paying an accountant to get you out of paying the tax on your yacht & Summer home. The United States needs to get off the road it is traveling. I am going to vote for Harry Browe. He will kick the Government out of our PRIVATE lives. He will stop the rule of the business & religious-owned politicians. We need our government to run on common sense & fairness & responsibility to citizens and the environment. I mean, How many more people, shopping malls, apartment buildings, hamburgers, and toxic waste barrels do we need?! None...so let's do something! How about Zero Growth Population? Dole(P)/Powell(VP)..socially moderate, fiscally conservative, stong foreign sector leadership and integrity Bob Dole - man of high honor and conservative politics I am sick to death of the status quo candidate. I am sick of the whimpy democrats & I am super sick of the judgemental, closed minded, uncaring, environment destroying, holier than thou, extreme "conservatives". I also want a REAL flat tax. It is the only fair way to tax. EVERYBODY pays a certain % tax . That's it! No deductions or credits or deferals or paying an accountant to get you out of paying the tax on your yacht & Summer home. The United States needs to get off the road it is traveling. I am going to vote for Harry Browne. He will not let Government interfere with our PRIVATE lives. He will stop the rule of the business/religious-bought-&-paid-for politicians. We need a government run on common sense & fairness & responsibility to citizens and for the environment. I mean, How many more shopping malls, apartment buildings, hamburgers, and toxic waste barrels do we need?! How many more PEOPLE does this WORLD need? None...so let's do something! Harry Browne for President; Harry has character and principles (which Billary and Dull lack); Harry wants to decimate the debt and get Government out of our lives, allowing market forces to reign freely. These are the policies the US needs to ensure a ho Harry Browne. His ideas on reducing government and returning the country to the intent of the Constitution are brilliant. Harry Browne - He alone seems willing to try a new direction of reform. The others only rehash the same old thing. I am sick to death of the status quo candidate. I am sick of the whimpy democrats & I am super sick of the judgemental, closed minded, uncaring, environment destroying, holier than thou, extreme "conservatives". A REAL flat tax is the only fair way to tax. EVERYBODY pays a certain % tax . That's it! No deductions or credits or deferals for ANYONE! Especially the rich!!! The United States needs to stop & get off the road it is traveling. So, until I find someone better...or unless he does somethng to change my mind...I am going to vote for Harry Browne. President Clinton, because he supports education and re-training instead of crying over industrial rev. textilie jobs. Harry Browne. He does not compromise libertarian principals, even 1%. Bill Clinton; other candidates are not viable options Alan Keyes. He would do the best job os dismantling the huge government programs that eat our tax dollars and destroy this country Phil Gramm, because he has a strong economic background and does not back down from his convictions. You can believe what he says--no double talk. Dole, because anyone would be etter than Clinton clinton, no better candidates BILL CLINTON HE WANTS TO CHANGE THE US FOR THE GOOD B. Dole: Experience and will make the Congress effective Phil Graham; He is a man of character with the ideas to make the nation great as it was at it was when the founders first won our freedom. Clinton. Has accomplished much Bucanan- because he is the only one who could truly unite America and all of its' people and restore the 'America First' attitude. I don't agree with everything he says, but at least I know where he stands on every issue. His positions do not and will not change. Bob Dole He is Conservitive Bob Dole Because he has already proved that he is the man for the job even before the election has started he has far more experience than Clinton and is mor respectiful then him also Steve Forbes. He's new, fresh, & different. I'm for a flat tax. Pat Buchanan Bill of Rights No Answer Pat Buchanan - He is unwavering in his political view, he is a pro-life candidate, and he would enable the conservative congress to enact/repeal laws that matter to me. General Powell -- Because I don't feel I can trust any of the other candidates. Picking a President is, in Noam Chomsky's words, "about a tenth-rate decision." Pat Buchanan, Uncompromising Bill Clinton: I've seen what fools republicans can be (Newt and Dole) Harry Browne, because he's against censorship, and all the others aren't, and he's liberal. Harry Browne Bill Clinton because he is not republican Bod Dole,the economy,pro life,he's somewhat honest,Clinton is a lier and a pannderer.Republican might help with health care without giving the house away. Pat Buchanan: Because he is honest, moral, and a fighter. Harry Browne -- Increase Freedom, Decrease Taxes Dole/Powell, leadership/excellence (an ROTC motto) Buchannan, He has what this country needs. A moral Backbone. Alan keyes clinton he is the best, plays saxophone Alan Keyes, He has the ability to unite peopl unlike most others Bill Clinton, I think that he has does a good job in turning the economy around. Bill Clinton, because he is best of the group. My hands a tied. A president who will *DO* something and has new ideas. Browne - Because the other two parties are running the same old corrupt politicians who will continue running the government in the same old corrupt ways. Bob Dole - To work with a Republican Congress Clinton, becuase he has better potential than any of the candidates thus far, he is less dogmatic, less polemic, and ostensibly more concerned with the interests and well being of "we the people" of which I am one, than any of the other candidates. open-minded, hate censorship of anykind Harry Browne, has a clear plan to end the growth of government Vote for Harry Browne and put an end to reckless over-taxation. Clinton. The economy is recovering, unemployment is down, and he has done a good job overall. Harry Browne can stop govt corruption and spiraling taxation. Harry Browne - he is the only one that offers change Harry Browne, we need someone socially liberal & economically conservative. A person who cares about the enviroment Browne- We need to REVERSE the debt and fast... Bill Clinton. He's doing quite a good job now, and he's on the right track. I think Dole is dead (literally) and all the others are out. Clinton is the best. Buchannan, You KNOW where he stands. h. Brown: lees gov. Harry Browne because we need a more Libertarian government. Bill Clinton. He's not progressive enough for me, but he is a very intelligent, capable man. I can't help but be partisan, because the conservatives scare me to death, and I would be afraid to live in a country in which big business was given unconditional free rein in political and civic matters and in which the Christian Coalition controlled our culture. Bill Clinton, because he is for, Enviorment, Education, & Government reform bill clinton because he's pro-choice and pro-education and health care reform and pro-environment Lowell Weicker because he is non-partisan and speaks the truth even if it is politically unpopular Bill Clinton - Education, Research, Technology, and social issues are stressed in his campaign, and in my opinion that is the only path in a modern information based economic market without regression to industrial periods of exploitation of lower class/middle lower class individuals. I'm not sure. I'm disgusted with the current field of candidates, so I'm not sure who to vote for. I believe the American people are picking between "Dumb" (Bob Dole) and "Dumber" (Bill Clinton). Only if there was an honest man or woman who would be willing to run..... Bob Dole because he is the best candidate for the job. Bill Clinton he has not done too bad so far Pat Buchanan is the only candidate with genuine convictions remaining in the 1996 presidential campaign. Bill Clinton because With a republican majority in the House and Senate a republican president would wipe out medicare, school lunches, and the environment. Mahatma Ghandi Alan Keyes - He believes, as I do, that we need to take more personal responsibility and base our decisions on moral grounds instead of MONEY. Barbara Jordon...too bad she's dead Pat Buchanan -- strong, charismatic leader with sound character Steve Forbes, he seems to be honest,unlike the others. Harry Browne, because I believe only a Libertarian will be able to make a significant impact on our problems. Ross Perot - need 4 years of relief from corrupt govrnmt Alan Keyes is the only candidate addressing the issues that are truly affecting this nation! Anyone except Dole (we would need a large supply of Depends undergarments) or Clinton (we would need someone who actually CARED about things)! I would vote for Col. Powel because he is qualified NO MATTER THE RACE! Jack Kemp - broad appeal, experience, economic ideas Alan Keyes, because he is the most conservative candidate. Buchanan. America First, Baby Bob Dole Jack Kemp. He is a fiscal conservative but is a social moderate. Even though I agree on where the Republicans are trying to go, I do not agree with their approach. The system created many welfare dependant people who cannot just be dumped. I am also opposed to legislating morality (the Internet censorship is a good example). Jack Kemp , Inthusiastic about American Business, good ideas for solving the problems of the inner-city, Pragmatic. I see Sen. Maj. Leader Bob Dole for two reasons: 1) He is a good and almost no-contest choice for the Republican nomination and Pres. Clinton is one of the most dishonest men I've ever seen. Clinton lies, insults our intelligence, is in scandals, and DOES Harry Browne who will cut government spending in HALF. Harry Browne - Big Brother is not our friend Harry Browne--less government intrusion Pat Buchanan, because he knows what he stands for and is not afraid to say so. Pat Buchanan - I grow tired of waffling and candidates with principles that change to suit the popular tide. Clinton, because in spite of his faults, he has a more open mind than the other candidates. None of those currently running Alan Keyes: I believe he would do the most to dismantle huge government programs. He understands that a government without a moral foundation cannot effectively govern. Pat Buchanan. He's the only one who has'nt sold out. Buchanan, because of his strong true moral views BUSH Steve Forbes - Conserviative/Intelligent/Experience in economics Bill Clinton.Of the possibilties we can choose from he is the lesser of all evils , so to speak. Harry Browne is the only candidate that had detail plans to reduce the size and cost of government, thus increasing my freedom. Pat Buchannon Bob Dole, he has the experience Bill Clinton - has kept my priorities: peace, education, reducing deficit without damaging useful spending. Harry Browne Any candidate that will sign the Contract /America Bills Bill Clinton is the only reasonable man running. Bill Clinton, great sax! Newt - The smartest man in America Harry Browne- "Why Government Doesn't Work" Pat Buchannon I like the isolationist trade ideals Bill Clinton has done a good well-balanced job. harry browne; correct ideas Bob Dole, solid standard, not religiously zealous, doesn't belong to the moral mafia... Pat B. - He most represents my opinions. Bob Dole Harry Browne - he wants to make us responsible for ourselves again. Clinton: He understands that that its not all simple choices Harry Browne, because I want to love in a FREE country. Harry Browne - less government Pat Buchanan - He represents a return to a constitutional Republic and away from Global Socialism. He has also promised to pardon PFC Michael New. Dole-Clinton realy scrued up the White House Anyone who supports individual rights. Buchanan. He's the only honest one of the bunch. Pat Buchanan: I want him for president because he is a man who stands up for what he believes, and you know exactly where he stands. He also is what I feel the only hope we have in saving our country from liberalism and the moral decay prevelant in the United States under the Clinton administration. Harry Browne because he is a Libertarian Clinton--to help stem the overly conservative run on govt. Buchanan, he is honest Forbes, Flat Tax clinton Buchanan - He stands firm in the truth and wants the same as our forefathers did for this country. Pat Buchanan - Moral and honest leadership I would vote for anyone who would defeat Clinton Bill Clinton because I am afraid of the consequences if electing a right-wing extremist to the Presidency. Harry Browne. I've read "Why Government Doesn't Work" and realize that if someone doesn't take on the established political structure and turn things around, America and all of its inhabitants in the 21st century will find themselves living in an impoverished, totalitarian society Bill Clinton - He is the best overall choice any liberal, dump the conservatives Clinton, because he is pro-choice and liberal. I'm not happy with any of the choices. I'd like to see a female libertarian candidate who is a strong leader and can get things done (or undone, really). Pat Buchanan, he found the voice to speak to most of the people making up this nation. He is spiking for those who has no protectors in the government. The rest of the major candidates represent either big business or big government. Pat is what Rush Limbough should be if he did not sell out his soul to the big "global" business interest. i have no idea, probably clinton by default Harry Browne or Rick Tompkins because for the most part their views on the proper role of government fit mine. Buchanan -- Support for Americans, instead of Wall Street and International Corporations Bob Dole, because Clinton is a lying, redneck, ultra liberal! We need a man who will help make America not be the laughing stock of the world, and if we don't stop killing inocent babies, the entire world will suffer on account of thier inocent blood. PAT BUCHANAN!! Gen. Colin Powell. He is a true leader that can use a mix of political savvy and inspiration to enlist people in participating in his vision. Clinton because the US probably deserves someone like that. Bill Clinton - at least he's better than any of the republican candidates Anyone who is the Anti-Clinton" Only Browne has taken a stand against the CDA. Though I like some of the reforms Clinton attempted, he backed the Clipper chip. Pat Buchanan because he stands up for what he truly believes and agree with the majority of his ideas and way of thinking I will vote for Dole. Dr. Keyes--Moral rebirth, racial peace, return to the Constitution and Declaration as basis for Government. Patrick J. Buchanan sticks to his convictions even when they seem unpopular has the only real vision for America. Only a libertarian like Harry Browne would agree with George Washington that "Government, like fire, is a dangerous servant and a fearful master". bill clinton--Although his foreign policies are digraceful his awareness of the true domestic situaton is rquired in the oval offic at this time. Harry Browne. I think a Libertarian in the W.H. would be the best thing to happen to the US in 200 years. He will remind us of our roots, our special duty to ensure that Liberty emlightens the world. Pat Buchanan---America First Dole, it's time we get an adult back into the White House it really dosen't matter; does it. Dole because anyone is better than Clinton a republican the democratic welfare state is bankrupting us Bill Clinton because he's the greatest president of the 20th century Bill Clinton continues to do a good job giving the congress he is working with and the pressures exerted by strong business/po;litical groups. Pat Buchanan, he will return the power back to the PEOPLE! While restoring our CONSTITUTION! And eliminating the Emergency War powers Acts which directly puts the government at war with we the people! H A R R Y B R O W N E Steve Forbes, for putting in a low, flat tax and reforming medicare and medicade. Harry Browne; Liberty Bob Dole - He is electible, he is a statesman, and Bill Clinton is an immoral murderer who is corrupt to the CORE! Bill Clinton because he most closely represents the moderate fiscal and social views held by the majority of Americans. Harry Browne- He will get the government off our backs, out of our pockets, and away from our personal lives! Bill Clinton Doing the best job he can Harry Browne, We need someone that does not owe favors to those in the political estabilshment that can hold it over he/she(s) head Pat Buchanan. He stands up for what he believes in. Bill Clinton - Because he is a moderate Clinton - He's the only man for the job, who has experience and isn't half dead! Bill Clinton, because the other choices are less desirable. Bob Dole - Dole/Kemp, Put grownups back in the Whitehouse! Clinton ...The best of the worse Clinton-because he needs more than one term to accomplish his stated goals. Pat Buchanan because he's interested in America first. Alan Keyes. He's the candidate who understands what's wrong in society. ALAN KEYES is the only candidate who recognizes that the core problems of this country are moral and spiritual - not financial. harry browne, bc gov't doesn't work, restore our freedoms Bill Clinton, the Republican Party Platform will be bound by its' relationship with the religious right and will lose because of it steve forbes we need to get back to citizen gov instead of relection gov. Colin Powell - I know he's not running, but he seems to be less invested in the agenda of any one group. collin powell he's not a politician and is fair Bill Clinton-intelligent,liberal and dedicated Jerry Brown, because he talks straightforwardly about real issues. Strong Christian Leader to lead us back to the roots of our country to build us to greatness I would like to see Alan Keyes as president because he has experience, he is moral, he is a minority and has an interracial marriage, and he is a conservative who wants to take us back to the basics of the Constitution. I think we need a leader who is pa CLINTON EXPERIENCED Bill Clinton, because he has not done a bad job as the current Colin Powell-Honesty & Integrity Any woman because woman are better decision makers and are often more open minded. Dole.. For Congressional and Political Stability Harry Browne - real solutions, return to constitutional ideals Hillary Clinton! Pat Buchanan - his desire to return to the foundational roots of our republic Bob Dole; leadership, integrity, character Pat Buchanan because he wants to give more power to the states, reduce the national government's responsibilities, protect the sovereignty of the United States, and get us out of all foreign entanglements (ie the UN and WTO). Alan Keyes -- moral leadership Bernard Sanders of Vermont, the only Socialist in Congress. I think that's fairly self-explanatory. Bill Clinton--He won't cave in to the religious right, who I don't feel are in touch with the majority of Americans. Jack Kemp. He wants to help country, not himself Alan Keyes Because he focuses on the moral problems which cause most of are money related problems Browne - I believe in self-government. Bill Clinton, to protect our way of life & invest in our children Colin Powell - exemplifies positive American values Steve Forbes is moderately conservative-libertarian Harry Browne -- he respects people as individuals, as a matter of principle. buchanan- has conviction!!! Pat Buchanan or an anti-NAFTA candidate. Colin Powell because he would force racism to either die or come out into the open in our political climate. Harry Browne -- To strengthen our personal and economic freedoms. Clinton, although I would consider another DEM or liberal Pat Buchanan because he represents moral leadership as well as working class values Clinton represents everything I detest. Even though I voted for the Tisch party in 92, I will vote for the Republican candidate, regardless as to who it may be. Why? I am against gun control, tax & spend liberals, and big brother government. If Clinton wasn't running, Bill Bradley, if they were both running then there would be a split like in Bush/Perot. Pat Buchanan; His stand on trade issues, immigration and Christian values Noam Chomsky- because he is the only public figure with vision Harry Browne - We need to vastly reduce the government Alan Keyes, because he identifies and proposes viable solutions for the problems of our society. I would like to see Pat Buchanan President because he and I agree on almost every if not all issues. Browne - For Liberty! Libertarian Harry Browne, because "Government Does Not Work" and never will. Bob Dole, because his ideas are the best Harry Browne. I don't trust any Rep. or Dem. to tell the truth or live up to a promise. I like Browne's positions and believe him. Bill Clinton- I do not like or agree with the other presidential candidates ideas or personalities I want to vote for a candidate who is capable of leading this country away from the "Big Brother" tactics so many Americans in their ignorance and apathy accept without question. Without question, that is, until it strikes at them. Harry Browne; only one that will cut government Harry Brownne to cut waste,waste waste Buchanan- He stands up for "We the People". Harry Browne, because he is the only contender that has a realistic plan to reduce the government NOW. Pat Buchanan because I feel that the country needs to have someone in office who has not necessarily been involved politically before, but who still has been involved with politics from the outside in the media. I feel that no matter who gets elected to the office, he/she will be at the mercy of Congress who tends to corrupt the integrity of what our founding fathers began. I hope we will have someone strong enough to not give in to the typical political polls and do what the country needs and not wht is popular. Collin Powell - He is a man with integrity. He has a sharp mind and would do what he thought was right for America. I am disappointed with all of the current candidates. Alan Keyes: because we have moral problems not money problems. Jack Kemp or Bob Dole - conservative ideas, Supreme Court appointments Pat Buchanan Alan Keyes - Focused on correct issues Clinton, because he is the only candidate with any flexibility. Buchanan -- says what he thinks & MEANS it Pat Buchanan, because he has a just and moral stance and he has integrity! No one else does... Harry Browne; has the right ideas about what's wrong with government. Pat Buchanan,NAFTA is going to kill us. ROSS PEROT Harry Browne Alan Keyes. He says what he stands for. No holds barred Clinton Know what to expect/good ideas what a mess this country is in! Who can do the job and be decent about? I just don't know. It's so hard to believe the candidate's hype. I would like to see Jack Kemp because he stresses ideas in a positive, inclusive manner and doesn't other people or their ideas. Alan-Keyes wants to get back to Declaration of Independence thru healing process. Harry Browne. I've found that a vast majority of people are Libertarian. They just don't know it. Forbes - I'm rich, so what? Steve Forbes because of the flat tax and strong business experience. I want a leader that believes in what he believes, not in what the public wants at that moment, ie. Bill Clinton Pat Buchanan because he has the highest moral standards and America needs him to get us out of this cultural decay that we're experiencing today clinton, he needs 4 more years to keep this country moving the way that it has Alan Keyes. He is the only candidate who is truly qualified for the office of president, and the only one who understands the moral crisis that this nation faces. Alan Keyes: He is the only one who stands for the TRUTH. Alan Keyes - He has a high standard and sticks to it. Alan Keyes - The only candidate who's clearly and unambiguously articulating the ROOT cause of our problems, the breakdown of morals in the current society today. Alan Keyes, to give moral leadership and elevate the importance of the familhy B. Clinton. In order to continue the progress on personal freedoms and to check the right wings attempts to dismantle the programs that benefit, educate, and improve the environment of we the people. A minority--I think that it is time. Alan Keyes - He is a solid conservative with great ideas and leadership. Harry Browne -- Less Governement is the only way to get this country back on its feet Bill Clinton, because the potential republican candidates (especially Pat Buchannon) are a littlebit too conservative for my taste. Dr. Alan Keyes "We don't have money problems. We have moral problems." Harry Browne, he is the best man for the job. Jack Kemp. Best person for economic "empowerment" of the poor. Howard Stern alan keyes, because he is the only candidate who is addressing the real cause of our country's problems, the morality and integrity of our people and our leaders. essentially I simply do not want Bill Clinton in office another four years. Anyone else will do, though I personally lean towards Dole because of his experience. If the choice is Clinton vs. Dole, I choose Dole. Clinton does a great job of pretending that he wants a balanced budget, but Dole will deliver. Forbes, for growth in the economy and values in the home Harry Browne; He has many views I share. Alan Keyes - he is a man of principle - a man worthy of the job Harry Browne - He would actually cut government (by 50%+) and replace the income tax with *nothing*. Dod Dole. Belives in the same thing I do. Steve Forbes, for the simple reason that the flat tax WOULD WORK, and be fair to all. Browne, because he represents less government and freedom. Keyes-argues passionately from Declaration principles for a return to foundational morality which would strenghthen and honor the family. Educated.Brilliant speaker/debater. Speaks, not pragmatically, but from principles outward. Bill Clinton - I feel he is the only candidate who will not be influenced by big business interests. Dole! Any republican but Buchanan! Steve Forbes Pete Wilson, socially open minded and economically conservative: a real 18th Century Liberal Bob Dole, the Democratic party needs to be humbled Pat Buchanan, b/c i like his issues and he stands firm on them. Bill Clinton - He has more vision and sincerity than recent past presidents. He wants to balance the budget and has done something about doing so. He is not opposed to raising taxes in order to balance the budget. Clinton--experinece in white house; a but slimy but at least he's awkward about his weakness. Dick Lugar: He's got the attributes--except for popularity. He's bright, articulate, and thoughtful. But people are afraid to elect Hoosiers after Dan Quayle. Buchanan - Foreign policy, economy, uncompromising nature Bill Clinton as the better between him and Sen. Dole Clinton- he's a democrat and not on the conservative right Steve Forbes He will make a difference to everybody and help get things back like they should be harry browne real change Bill Clinton; America will never be satisfied with any president. I believe that Clinton is human and he has tried his best. Buchannan and Dole are extremely prejudice. Even thouch I believe that the majority of presidents have been racist, I believe t Lamar Alexander due to broad appeal & increased local power I'm fed up with D's and R's ... I'm voting for Harry Browne Alan Keyes. He is the only candidate running that has correctly isolated the REAL problems facing our society today; the complete lack of standards, moral or otherwise, he is honest and the most intellectual among the bunch. Alan Keys. I whole-heartedly agree with his message of morality and personal responsibility. mario cuomo Alan Keyes. He seems to be the only candidate in my opinion who recognizes the root problem of America. Clinton - he's done an OK job; he'll be hard to beat. Frankly, I'm not in love with any Republican, but I can't stand Clinton and I think he's the worst thing to ever happen to America. Dole, He is the man of the hour Elizabeth Dole - President Dole (Liddy) - Why is it that the smart, appealing, rational, experienced, and most honest of potential canidates never run? If Bob does not get it in 1996, look for Liddy Dole in '00! Jack Kemp because it seems that he could bring together Americans from whatever party they may be associated. Jerry Brown bill clinton- he has the views i agree with Clinton, he has done a good job so far, why not let him continue. Pat Buchanan Steve Forbes because he is the Bomb! me...I am cool\ Bob Dole Kristi Ewing Steve Forbes not sure Bill Clinton Kristi Ewing Pat Buchannan Bill Clinton because he is pro-choice Bob Dole He's a cool guy Pat Buchanan Bill Clinton- he hasnt done badly & who else is there? Harry Browne can stop govt corruption and spiraling taxation. Bob Dole, because he seems more honest than Clinton and less reactionary than Buchanan. Jonathan Russell (KKK) Bob Dole Bill Clinton,because instead of crying over Industrial Revolution textile workers,he supports education to train us for new, better opportunities. Alan Keyes: He best captures the conservative message, and would lead our country into spiritual and economic prosperity. Harry Browne, Libertarianism is the only way to turn our country around. Clinton, He's fair, not an extreamist, portrays a good image for America, genuinely concerned about America's welfare and world peace Pat Buchanon, because he is more about substance than fluff. Bob Dole, because Clinton has done nothing and he has the experience to be a good leader Richard Lugar- seems to have a sane foreign policy (w Rick Tompkins, Libertarian Dole .. ethical, stable, experienced Harry Browne because of his platform! http://www.HarryBrowne96.org/ General Colin Powell Bob Dole - He is an honest and morale man. Gen. Colin Powell because he is not a corrupt politician, and would have a more honest term My dream president, so to speak, would be Colin Powel, because I think he's got a tremendous amount of integrity and ledership. Powell forbes, tax reform get rid of irs and free educational choice of parents to send children to any school Steve Forbes Working class needs tax breakssssss Harry Browne -- Stop the lunar trajectory of fed gov growth I want to see Pat Buchanan, I think he is an honest (I use that term lightly for a politition) candidate and a good American and I think he has more ideas that the other candidates instead of empty promises> Alan Keyes: He is the only one that realizes that money problems are not the cause of high crime, falling test scores, children raping and killing each other, etc. He has recognized that it is the moral breakdown of this country and our priority needs to be the restoration of the marriage-based two parent family. Harry Brown, Because he is the most honest person running Pat Buchanan Bob Dole. He has plenty government experience and he is not too conservative. Pat Buchanan - he'll bring back wholesomeness. me, I don't trust the "mainstream" politicans Harry Browne, because Government Doesn't Work! Pat Buchanan, because he stands up for what he believes in. Dole-This country needs to stress more individual responisibility and less governmental reliability. This country's lawmakers must collectively engage in the devolution of big government. Eliminate superfluous federal government expenditures, social progr Harry Browne. A candidate who will stand by the principles this country was founded upon. He is the only candidate who will cut government, end this insane drug war, and restore liberty and responsibility. The others are all for a big intrusive government on one issue or the other. What attracted me to Harry Browne and the Libertarians in the first place is this is the only party with the BALLS to stand up for legalizing industrial hemp which can resolve many problems here in the northwest. The Libertaian Party is the only party which is consistent and principled. Others waffle the momnent they are elected. These are but a few reasons to refrain from voting with the major parties. Harry Browne is the clear choice for me. I woulde like to see a President touting the values of inclusion and open-mindeness necessary to carry this nation forth into its fourth century. Clinton, supports true working clas economic concerns, has made decent progress in international affairs, and has gov't experience Realistically, who I want to see for President in "96" is a sad case indeed, but if we don't elect a woman President in the next 12 years, we will have to continue to live with all our worse problems. I'd like to see Nancy Kassebaum run in 2,000 Buchanan Buchanan - Best running! Pat Buchanan--He is clearly the true conservative in the race. President Clinton, to keep scales balanced with th radical right! Buchanan, because he is not controlled by the plutocracy Harry Browne. The non-Libertarians all want to increase government, albeit in different ways. Browne - in E. Europe best results came from cutting gov. fast. Too many special interests for incremental change. Rick Tompkins, Libertarian. Tompkins seems to understand that the "initiation of force as a means of achieving political or social goals" is wrong. clinton for the reason that he has made some mistakes and has learned Ideally, Harry Browne, but I'd settle for Forbes or maybe even Alexander. Basically, anyone but Buchanan. Bill Clinton, because he seems to have done a good job so far. He has done almost everything that he said he would do; although I feel he should be more unwavering on issues that he supposedly feels strongly about. Pat Buchanan he's the only one with the guts to say what he feels. Pat Buchanon because he stands for the things that made this country great and allow maximum individual freedom An outsider which new ideas, Harry Browne Harry Browne to reduce the Federal govt. Harry Browne. Because he is the only candidate that advocates rights Harry Browne. We need fresh ideas. I would like to see a Forbes\Buchanan ticket because Forbes has good ideas about how the government should be run and he rarely brings government control over moral and religious issues to the table. His only problem is that he dwells way too much on the idea of taxes and should spend some time battling other issues. Buchanan has some good ideas too, but he is a little radical and I think he needs to be in check with any policy ideas. I think building that wall is a fantastic idea. Patrick Buchanan, He means what he says Harry Browne. He is the only candidate who will really change the federal government. Pat Buchanan Pat Buchanan Harry Browne for Libertarian principles ABC=Dole Anyone who's for significantly reducing government spending, who is aware of the "takings" clause in the fifth amendment, and intends to abide by the intent of that provision when spending public funds. Ross Perot, I believe he would "shake up" the Congress and we just might finally get some of them to work for a change. Pat Buchanan--He is the true conservative in the race. Harry Browne A republican who can turn around the welfare program, eliminate affirmative action, and not cut military spending. Preferably Buchanan or Dole Pat Buchanan Buchanan. To bring Amerian jobs back to America. Harry Browne: presents a real alternative to the status quo bill clinton Harry Browne, because he's the best man Some with a philosophical depth of thought and an intuitive ability to communicate those thoughts, someone like Aristotle... A Libertarian to reposition the government where it belongs. Jack Kemp; Good ideas & good politics Bob Dole - Good Values Buchanan or Perot....will vote the trade issue Harry Browne because he is the only one who will reduce the government Gen. Powell FORBES new ideas and hes not a politician & good bye IRS Anybody but Bukkkanan or Clinton Harry Browne - the Libertarians are the only ones I've found who consistently support freedom. Steve Forbes a quiet Reagan Harry Browne, because he wants less gov't. involvement. I want to see Alan Keyes for president in 1996. I believe he has the plan to help our nation get on the right track. He believes in self government, taking more responsibility for our actions, believes in rights which are stated in the Declaration of Independence. He's also for abolishing income tax and wasteful government spending. Bob Dole - Strong leadership and character. Harry Browne - The Clinton or a GOP nominee will only keep the government juggernaut running. Clinton... The govt. is overly conservative. We need Clinton to continue to keep things in check. I'm proud to have him as my President and admire him (and Hilary) a great deal. Buchanan! He's the only major candidate that is not afraid of addressing the real issues, and, when elected, will have the same passion to fight for what is right. Clinton, because none of the Republican candidates can get the job done and Clinton will be the lesser of all evils. Pat Buchanan because of his aim to enforce the tenth amendment and because of his position on moral issues. Lamar Alexander becuase I think that he represents what I'm loooking for in a candidate and although he is far from ideal, he is better than some of the others running Pat Buchanan: He doesn't compromise. I would prefer to see a person who supports free speech, is Libertarian and is Pro Choice. A libertarian. Rick Tompkins, right now. Because I believe they're the only party who will reduce government across the board until it serves only the purposes for which it was intended. Pat Buchanan, because he will look out for American Interests Harry Browne maybe he could reign in big government Bill Clinton, experienced, successful. Already doing good job. Bill Clinton. We have to stop the Republicans before it's too late! Forbes. An outsider espousing self-reliance and personal responsibility is my candidate, as opposed to those political hacks claiming the government is there to do FOR them. Since Al Gore can't become president in 1996, Bill Clinton is as good as anyone and certainly better than the frightenly conservative options. Harry Brown, Freedom, Liberty, No regulation:) Bill Clinton/Bob Dole will have difficulty defeating him Bob Dole. I trust him! Howard Stern on the LP ticket buchanan(pres)/keyes(vp)-due to their unshakable conviction Buchanan, Just Because. WILLIIAM JEFFERSON CLINTON Anyone who believes in less government. Buchanan, Dole, Gramm I wish Patricia Schroeder was running. I agree with nearly all her positions. She is fair and intelligent. Pat Buchanan - We need someone outside the establishment Of the candidates I feel that President Clinston will point the country in the best direction. Pat Buchanan - His passion for change O. J. Simpson Harry Browne to slash the size of Govt. Lamar Alexander because he seems honest Buchanan - Second Amendment Support Steve Forbes Great ideas. Man of integrity. Free of political alliances and debts. A patriot who wouldn't have to subject himselff to this if he didn't love his country. Bill Clinton-lowered taxes on the lower middle class, lower unemployment Me, because I have no dogmatic agenda Pat Buchanan - He supports the causes of Native Americans like myself Harry Browne - he has a realistic plan to cure government Pat Buchanan-knows what he wants to do and will keep his word Pat Buchanan because he is a Washington outsider and the only GOPer who can beat Clinton Harry Browne - Principled Clinton I think he means well and if given enough time he will get the job done Harry Browne cuts out the cancer rather than applying a bandaid. Clinton has done a good job-- no need for a change. Harry Brown-he's the only one with a written plan (see his book) Patrick J. Buchanan A man of solid beliefs. Harry Browne best understands relationship of people to govt Alan Keyes, he wants to put the family back together with minimal government Pat Buchanan. Because he's Pro-life and against gays. Harry Browne--we need far less government controls Bill Clinton. He's pro-choice and seems to be fairly open-minded. ?????? A Canidate that is Intelligent. You know, At Least Halfway smart. :() Bill Clinton, he appears to the the candidate who is closer to my personal positions. Harry Browne - I'm for freedom and against slavery Alen Keyes because he is a committed Christian and, frankly, is the best of several BAD options Harry Browne, to take a weed-whacker to gov't growth Irwin Schiff, Libertarian, only one with guts to tell the truth. It's time to destroy the IRS and the Federal Reserve and restore the Constitution. Harry Browne for President. Why? Huge Tax Cuts Now! Huge Budget Cuts Now! A Balanced Budget Now! Bill Clinton hasn't done anything to deserve being dumped. Buchanan, He is far enough right to get the attention of the Federal Government. The Washington establishment is well strong enough to prevent any of Pat's more extreme ideas from hurting anyone. In the mean time his presents sends a clear message to both parties that the American people are wanting change. Buchanan, He is far enough right to get the attention of the Federal Government. The Washington establishment is well strong enough to prevent any of Pat's more extreme ideas from hurting anyone. In the mean time his presents sends a clear message to both parties that the American people are wanting change. Pat Buchanan, because he is the man with the best ideas and beliefs. Someone w/ fresh ideas ready to deal w/ the "New Republic", which none of the current "politico's" are! Dole, experience, favors returning power to states Pat Buchanan, because he believes in what he says, and he is not part of the insiders. Harry Browne-Libertarian is the only choice to get America Back on Track Pat Buchanan. He approaches closest to my political agenda Harry Browne, Because he is the only candidate that understands that coercive government does not work. He will resore our freedom and bring us an unprecedented economic revival. Bill Clinton - He represents the spirit of the american people (he's fat) Pat Buchanan - He puts America 1st! None of the above - I prefer King Log Patrick Buchanan- Because stands behind what he believes in ! Pat Buchanan restoring property rights Bill Clinton: considerably better than the alternatives Bill Clinton because the alternatives are racist, silly, or dead - take your pick Bob Dole-fairly moderate, experienced, willing to solve problems, high moral standards, stands up for convictions Bill Clinton - Least of the evils. Most harmless. Harry Browne He will shrink Federal Govt. howard stern-he could get this country on the right track Pat Buchanan - Listen to what he is really saying, not what the press or the establishment tell you he is saying. pat buchanan Steve Forbes - He has a vision for the future (flat tax, soc. sec. reform, medical savings accts, etc.) Bill Clinton, because he's better than any republican I know! PAT BUCHANAN - HE'S THE ONLY CURRENT CANDIDATE THAT'S INTERESTED IN PROTECTING JOBS IN THE US Buchanan - only serious candidate with integrity Pat Buchanan; he is the only true conservative and doesn't speak out of both sides of his mouth. He can be trusted to do what he says he will do. He is not a coward like all the others (Democrats and Republicans). Pat Buchanon - Patriot, constitutionalist Pat Buchanan - He has shown that morality is an issue today, and he has ideas for which he is willing to fight. Harry Browne. To put an end to the government bondage we've had for over 50yrs. Alan Keyes because America needs to return to the values that made us great. Pat Questions, comments, suggestions? Contact us. Return to theHome Page. Copyright ©1996, /InterCommerceCorporation, All rights reserved worldwide Send comments to Webmaster@Survey.net WT02-B22-24IA060-000333-B025-244http://www.survey.net:80/sex1c2.html 204.107.221.240 19970115055833 text/html 67455HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 15 Jan 1997 05:52:19 GMTServer: Apache-SSL-US/1.0.3+1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 67272Last-modified: Mon, 25 Nov 1996 20:26:46 GMT SURVEY-NET - SEX Survey User Responses (ARCHIVE III) Your source for information, opinions & demographics from the NetCommunity! ANNOUNCING: The Internet's finest interactive, totally-automated,immediate survey system. We can take any form and instantly create adynamic demographic database and show you the results as soon as youcomplete the survey! User comments [ARCHIVE III] What do YOU think about Sex & the Internet? beautiful i love humping the screen Easier than buying magazines It is all over the place however it can be avoided with practice or supervision people writing true sex stories people writing trues stories I'm in favor of it because the worst thing that could happen is that you get a computer virus... Love it bring it on Sound and progressive Shouldn't hve to pay... It should be available to adults. Those areas should be accessed by passwords that are given out after proof of age has been checked. It is probably adding to the immorality of society, much like the sixties and seventies. However, I don't feel that we should totally rid ourselves of it. Parents should use security software to prevent access to pornography web sites, news groups, ircs, etc. I like it, but I think it's bad for me. It is there and if I want to find something to relate to it I am sure I will. Sex is the #1 human drive let's not make it something perverse. Too hard or too soft, but not much sensual in between. For geeks only. The real thing in the real world is better. its fun i love porn You can't have sex online, you can only exchange sexually-oriented media, which is a lousy substitute -- like "near beer." its weak i don't find very explicity images I think it's great! Sex on the internet provides an outlet for any type of tension you might have... It's also a great turn-on. My girlfriend and I have had sex while talking on irc many times. I think that there should be online sex site, as long as they do not contain pictures relating to pedophilia or any other illegal sexual pictures I LOVE it! I am surprised ayt the treatment women ( or those with female logins) get on some of the Chat sites. I think that there may be a danger of devaluing sex for younger net users who often seem to be the most "foul" on the net. With our generation being so "open" it's just natural that this be the next step. for losers who can't get a real sex life. I discuss with my friends and even my instructors that there should not be a governmental regulation of sex on the net. If so, why is there sex on tv and in magazines. I thought that God created humans in his form, so why are we covering it up? internet shpuld provide a url on personal experineces for other users to enjoy and read YAHOO!!! THE ULTIMATE SAFE SEX If the Govn't is going to stop sex on the Internet, then I guess they will have to stop it at the book stores, magazine stands, TV, movies, music and so on.... It is up to the parents/guardians to ensure the children are educated about sex and monitored. Making it against the law only makes it more apealing. I'm glad that it can be expressed openly...in this day and age it is necessary to be able to access information if it is needed. we see ppl die on tv daily, why not see ppl make love? should be used as an information tool not.to educate no harm Sex on the net is a harmless outlet for sexual fustrations and fantasies. However it is hard to find without a major credit card, therefore much remains in my imagination. I am still exploring it, so no comment as of yet. Haven't had much exposure to it. This survey is the first. There should be more i love sex. sex on the internet gets me hard and wet. mmm mmm good! ooooh yeah give it to me some more faster harder faster harder establish some kind of rating system for sites essentially. It is a wonderful to open up to people and truly discover the depth of your own sexuality. I feel like a sexual being now... I am liberated. The internet stimulates the imagination. The imagination needs to be utilized more by people as a way of spicing the sex life up. no censors please, let me do it myself i wish there were more ways to interact with other horny people on it. i might just not know how to find it yet though. I like it. I believe that it is good to have on the internet.NO A.I.D.S Sex on the internet provides a location that allows the sampling of various forms of sexuality from mild to bizarre its grrrrrrrrrrrreat!! Well I love to try to find pictures of womens feet. I really love long toes that have red polish on them and that is really hard to find. I wish it was eathier to locate then it is. I love Sex, The internet is okay where is it? i would like more sex stories and pictures I have been on only a short time. I don't see the access the news media seems to have. It takes money. Sex links were the primory reason I persued net access. I have found other stuff too, but sex was my primary intrest. It's fun, but a lot of it is in very poor taste. It is also very easy for minors to get access to. I haven't found much yet great yes,it is gooood not mucht Very fun! Why doe this shit cost so much???? Difficult to find generally - but some interesting areas Tragic that people are living such sheltered lives that they prefer the canned sex of the internet to the real pleasures of sex in marriage! It may well be the last bastion of sexually explicit material. lets keep it that way! The "problem" is vastly over-rated -- the potential for both good and harm is great, but it must remain a matter of indivdual responsibility. LIKE EVERYTHING ELSE ITS THERE IF YOU WANT IT, IF NOT DON'T LOOK AT IT. Actually, I already answered that in question #13. I can find anything that interest me on the net my friend rachel likes to touch herself while on line. consider a "talk dirty" segment to help her stimulate herself Sex in the internet is a source of knowledge to promote how aids and other sexual desease will afect a person.. Also for entertainment. valuable tool for a variety of stimulus Sex is not the only thing you should pay attention in the Net. There's much more dangerous material available, such as instructions for building a bomb. Ok, as long as there are ways to keep children off the sex pages. Pornography and other social illnesses are nothing new. What the Internet does is provide "home delivery". I believe Sex on the Internet is fine. I think that males are more visually stimultated than women. And for that reason pornography on the "net" allows me to view material in another medium. It's better than phone sex, because you don't have to hold the reciever. I am new to the internet and haven't had too much experience with it. I hope to view more and I believe that people have the right to be sexually "free". The problem with children start in the home and sex education is the solution to all those who can't control themselves or their children. I was educated and i appreciate and respect all sex if it doesn't harm anyone participating. the net should be completely open Socialists promote it. It should all be removed from the NET, as it is a private matter. I feel that it enables safe contact with sexual desires without having to worry about cheating, or coming in contact with any sort of std's. I would like to see more information about homosexuality. I would like to see more information abour homosexuality. I think its a good forum of sexual topics I believe that any for of restriction in the access to infomation is dangerous. The world in general needs to be better educated in making their own moral judgments and not for their restrictiveness onto others. Parents should be pro-active in this, not reactive. its ok Everybody does it. Everybody likes it. So open the internet for it. Can show people many things, some bads some goods, but mostly bad things: in the sens of morality!!! It takes money to access the internet; I'm supposed to accept that parents purchase this access yet never want to take responsibility for what there children access. It tends to follow the current trend of society in that the people never want to accept any responsibilities, but rather set the responsibilities on others and complain. It's great..i love it!! i love it i cum all the time n/a I want to got all!! its cool. Very intriguing, an outlet, not something I would ever allow my children to access Most of my experience with sex on the Net has been in chat rooms, where I have a few regulars "partners". My fiance is aware and approves of this. We borrow ideas used in my "play time" as well as monitoring the other's sexual escapades without the knowle It's great, I wish I could Find More - Better stuff. I like sex on the internet. ITS COOL TO BROWSE AND LATER TRY WITH YOUR SPOUSE! anything goes ITS COOL TO BROWSE AND LATER TRY WITH YOUR SPOUSE! Given the inferior graphics compared to video or film, I don't know why anyone would bother. Besides, sex clubs are much more invigorating! It's empty, but entertaining just curious&want to learn more When is someone going to figure out how to transport themselve through the computer? I love to masterbate while surfing the net It's Great it's nothing like the real thing but you take what you can get helps me understand my needs and wants and what other types of sex and displays of such to explore. I'm glad it's there/here as I don't get it anywhere else. I think that there should be a club for this kind of thing Well, I can't say that I have !! Sex & Internet is just another part of real life and should continue forever. I'll take the old fashioned face-to-face meeting people anytime. I enjoy this 1st amendment activity I love sex, I wish you had more about bestiality!!!!!!!! Cool! Governments must not attempt to legislate morality. It's ok, but it not the same as the real thing. I think it is nice and good but you should find it easier I DON'T MIND SEX ON THE INTERNET IF THE CHILDREN WOULD HAVE NO ACCESS, AND NO GROSS PICTURES SUCH AS AUTOPSIES. I don't appreciate the pictures at the bottom of the page. No Answer The more the better We love it!!!!!!! Sex on the internet is fantastic! No one should take it away! I can't really get a hold of alot of it to make a decision. I think it is very good that it exists I've hard pronography in European bookstores--harder than any in the States. I've not seen anything that I'd consider hard core on the net yet. very prevalent cool A lot of good things. I am all for sex on the internet. I fell that there should be more easily accesable hardcore. I also feel that it is the parents responsiblitie to control their children. I only wish it were real. I THINK CHILDREN SHOULD LEARN ABOUT SEX NOW INSTEAD OF WHEN THEY END UP GETTING THAT GIRL PREGNANT so far I haven't seen anything too disturbing, none of which can't be found in other locatons such as magazines so far I haven't seen anything too disturbing, none of which can't be found in other locatons such as magazines i dont mind at all need more of it Hi, well, what I think is if you're a horney intelligent, young female, and you want to talk to a horney, intelligent,hard and fun male...... you should e mail me at bart4032.@tao.sosc.osshe.edu we'll have fun!!! bye! I love hearing about, talking about and especially paticipating in all kinds of horney and kinky sex. I also feel that sex on the internet or phone sex is a healthy way to live and experience some of ou're deepest darkest sexual fantasies, or is fun for "fucking" around..... In fact if you're a horney, intelligent, young and wet female and you would like to talk to a horney, intelligent, young male, you are invited to send me ANY of your fantasies .I would love to hear you!! Send to bart4032.@tao.sos.osshe.edu mmmmmmm it'll be fun!!! There isn't enough, and what there is seems no worse (or better) than newsagents' top shelf stuff. I am very intrigued and have longing fascination for the subject of sex, having sex and the sexuality of my (especially female) fellow human beings. I feel that sex can be a healthy and natural way to explore your self and the people you are closest to. also , in short.... Sex just feels soooooo good !!! bye. there should be more beastiality and no service charge for pictures. cool idea, but how do you know people only answer it once? There definately should be looser restrictions on pornography... And faster phone lines, some of those files are large. Assists fantasies It's a new experience I think it is great. Thanks! benign harmless fun, however that is how I met my fiance :) as a newbie I can not seem to find anything that my provider has not censored. I love it It's FUCKING GREAT! It is wonderful, and I feel it should continue. I think it is ok and if you have a problem then don't look I would like to learn more about it. a goldmine Nothing Wrong With It I think it is great. If you don't want to see it, don,t look It is OK, but should be some what guarded. I like the content but downloads are slow, Spiders everywhere I don't see any harm for people of age I think it is great. It gives me a chance to learn what kinds of different people are out there. It is also a lot of fun. I love it!! i like it New to internet. Somewhat surprised at openess of net, but I don't see anything wrong with it. Government is sure to take some stupid action. its great I love sex I wish photos and online letters were not censored I wish it were more interactive! If there was more of it , it would be great good. can be expanded upon here and there. there is way to much of it and to easy to get into Good for me, but would not want my kids to see it. SAVES ME MUCH MONEY AT THE NUDEY BOOKSTORE really, i prefer the real sex I like sex, but I don't care for the internet too much. I wish one would not have to subscribe all the time. Subscribtions cost money and then one has to turn the computer off with a big disapointment. I also wish they had more movies sex is everywhere, why not the internet? it's how we all got here. COOL I think that there is a place for sex on the internet. However, I think that there needs to be some guidlines and maybe even a rating system established. I was e-mailed a pornographic picture and felt offended. There was no reason that should have hepp harmless-fun-challenging Cool ! I like the Net. I like sex. I hope that the Net encourages more perversion so that society will crumble sooner. Thanks and have a nice anarchy. I use it purely to facilitate masturbation. It could be instructive et pleased for a couple to see picture Its Ok it sucks because of the overload many sites receive there is a demand for this service. to take these services away from consenting adults because some parents can't control their kids is wrong. and if some uptight adult doesn't want to see the material hit the "back" key, most of the sites give plenty of notice to the content. should be more open to public It is a good way to explore areas of sexuality that I normally wouldn't i dont know i like it It should stay. Let individuals make their own decisions. very hard to access for a beginer i'd rather not think about it diffrent not really sure Great Entertainment It's damn hard to find sex on the net. Censorship is unAmerican in any form. I think that the Internet could be used for an excellent exchange of sexuality, but it seems to promote the more "deviant" side of sex. There is a lot talk about homosexuality and even sex with children, and little talk about sex after a safe stable marriage relationship has occured. Sex on the Net is what I do 24 hours a day, 7 days a week *** Too difficult to locate and too control hold on I"m spanking my monkey. I don't know how to download dirty pictures!! IT DOES NOT TURN ME ON, BUT HELPFUL TO MY FRIENDS I think its awesome that we don't have to pay the outrageous prices that they charge for magazines at the newstand. With the net, pictures can be looked at and downloaded for free, and for costs that are cheaper that the magazines. That is the ultimate way to get satisfaction, free masterbation is the only kind of masterbation. I think it's great. I have fun looking for pictures and I met my fiancee online so I think there's nothing wrong with it. Hiding sexual material on the internet only fosters curiosity in children. Parents should be open with their children about sex and understand that just because sex material can be more explicit online than on tv it is far less exploited. I think it is very damaging to our nation. At the least we should allow a key system which would be incoded by the POP to determine if a user is consered an adult (or have adult access) and a minor (or non-adult access). If a system is registered as an adult group they can do basicly what they want (non-moderated) but if it is a non-adult group the group must be moderated. Anyone providing a loop hole for non-adults to get adult accesses should be prosecuted. To me this is a simple solution. Freedm of speech (or what we have perverted it to mean) and protection of our youth (or semi-protection because the prevers our still out there). A whole new style to enjoy Easiest way to find explicit material. ???????????????????? good for voyerism and ideas. Its difficult to find non-member or non- censored stuff Thank God for it! Now i don't go out looking and may have ended up dead! I can explore things safely on here. Questions, thoughts, all of it. Without embarassment. AIDS and herpes makes sex more and more dangerous every day. The Net allows people to experience more and communicate more with people in a (for the most part) safe setting with no risk of disease. I'm all for more sex on this planet! Mostly kinky and tasteless but a few good areas that deserve encouragement - above all we must as a community uphold the first amendment and all other parts of the Bill of Rights! It would be helpful to the newest "Net-surfers" to have access to information concerning the downloading of all pictures. Sex with a partner is infinitly better great boys will be boys, girls will be girls pretty cool great Kids should not learn about sex on the net, education begins at home. I think it's great you can learn more about sexually things and possible meet others interested in the same things. I wish I could find more. Very hot, I am fucking myself right now!!! people like it, so it's going to stay on the Net, but I don't need it It is great! In today's society- people need to be able to use computers. What could be a better way than on your computer when working the wonderful world of sex and the Internet.. I think that it is okay to talk about sex and be open to all different opinions. People who want to see pictures of naked people and masturbate, or people who want to have cybersex, or even people who just want to learn more about sex should be able to co Sex is part of life and part of democracy It's great!! Love it , keep it free and uncensored Great if I new of all the networks It's okay. It started as safe fun and has led to unexpected true love. I thought I was happily married....now I wonder why I was there in the first place. I hate having to join a freakin www page in order to get stuff!! Tha pisses me off!!! its great,when you find it It's fun for many people having "virtual" sex, and really helps some people develop flirting skills. It is good. I am able to find out some answers to questions that I've had. It has opened my eyes to what is out there and what can be done. Should be as open as possible, with clear indication of contents, so as to let the person chosse to continue or not. amazing what people imagine/do BEcause of this,,,my dad cheated on my mom! I hate it! The Net is a great place to read/write about anything. Sex is always going to be a topic of interest and will obviously be read/written about on the NEt. Good! I THINK THAT SEX ON THE NET IS FUN ADN CAN BE AN OUTLET FOR SEXUAL FRUSTRATION. I DO NOT FEEL THAT IT SHOULD BE CENSOED. I FIND THAT IT CAN BE ACTUALLY PRETTY DIFFUCULT TO FIND SEX ON THE NET ANYWAYS!! personally enjoy what I see. Favor childproofing, though. Too many parents can't/don't monitor their children 24hrs a day. WE are a society, they are OUR children! I love it!There should be much more I Think its cool Frankly it is a way for children to learn, really learn, about sex. My first experience was watching a porno at a friends house in 3rd grade. It's pretty cool. very good INTRESTING i think its great that adults can learn more about sex in the privacy of their own homes. It is a citizen's right under the Constitution to be able to exercise freedom of speech. Since access is private it should be up to one's own morality as to access. I think that since it is a free country, we should have the freedom to expose people to a variety of subjects. Sex is a natural part of life, and it's eventually the reader's choice as to whether or not they wish to read the material. Its natural and healthy. Revere Sex and its Power, don't objectify women or children, RESPECT women, men, children and animals. Keep the sacred in sex. I think it is ok. I wish more sites did not require plastic, why not cash? Disapointing it rocks!!!! I think that it is fine. I wish there were more free jpeg photos. I like the stories I think it's great? It is fine and it sould be left alone. i haven't had mush experience with it. sucs dick cool dude Sex has a place on the net but sex places should be open and clear about what their sites contain so parents have an easier time regulating their children I THINK IT IS GREAT TO HAVE THE OPTIONS WE DO ON THE NET, IF PARENTS DON'T WANT THEIR KIDS LOOKING, LET THEM DEAL WITH IT, IT IS NOT OUR PROBLEM IT IS THE PARENTS PROBLEM TO DEAL WITH. cool!!! very good pictures If you want to access it you should be able to :) I wish there was more Wish it were more well organized and easier access to specific topics. It's different and very interesting perspective I want to find more stories they turn me on. Where can I find them!?! very interesting it must be people will get sexually explicit material anyway, the net is a safe alternative to some adult bookstores. I think it is great No too hard but beautiful!! I WANT MORE!!! I LIKE THE AMOUNT ON THERE. I DON'T LOOK FOR HARD CORE, BUT LIKE TALKING DIRTY TO OTHERS. IT'S A GOOD WAY TO RELEASE SEXUAL FRUSTRATION, AND IT'S HUMOUROUS! I think sex on the net is great.It opens doors for free speach.SO KEEP IT CUMMING! Sex is a part of our humanity and comes in many variations. The number and bizzarness of the variations will continue to grow as our directionless society grows bored with itself. The material on the 'net is some times stimulating but mostly boring and really lacks in artistry. There are exceptions, and no doubt the number of these will grow as use of the 'net grows but so will the proliferation of commercial sites and sites made by people who have no tallent at all. Pretty Perved Wow. Too bad it isn't real. Who ever thinks of the VR CUp first is sure to make billions of dollars instantly Sex on the a something shared between consenting persons and the Internet is a sort of free press which does not intend to offend anybody but however, I do believe that a rating system is logical to help those who are supervising their children. I DIDN'T KNOW THERE WAS? From Chat rooms to News Groups, Sex is everywhere and too easilt accessable to children. ITS GREAT FOR ADULT PEOPLE, BUT EASY ACCES FOR CHILDREN. It has let me be more honest with my self and my desires. I thought I was the only person who felt the way I do. I think Sex on the Internet is wonderful. It has broaden my mind and made want to try more things with my wife and myself. good!!! It is as variable as it is in the outside world. not accseable and not esay to find people worry to much!!! if safe sex, okay It cracks me up...and people like Exon freaking out about it crack me up even more. something cool to masturbate to. no opinion It gives a private way to learn about things you may not want to ask about of a friend or doctor. for the things that can be openned gives me something to do on my spear time what fun! don't know much about it No opinion--haven't found any I like it. Providing that politicians keep their damn hands of the internet, it will be the future of safe sex. I think it is okay, but I am not wild about children gaining access. Also, it seems like everyone is so excited to post sex EVERYWHERE, so I am a bit disappointed (in us, as a society), but not really surprised. I think that it is great, it helps me live out fantasies,things I couldn't do in real life. If your curious, you can learn without being embarrased. I don't belive it should be on here. Sex is part of life, so is Internet i love to wax down my stick and surf the net I have just gone on line. I am interested in many things including sex and I hope to explore further. I think people should lighten up it's just for fun and those who abuse it do get caught so whats the harm. People should just spend a little more time with their children and stop worring so much about what they are seeing a on the net. Put some sort of password or something on thier internet conection so their unsupervised children can not get in. I think sex on the internet is OK. If people are looking for outlets for their frustrarions, or looking to see if ohter feel the way they do, they should have access. IUf people want to look at pornography, let them, it is their choice I think sex on the internet sholud be avaiable to everyone. it is a great way to find answers. brings out the horniness in me i've found some rather interesting information regarding sex....i would also like to say that the only way that i was able to find the hard-core sex stuff was through a post on what are your kids seeing on the internet....ironic huh??? It's great stuff. I'm new at this so no idea. A MAJOR FORCE IN THE NETS CONTINUED GROWTH No government intervention, let people take personal resposibility for their actions. I like it, because i am horny as hell I like the fact you can speak openly and honestly with others I think it's great, because I find some of it very informative. I do not think that the government has any right to censor what people are allowed to show, but I do think that parents have a great responcibility, along with the people who are making pornagraphy public... a rating system would help, but would be totally ineffective without help from the parents. it's a good thing i love them both No comment I wonder if what I see on the Internet really reflects what people desire/ want/ crave / are, etc. Is this just an American phenomena? I think the religious right should leave the net alone. It is very interesting and should be allowed not much Sex on the Internet is great and provides a great escape for those who are not getting it This is a lot of harmless fun- and difficult to access. Good! It would be nice to have more interaction with other people.Also,more dirty pictures of fetish interests would be appreciated It is fantastic. You can get around government legislation totally on this type of material. It should be more accessable and all of the critics should enjoy sex more by using it. Please,give me more erotic pictures!! It's starting to be too much question about creditcard when you want access to places whit sexual oriented stuff. more more more It's great very exciting good I love IT!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!! I think Sex on the Internet is great you can DO THINGS with other people you meet and not be guilty of cheating on your boyfriend /girlfriend... Plus its SAFE SEX! Wish it was easier to find the Realy Good Stuf. It's very erotic. It gets me horny!!! I think it's great, there is less embarassment since there's no need to walk into a video store and confront people with your sexuality. The Internet is the perfect place to relieve sexual frustrations. It is harmless. As long as it is not used to harm anyone else, I believe that it is alright. I think that the internet and related electronic information services promote free communication, the transfer if ideas and useful information, and a safe environment in which to experiment, meet new people, and learn abour different facets of one's self. need more Personally, I think it's the best thing to happen in terms of both safe sex and personal self-esteem in ages. On the Net, no one has to hide behind a socially acceptable mask, and a person gets the opportunity to mentally bolster themselves. opened my mind to all types of choices for myself and my wife. I have just started visiting sites, but feel I will be able to meet with others with similar interests throught the net. I THINK SEX ON THE NET IS A FUN RECREATIONAL PAST TIME. HEY, IT'S NOT LIKE YOU CAN CATCH A COMPUTER VIRUS FROM CYBER-SEX.:-) very good cool!!! Sex is good. The Internet is good. Sex + the Net = good. There should be alot more of it!! I think the pornographic phots that can so easily be downloaded should be eradicated completely from such an open forum like the Net. ok...dont let youngsters see stuff they shouldnt like i said if you like it look if not dont!!!! Just like sex in real life..when I want it..I REALLY want it! When I don't..I get really sick of guys not taking no for an answer. Thanks for it!!! I'm tired of censorship and goverment intervention in my private life! I'm new on the net so I can't tell much about that. great No comments I think it is fine if you don't like it don't use that part of the net. It�s a good way to connect people who are in the same vibrations - I hope so!! what sex? It's a great way to express your desires and not be embarrassed I think it's a great way of exploring different sexual preferences, desires. Not realyy experienced much I would very like to be able to access harder pornography than at present. As you can see my interests are possibly frowned on by society but everybody should ba able to access what they want and freely. I think number 16 says it all. If you are looking at porn, you have gone through a great amount of time, effort, and just plain searching to get to a site with "real" pornogrophy. Then the site gets shut down bcause of traffic . . . Never expected the net to play a role in my sexual life It should not be regulated, except by self regulation. Don't get enough of what I really want. Wife not kinky enough for me. very slow downloads I think its a great representation of the freedom of the net Those engineering students use up all the GPU time looking at Nudies! That picks my ass! I think it is an outlet for sexual frustration interesting This is the first page I've come accross about sex and I've been looking for about 10 minutes now. Sex is great.. I met my girlfriend on the net, and hope to meet a male lover online. I think sex on the NET is cool but I just wih it were easier to find the really good stuff.... i think that it is a good reliever of stress I love it It provides info Parents must have the capability to "lock out" their children from porno material on the web, end of story. i love sex on the net For those who seek it I have no problem with, only it should not be every aspect of the internet and be limited to specific areas. It' fun to browse i think that everyone should be fucking their children in the ass Let those who don't want to see it, block it with some kind of security device/program. The Cable compnanies seem to handle this well, why not the net! Sex is one of lifes greatest joys and can not be summed up in a sentance. I beleive sex on the net is an excellent outlet for people that have built up anxieties and stress to express themselves openly and freely. I would rather hear that people are wacking off all the day and doing nothing with they're lives than venting their anger, physically, toward our society. Shit, Rabin was just shot. I should now eat my own words. There should be more good content for free to each his own I am totally against censorship, all control of access shall be the responsibility of ISPs, authentication systems should be used where possible, they should be difficult for children to bypass. if you want it,it should be there. It rises the limits of the horizons of my soul on the matters concerning the sanctity of lunch meat. I am 14 years old, and i really enjoy the newsgroup alt.sex.stories, it helps me let out sexual tention, and I don't think that parents should disaprove of children past puberty looking at pornografy, as long as it is not to hardcore. i like it very much Multimedia it makes me get realy horny I wish it was easier to find! I think that there should be no restrictions on the net for people who have access to the hardcore picture files It's a societal problem, not Internet's. It's being scapegoated. Sex is great, wouldn't live without it. Internet needs more "AREAS" for open sex conversation. The internet stinks of semen and acnecream... Doesn't bother me though... Interesting I think that sex should be a way of personal expression towards another you love, but as far as on the Internet, well you know people. Sex rocks! The internet does it well. I like all this fucking sex!!! I love it i think that they should have more of it Opens your mind to new things! Many in fact most areas of the internet are depraved, sick and I am personally surprised that nothing more has been done to remove it I Love It!! To hard to get an overview i like it but it should not be seen by children ok I find nothing wrong with "sex" on the internet. There are way to may steps to go through to access porn on the internet not including the WWW and most the hard core stuff if First Virtural or some form of payment is required. That's why I am on-line most of the time. I'm going to sleep now. Good luck. i don't get much sex at home so i look on the net and it should no be regulated Go I have no problem with it ay all. The varieties of new taste! look and feel If the stuff is illegal off the net, it should be illegal on the net. There should be a rating system as well, and then a way to automatically block areas with ratings you don't want. i like free sex, and i think that the parent has to have a complete control under their childrens. (i don't speak too much english) Internet is a tool,no censsorship should be tolerated. it rocks my world i wish i could find more NO COMMENT it's not as perverse as i thought it would be. some of it is actually educational I think that it is a good means of "safe sex" but in a way it also incouarges sexual perversion. It is also too easy for children to access. I would like to know how to access the information. I find it very difficult to find anything at all on the internet yet alone something that Itruly have to look for due to some rich politician that doesn't want it to be known that their child actuallly started this whole controversy. Keep it up. Allows one to explore sex uninhibited and ask questions that otherwise one would feel uncomfortable asking other let alone a total stranger, and yet trust the information given. The truth can be told with no consewquences. People are making way too big a deal of it...if you are really into porn you're going to get it anyway...for most people they experiment a little and then quit. Kewl! nothing BORING!!!!! its kinda cool sometimes It's great, but harmless I think it is great for the curious, and a good outlet for those who can't afford 'commercial' sex mags I love sex, the internet is only ok. Wish I could find more. Its a nice outlet for fantasy and imagination Bad idea i see nothing wrong with it I want to get fucked on the internet. overrated The only free sites are in usenet newsgroups very hot, if you know where to look. I think it is great It provides access to sexual things you stupid #$!#$# loser! Didn't you know that already You could learn some things about it on the net. Free speech must continue for the benifit of truth. I wish there was more free stuff, free dl's.. i hate paying Should be continued it can be fun Im mexican gay and some times a nide somthing in spanish i don't know, I like it, and want to see more videos of it I think that sex on the internet is an excellent form of safe-sex and a great way to have fun. IT SHOULD BE ENTIRELY BANNED I havn't spent much time looking for it. I have been using the internet mostly for gathering information and email. I plan on checking out some sex sites on the internet, though. good ! Their are no good stories or good pictures THE GOOD STUFF IS BLOCKED BY MY COMPANY. WHERE ARE THE ROOMS TO HAVE CYBER-SEX?? Sex is awesome, plain and simple. Sex on the net is by far overrated compared to the real thing. I love it! Is very beautyful I think it's only natural, this is just another area of life and sex is a parte of life. It is a little more prolific here, because people can talk without fear of discovery: they don't have to let others know who they are to share their feelings. Intense I think that the beneficial information available on the net far outweigh the few questionable sites My Japanese girlfriend says that sexual topics in Japan are not something to hide, ergo the internet is giving Americans an outlet for that (in USA) ashamed interest. ok for consenting adults it is informative,and i am a voyeur i wish there was more sex on the net yeah!!!!!!! Free speach Interesting, but greatly overblown by the media. nothing special... I just stumbled on it today, and I could not believe all of the sick and perverted things I came across. From gays, lesbians, weirdos, etc... Are my boyfriend and I the only normal and straight people left? DIDN'T KNOW IT EXISTED TILL NOW...SOUNDS LIKE FUN! I think sex on the internet provides a natural, private means of people getting their sexual needs filled. It beats going to the adult bookstores for those who do. there might be more pictures there might be more pictures boring It's entertaining, and many of the articles on human sexuality have actually helped my relationship. A little enternet voyeurism with your lover before bedtime, why not? Over-rated. I think it is wonderful and it helps me get-off!!!! it's great I think it's a great new device for information and a way to interact with other people in ways you'd normally be considered a freak or pervert. I think it's good. Mostly harmless fun... Its just a format to talk, thats all,its up to you as to whaT Sex should always stay on the internet.. openly. I do not see anything wrong with it. I would do it everyday if possible! a great place to pick up horny chicks. I'm curious to see stuff. I think sex on the net(safe sex, no violence or discrimination) is an interesting way to stimulate the imagination (like magazines or books). I think it is a safe way for people to explore their sexuality. oh yes Pinky It, potentially, could be a great thing, but it isn't. Good stuff has allowed me to become more sexual..has opened new sexual doors to me ..has greatly pleased me It's interesting to view and at times ejoyable pritty two dementional not enough panty pictures it is OK I really would like it to be easier to access but I understand why it isn't I think it gets annoying. It's great I think it provides a way to add spice to any relationship. I LIKE IT too inexperienced on internet to know(a few weeks), but very curious it has potential I'd like to see more accessability to the hard-core stuff. I believe that the US Government should stay out of our Cyberlives and not even try to regulate Sex on the Net. The internet is a good outlet for sexual frustration if you are on the lean side of dating right now. At least there are conversations you can have with the opposite sex without feeling intimidated about a date. I'd like to see more accessability to the hard-core stuff. I believe that the US Government should stay out of our Cyberlives and not even try to regulate Sex on the Net. Sex is great, especialy on the net I think it is cool. Anything ileagal such as children in porn, should be caught, and put away, but otherwise let it be. It is not hurting anyone. I don't have a problem with it in general. I do with kiddie porn though. Keep it up!!!!! need more picture and a chance to talk "dirty" to others based on your sexual preferences. its incredible I love it! The net is a reflection of our culture which sex is a part of I'm very open about sex. The Internet is one way to learn and communicate about sex. i want to know more it's kinky. I love hard core sex. SEX IS GOOD I enjoy it. I think its safe fun for adults and quite erotic. The internet is finally a place where most people are themselves, and it proves just how curious people are in sex, and such. The internet should NOT be regulated, by anyone but the servers, and the users. Just like that "V" chip they want to put into TV's to block sex, and violence, there should be an option when you get service, or evertime you login, to activate a censoring program, with a password, only available to those over 18, or 21 (depending on state) The internet is a free place; so all natural things are present. nothing wrong with it I am still looking for some real porno on the net. As for kids seeing it ITS THE PARENTS FAULT there are many locks that can be put on. its ok if it stays in the right hands. It is a good source to get ideas and be creative. If you've got both sets of equipment, call me!! I believe that sexual openness should not be discouraged on the net, but in the same sense it shouldn't be exposed to children during thier developimental years. The reprpocussions for damaging childrens psychological development is not a burden that any one one entity would admit to bear or take reponsibility for. It's done pretty well. It gives good exposure to those who want it. MORE! Fun, fun, fun it is a good way to say things you wouldn't normally, it helps most people be more open to their feelings It there .... Just search for it ... and ye shall find! It is easy to acsess sexual material on the net. no censorship....kids should be protected by parents/guardians i get off everyday using the internet,i even giz on my screen once in a while Do not regulate anything on the internet!! cool! Sex is part of our life. Why shouldn't it be a part of the internet? the only problem is people who view sex as bad I think that it's a wonderful thing. Sex on the internet should be limited to mild erotica, in consideration of photography. There should not be any photographs of children dealing with any aspect of nudity. The written text should be limited to mild to intermediate sexual presence. where can i find more! I don't think it is a problem and I like it sort of. The media has blown it out of proportion, which isn't surprising really. If you're not looking for sex, then it is very unlikely that you will find it accidentally. without alt.sex.stories and alt.binaries.pictures.errotica.whatever, we cyberpunks would have to actually pay for playboys (or playgirls...)! how horrid! As an adult, I think it should be left up to the people. If I wish to see it, I should be able to, I'm fed up with others telling me what I should be able to do, I'm not a young child and the internet is not my mother. As far as kids, I brought mine up to respect my wishes and they know what I permit them to see/do and I haven't been let down. They're open, and so am I with each other, maybe others should open up their relationships with each other an find out how each of us are different, individual,and have our personal desires. Thanks for letting me put this thought here, I believe it is a very important facet of our society, so therefore should be an important part of the 'net'. Need more pornogrphic pages and fewer links to links to links of pornographic pages getting you nowhere. Plus, I want to see some hermaphrodites It's keeping me up to late! awesome If it does it for you, then proceed I love it, I have sex here every night. Well, not here, but on the net!!!!!! Aside from the annoying 900 number spams, I see nothing wrong with it. the video & picture quality is not worth all the fuss, and you can find the same stuff anywhere if you are looking for it. I would like sex on the internet to be freely open to everyone. It is getting harder to access such things, and our sillyheaded government isn't going to make it any easier. I think it the hottest most wonderful thing! I think it's overrated and only a small % of porno is on the net. like the access Love them both it rocks Wish there was more of it I think that people tend to overestimate the amount and availability of pornography on the Net. I think it is what America craves Sometimes it is just pleasant to watch. I only see my girlfriend every once in a while It's nice to stay in touch. I haven't had any experience, yet. Screw the gov't; parents are to blame for children's access. If parants can't control their children, they shouldn't have had kids in the first place. No one is forcing them to have kids. wow! It's a great way to meet people I think it is Ok for adults and should be clean and healthy. I love the idea! In fact there should be more about crossdressing I love it, I love smut and I cant get enough! I think it is great! i think on sex on the net is bad because it can be accessed by those people who are at the very tip of thier teenage.This would defenitely have a very bad impact on them..and unless science can come up wiyh ways to check this i believe it should not be allowed to take a place on the net. I AM NEW TO THE INTERNET LOOKING FORWARD TO A NEW EXPERIENCE interesting; maybe we can learn the truth about what's in the closet. just 2-D it has no depth. Any sort of regulation that actively affects the way the Internet operates will not be tolerated. I think its o.k. in some cases excellent! I just need to find a left-handed mouse. I'm new to the net, I want sex talk and pictures, HELP I think that it's not that influential, and that is should remain open. It is every where! I see no problem - yet! Too commercialized! I spend hours roaming and searching - and inevitably end up with "Send Us Money!" Where is the juicy stuff? I am getting really annoyed, you know! There's certainly a lot of interesting stuff. I think it is great and very safe. interesting Sex???...Please,the sex is natutal.The War,no This is a democracy, jam-packed with 1st amendment rights, tell the conservatives to cool off! I think there needs to be more pictures and stories of teenager girls making love to one another. I also think there should be more erotic incest story for those who find it a turn on! I feel that sexual resources are a good start for outlet, curosity, and they are harmless, PROVIDING there is no child pornography involved! Sex is fun, The internet is fun, I haven't put them together. I don't think stories and pictures cause any harm. I haven't seen anything too hideous, so perhaps I'm not qualified to answer. I do not have irc access at this time either. (Soon.) Very nice! I think it's very good. I like both! I have not found much material. Some friends have but not me. i think its great! With something as open as the internet, it doesn't surprise me, that sex is so abundant. I find simulated net-sex to be kind of silly, but I am not personally offended. To me it is much better than real-life promiscuity. I do worry about the concepts of "sexual freedom" that seem to be promoted in some areas, though. it�s fun Looked at the erotic binaries and erotic literature, but nothing else. Didn't know there were online personals (although it certainly makes sense). I like the idea of this survey! n/a IT'S GREAT. NEVER REMOVE IT!!! Cool because it's open and free. I can't wait til someone makes a monkey homepage so that I can fuck them in my dreams. I want to play with my little penis while I Cum on someones head. I want to get payed to shit on someones face and stick beads up my butt and pull them out. I want everyone to know that I am a fucking sick person!! Thankyou. :) It's everywhere: porno, gifs, bmps, au, docs. haven't looked, therefore, haven't found It's a matter of personal preference. I love sex and the interrnet. Why not mix the two! The net needs more FAQ's and informational sites Ilove both!! GREAT FUN It's an opportunity to overcome inhibitions. Just be oneself and enjoy life. We only live once - go for it!! Think its a good place to learn, discuss and judge sex and sexual information Yes its nice to read and see its just another way of expressing freedom of choice on a system that is not regulated Like any mode of communication, it has the capacity to be either used well or abused. some sites have an educational value great i want more! Sex-not yet experienced internet- Great i like it I'm very curious as to what it offers. I think its exciting, and I would love to find another way to channel my sexual energy. i really haven't found any useful material, just a lot of pictures of naked women. I think that it should be more hardporno fore does who want it. I have trouble finding what i want. "Jimmy" The keyboard makes my penis hurt. By leaving the censoring to local or national governmental control, you open up a can of worms to this question: what does pornography entail? Everyone will have a different view. If you go to the solution of local control, people who post things could be penalized in one state, but not in another. If you leave it to to national control, people see this as heavy censorship...where will they draw the line. What is new with the internet, is that the international boudaries are not as heavy... Contrl of pornographic material will have to be self-censorship by parents and legal guardians. It's just like putting childproof locks on the household cleaners cupboard. Household cleaners are obviously poisonous, so you take precautions to prevent a child from getting into them until they understand the pros and cons. Porn on the net should be handled the same way. Absolutely no problem at all. If you want to see it, there it is. If not, then just don't look. All you prudes can go hide behind your Bibles. This is the last unregulated vehicle for free expression. amazing keep it coming We need more!! When you work on for a big Internet provider like I do I form many opinons. more cumshots freely delivered! fuck you The way it should be right now. the internet has so many topics of interest from a-z, sex is one of those topics Its fun! Focus on the positive. Control access/maintain freedom. I'm not looking for sex on the internet What you think about sex is not for government intervention, only what you you do about sex should be of societies concern. The internet is a good free way of finding pornographic material on the cheap but some of the stuff is very hard and possibly contravenes some of the laws of he country. But all in all a good system. i think that sex on the net is totally cool. it is the ultimate in safe sex. I think of sex on the net the same way that I look at sex in general, it's healthy and good. It's called Freedom of Choice! and parents, control your KIDS!!! It�s cool!!! And you are learning somenthing if you are under 13 (me). Since I haven't got any lately I don't see any problem Like it ! I think it provides an open, safe outlet for normal feelings. People will act on these feeling one way or another. The net is safer than the streets. I don�t know enough, but I�d like to know more. Sex is fun, Internet is fun. Combining two fun things can lead to more fun :-) I need a cigarette!... Open it up! A valuble and interesting way to broaden horizons and view the phsyche of human kind, a representation of an unregulated form of communication. Perhaps a model of an unregulated society. Actually pretty scary given the possibility of educational value. The internet is a free sex zone. As it should be. cool...would like to know how to chat on line with others 's okay! Way too many perverted people out there! no great If I could find it I would tell you. I'm still a virgin on the net. The I-net should be free of any or all censorship. Lest we forget the key role that the internet played during the aborted Russian coup. If we start on offending pornography, do we stop when we hurt peoples feelings with words. We cannot censor a free exchange of ideas no matter how distasteful. It should be the parents responsibilty to teach the children what is right and wrong. I have no thoughts because I have not found anything on the INTERENET that I would consider Sex or pornography. i like it a lot i like it a lot i love it Blown out of perportion NEED MORE!!! interesting outlet for exploring new ideas I don't find anything wrong with it on the internet There should be more penetration shots Thousands of people who would never dare buy a Penthouse magazine because of the fear of someone seeing them can now do it. Inhibitions exist for a reason, they are our gage between right and wrong. If I did not think it was wrong to buy a Penthouse magaz Sex should be easy to obtain on the internet if it truely is a tool for and of the users. People hung up on censorship should not query sexually implied pages. I still assume we do not live under military rule! its ok easier access to nudes and movies sex is great!!! Have sex often!! It's fun!! keep sex on the net!!! a healty combination is expected I've been looking for more of it, just can't find enough ! :) The internet was established for exchange of data...let's keep it that way. If you don't want to find sex on the net...either go to a server that doesn't offer that type of material or one that censors everything. Great!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!1 i love it :-) It's fun--and if people don't like it--they should not look at it!!! I would like to see more i have tried to find it it is hard love it What they have in common are keyboards It's an obsession. it's great i have no time for it but if people choose to spend their money masturbating at a keyboard then it is their business. There should be some way to stop insulting instant messages to people who want to recieve IM's but not get into cybersex. Maybe a key that awakens the so called regulators and they could stop any porn there. If they are talking sex in aroom well then its the individuals responsibility to cchange rooms. No one is chaining you to your keyboard and forcing you to watch. it seems to be self regulated, that is, sites are posted, and advance warnings are present to avoid being surprised or viewing something that would offend. It's a safe place to have it and it's fun. Censorship is the parents job, not the governments. How would you deal with the issue of regulating sexual/offensive content? help people find porno on net If it offends you, don't look at it Independent monitoring via software such as Surfwatch "SurfWatch" and such programs for people who need to screen out offensive content parental block availablity according to ratings Let the user decide on how "open" it is. fuck you bitches and bastards Sex is everywhere, they'll see it anyway! Supervise minors; otherwise stay away from offensive material have only pornography Parents should take the time to block out unwanted material. If a person knows or comes to know that a particular site is offensive, those people should stay away or lock that material out of their system. The real problem is that those people who want to have the parents be responsible for their children Parental control "lock out" features. Make parents realize they must accept full responsibilty for their child. Do not force government or other sanctioning bodies to regulate material. Anal Rape and a nice ham on rye (if you know what I mean, wink wink) If you don't like it, don't view it! Ist Amendment censorship should be outlawed parents s/b responsible for everything, only and when it enters the home Opening a SexNet The warning system currently used is adequate establish rating system for sites AND accounts Parents need to control what the kids see. adults can just avoid the areas of sex if they don't like it. Parents should be responsible in finding ways, such as software, to prevent their children from accessing the prono sites! Tell these groups to get lost Kill those Self-rightous Bastards! Parents monitor their children on the net. I think one should have a place where you identify your self and then you get a codeword which from then on will give you acsess tothe things you want to see. let parents regulate their children realize personal responsabilities parents should watch their children, adults can watch themselves I consider any attempt at censorship to be an affront to my basic personal freedoms. Freedom of speech. Freedom of choice. there should be a lock-out for parents, but should otherwise be open it should be allowed with a key pasword to adults over 18 devices should B avail. for people 2 censor selves if desired Allow a key system that would indicate if the user is an adult and can get access to adult lines (non-moderated) or non-adult and can only get moderated groups Let households decide for themselves. Parents should talk frankly with their children about all sorts of behavior and allow their *teenagers* to make their own choices. Otherwise, children should be monitored somewhat when using this communication system Programs to give parental control (they exist) Let people have the choice to decide for themselves. Let them set their own values. govt. overseen self-regulating body (net-based)AAar Leave it alone, it's fine. Age level rating system, keep kids safe all explicit cites should be pasword access only let people frickin decide for themselves... make it completely clear what is on each site Let the parent censor; leave the rest for the adults without censorship. It is the responsibility of parents\guardians to monitor. self censorship is the answer PUT MORE HARD CORE PORN ON Service providers should have parental security unsure - encourage good parenting on a family level Let people opposed find their own soluton. Parents should take responsiblity for what their children see on the net. Nobody has a right to tell me (a legal adult) what I should or should not see. Possibly a "lock out code" for parents? fuck censorship Have parental control keys if you dont like it dont look for it!!! I think a rating system is a very good idea !! proof of age to enter explicit sites local lockout capabilities fucking all children in the ass,so much fun for the whole family!!! Those that don't want it should block it, not eliminate it for the rest of us! cencor only under EXTREME circumstances have sheilds set up for children Develop a devise that which allows parents to control what their children can access, and absolutely no child pornography should be permitted on the net Install violence/sex chips standard. Self regulation Shut down obscene stuff (as legally defined) and make a rating system for whats left. Let the parents "sensor" what their children look aok at Allow Parents to block access on PC/Mac WHo gives a shit? Stress watching Letterman heavily while drinking coke! the net will be completely open and in spanish too Some form of electronic identification individual parental responsibility to child's access to the internet censors for individual net sights Allow parents to sensor their OWN children, leave the rest of us to do as we want! There is a thing called "Education", use it some sort of code to keep minors off Require browsers to come with Parental Switches require safety options on all browsers Ban all those under 18 from using the net It's the parents responsibility. Limit minors access Parents monitor their children Let freedom ring prevent the frustrated Americans to read the sex groups all goes Access passwords should be issue for adult sites on the net and monitored by an issueing company. tell these american nazis that i pay taxes like everyone else and where do they get off telling me what i can have for entertainment. it's not like i go to their homes and tell them what to enjoy. if they are into hypocrites of the radical right, then so be it. if you don't want it don't use it Make them more educative It's a great vent for whomever, leave it alone! I Think sex holds the internet community together Have the parents become PARENTS! Allow private industry and parents deal with the problem. Tell the influential groups to such dick! A "behind the scenes" (i.e. HTTP, NNTP, etc. extensions or something.) rating system with the end-user responsible for filtering content. if you have a problem with it don't look! Education,please. Make software to block out offensive material readily available. Give everyone a Sex toy Give everyone a Sex toy use At Ease type programs if you dont like it, dont read or look at it mind your own business free love, man if u dont like it dont look at it promote sex on net Limit access through software in owner system parental control if you don't want to see it, just don't look. I think the parents should make blocks for their children. It's their jobs, not ours, to make sure the "kiddies" don't see. let everyone have sex all of the time levels of blocking--R First block, XXX next block, weird shit--next block fuck `em do not establish anything, have patience give individual option of not recieving porno material. Return to theHome Page. Copyright ©1996, /InterCommerceCorporation, All rights reserved worldwide Send comments to Webmaster@Survey.net WT02-B22-25IA060-000333-B020-192http://www.survey.net:80/sv-shop.htm 204.107.221.240 19970115053927 text/html 10298HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 15 Jan 1997 05:33:12 GMTServer: Apache-SSL-US/1.0.3+1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 10115Last-modified: Mon, 25 Nov 1996 20:26:49 GMT SURVEY.NET - Shopping Habits Survey #1 Your source for information, opinions & demographics from the NetCommunity! ANNOUNCING: The Internet's finest interactive, totally-automated,immediate survey system. We can take any form and instantly create adynamic demographic database and show you the results as soon as youcomplete the survey! Internet Shopping Habits Survey Have you ever purchased a product from a company via the Internet? This includes ordering via telephone number listed on a web site. No AnswerYesNo How many times have you made online purchases? No AnswerNeverOnce2-3 times4-6 times7-15 timesMore than 15 times If no, why not? (main reason) No AnswerIt was too difficult finding what I was looking for.I'm wary of ordering online due to unfamiliarity with the company.I do not want to submit personal billing information over the Internet.If I don't deal with a person, I'm afraid my order will get lost.In general I don't do alot of shopping. If yes, was your purchase(s) for an item that you specifically weresearching for, or was it an item that you came across while Internetshopping and decided to buy? No AnswerN/A - Never purchased anything onlineI was specifically looking for the item.I came across it and liked it, so I bought it. On the net, what is the primary factor which influences your decision to purchase items (not relating to the product, but to its presentation)? No AnswerN/A - Never purchased anything onlineThe photo or drawing of the item that was presented.The priceThe explanation of the item and its features.The general quality of the web site.The convienence of shopping online.The 'ease' of finding the specific item.The unique nature of the item.The payment method available for purchasing the item. On average, are your purchases a storefront in a 'mall' setting, or from a'standalone' storefront? No AnswerN/A - Never purchased anything onlineMallStandalone storefrontNot sure Would you make repeat purchases from the sites that you've patronized? No AnswerN/A - Never purchased anything onlineYesNoMaybe How did you pay for this online purchase (please answer for the majority of your purchases)? No AnswerN/A - Never purchased anything onlineSent credit card via unsecure form/method.Sent credit card via secure form/method.Sent credit card but not sure if secure or not.Emailed my credit card number.Called a telephone number and provided credit card info.Mailed a check or money order via postal service.First Virtual accountCybercashE-CashDigicashAnother Internet-based ordering systemCODTermsOther Have you ever had someone use your credit card and charge items without approval? No AnswerI don't have any credit cardsNoYes - by a family memberYes - but I cleared it up without any liabilityYes - and I ended up having to pay Are you set up or do you plan to become set up for online paymentproecssing using companies such as First Virtual, Cybercash,Digicash, Ecash, etc? No AnswerNot currently and I do not plan toNot currently but I do plan toYes, with one payment processorYes, with multiple payment processors What type of products have you purchased online? (Check all that apply) Art Books, Information and Magazines Business/Legal/Financial Business Opportunities Clothing College Services Communications Computer-related products & services Cosmetics and Beauty Aids Education Electronics/Electrical Entertainment/Hollywood/Culture Flowers and Plants Food/Drink Gifts Hobbies/Crafts Home Products Infant and Toddler Products Information Resources/Help/Non-Profit Internet Products & Services Jewelry and Accessories Medical and Health Products Mortgage Lending Music and Videos New Age Products/Services Real Estate-related Safety and Security Adult Products/Services Other Services Sports and Fitness Toys and Games Travel and Vacations Have you been satisfied with the products that you have purchased online? No AnswerN/A - Never purchased anything onlineVery satisfied - no problemsSomewhat satisfiedNot satisfied - many problems How would you compare online ordering with mail ordering? No AnswerN/A - Never purchased anything onlineOnline ordering is more appealingMail-order is more appealingThey're both about the same Are you worried about giving credit card information over the telephone? No AnswerI have no credit cardsNoNot muchYes Are you worried about giving credit card information over the internet (in a securedtransaction)? No AnswerI have no credit cardsNoNot muchYes Are you worried about giving credit card information over the internet (in a non-securedtransaction)? No AnswerI have no credit cardsNoNot muchYes In general, do you like the idea of online, computerized shopping? No AnswerYesNo Thanks very much for participating in thesurvey! To submit your survey choices, select: or You can view the latest survey results after you submit your answers. We hope you will also participate in other surveys online as well. Please note that you shouldonly complete each survey once. Copyright ©1996, /InterCommerceCorporation, All rights reserved worldwide Send comments to Webmaster@Survey.net WT02-B22-26IA060-000333-B022-387http://www.survey.net:80/columns/ba/ 204.107.221.240 19970115054834 text/html 8159HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 15 Jan 1997 05:42:19 GMTServer: Apache-SSL-US/1.0.3+1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 7977Last-modified: Sat, 07 Dec 1996 08:10:22 GMT ICorp SURVEY.NET COLUMNS - "It's Something to Think About"" Your source for information, opinions & demographics from the NetCommunity! ANNOUNCING: The Internet's finest interactive, totally-automated,immediate survey system. We can take any form and instantly create adynamic demographic database and show you the results as soon as youcomplete the survey! CHRISTMAS A TIME FOR REAFFIRMING FAMILY VALUES By-Barbara Ayash - International Woman of the Year This holiday season, a youngster somewhere will lie dying in a pool of blood, the happless victim of a gun shot. His killer will be one of the estimated 135,000 armed teen-agers who now walk the streets in this country. This month, while we are preparing to celebrate the hope of peace and goodwill to our fellow man, thousands of robberies will take place on or near school grounds. And a number of children will attempt to commit suicide, as one in seven children now do, sooner or later. This Christmas, a young girl will be rushed to the hospital to die from an overdose of a drug taken at a holiday party. And many thousands more like her, in an attempt to join in the festive spirits, will start down the road to serious substance abuse. For drugs are once again becoming the "in thing." Heroin has become the new trendy drug on college campuses --- a cheaper more concentrated form of heroin that has already led to a 34% increase in hospital emergency admissions for the drug this past year. And a recent University of Michigan survey found that the 12-year gradual decline in casual drug use has come to an abrupt halt. College students and even eighth graders are reporting higher rates of drug use than they did in 1991 and 1992 and the number of sixth graders using drugs has tripled since 1975. Crime, drugs and violence are part of the daily world in which children now live. So is it any wonder that youngsters today are so cynical about what this holiday season is supposed to represent?However, the Concerned Businessmen's Association of America (CBAA), know there is something that we as adults can do this season to deliver a positive message to the young people in our communities. Underneath the great many tragedies that our young people see and experience everyday lies one fundamental factor. For too many of our young people, human life has become practically worthless. It means nothing to kill, it means nothing to steal or harm others or even self. I urge parents and all adults to take time this holiday season to do something special which will communicate to young people that human life, any human life has real value. If we could just get across this one thing to youngsters a great many personal disasters might be avoided. I am often accused of being something of an expert in teaching the young the value of human life. However, I am only a grandmother who became active in programs to divert youth from involvement in Los Angeles street gangs by teaching them common sense morals and the value of life. And CBAA, with the help of businesses and educators in our nation's schools now runs the American Set A Good Example Campaign which has involved 10,000 schools from all states and seven-million children. This program helps to teach children important moral values using The Way to Happiness book, a common sense guide to better living, written by the noted author and humanitarian, L. Ron Hubbard. One of the reasons the Set A Good Example Campaign has proven such as success--- participants and private sector business sponsors have been commended 15 times in the United States Congressional Record, applauded by governors of 44 states and by mayors across the country--- is that children discover through applying the moral principles contained in The Way to Happiness that human life does have value. This is something we cannot repeat too often to children and it is something that we should all continue to teach them through example. For that reason, we at CBAA are urging everyone to do something special this holiday season which reaffirms the value of human life. Perhaps a gift to a homeless person, Perhaps help out with some charity work involving children who have no adult guidance. Perhaps read something to the family which talks about how precious human life is which emphasizes that values and respect for human life are important. Youngsters these days are deluged with messages of hopelessness, cruelty and despair. Nevertheless, their perceptions of the world---- and the role they see for themselves in that world----must be balanced with moral values and respect for human life. Gifts are nice. But there is something more important than a sweater or a new video game we can give our young people this holiday season. Clothes and toyr wear out. Respect for self and others does not. It can last a life time. IT IS SOMETHING TO THINK ABOUT. Let me know your thoughts on the matter.My E-mail address is 75467,1157@compuserve.comCheck out the CBAA internet site at http://www.cbaa.org. There is a section there "For Children Only" which admonishes "Don't Use Harmful Drugs." Barbara Ayash is the Founder and President of the Concerned Businessmen's Association of America. She recieved the International Freedom Medal in 1985 and was named International Woman of the Year for 1993 and 1994. Her E-mail address is 75467,1187@compuserve.com. This page last updated: Sat Dec 7 02:10:22 1996 CST Return to theHome Page. Copyright ©1996, /InterCommerceCorporation, All rights reserved worldwide Send comments to Webmaster@Survey.net WT02-B22-27IA060-000333-B023-90http://www.survey.net:80/columns/bf/ 204.107.221.240 19970115054924 text/html 4229HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 15 Jan 1997 05:43:12 GMTServer: Apache-SSL-US/1.0.3+1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 4047Last-modified: Wed, 29 May 1996 16:02:25 GMT ICorp SURVEY.NET COLUMNS - Think About It! Your source for information, opinions & demographics from the Net Community! Surprised? You Shouldn't Be Zoe Baird, Jennifer Flowers, Vince Foster, Paula Jones, Whitewater, TravelGate. What is the common denominator? These names and events are but asmall sampling of the tools used by some Republicans to insure against asecond term in office for President Bill Clinton. In the event they failto accomplish this goal, here is an early (May, 1996) explanation. Led by Speaker Gingrich and talk radio and TV host Rush Limbaugh, Republicans launched the nastiest, most vindictive personal attack upon anAmerican President in memory. Not even the anti-Richard Nixon crowd ofthe 1970s descended to the level of disrespect, derision and incivilitydirected at President Clinton. Though Clinton is a sitting President,he has been cast in the role of underdog. Recent polls indicate that this negative line of attack is no longerworking and Republicans, frustrated, are targeting members of their ownparty. Watch for another "character" discussion. It won't play as well asit did previously. Instead of responding in anger, Clinton has busiedhimself with affairs of state, growing in stature, showing a strength ofcharacter that even his most ardent supporters wouldn't have believed. Traditionally, Americans have shown a sense of fair play and have ralliedto support the underdog. They forgive their public figures' humanfrailties as they forgave Richard Nixon's, providing these figuresperform in their field of endeavor. Bill Clinton has performed, and theRepublicans have only themselves to blame for their failure to understandAmerican human nature. The author is a 1976 graduate of the University of Tennessee, with a BSdegree in Business Administration, and a 1989 graduate of Georgia StateUniversity's Executive MBA program. He was selected as a member ofInternational Who's Who in 1994 for his work in international finance.The author is a recognized expert in the field of international financeand has been a featured speaker both at home and abroad. This page last updated: Wed May 29 11:02:25 1996 CST Return to theHome Page BACK || HOME || NEW || Louisiana || INDEX || SEARCH || FEEDBACK Copyright © 1995, ICC/Mike Perry - All rights reserved worldwide wisdom@icorp.netWT02-B22-28IA060-000333-B021-214http://www.survey.net:80/sv-cmdy.htm 204.107.221.240 19970115054259 text/html 7241HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 15 Jan 1997 05:36:46 GMTServer: Apache-SSL-US/1.0.3+1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 7059Last-modified: Mon, 25 Nov 1996 20:26:47 GMT SURVEY.NET - Comedy Survey #1 Your source for information, opinions & demographics from the NetCommunity! ANNOUNCING: The Internet's finest interactive, totally-automated,immediate survey system. We can take any form and instantly create adynamic demographic database and show you the results as soon as youcomplete the survey! American Comedy Survey On a lighter side, let's find out what makes YOUlaugh. Who are your favorite comedians, types of comedy, shows and otherthings? Please pardon me if I've left someone out (It's impossible to listevery possible candidate here!) Who is your favoriate stand-up male comedian? Even though this might be a tough choice, select your favorite from this list: No AnswerAbott & CostelloTim AllenLouie AndersonLenny BruceGeorge BurnsAndrew Dice ClayBill CosbyBilly CrystalGeorge CarlinRodney DangerfieldJeff FoxworthyArsenio HallBill HicksBob HopeRichard JenaAndy KaufmanSam KinnisonJay LenoRichard LewisBill MaherSteve MartinDennis MillerEddie MurphyConan O'BrienRichard PriorKevin PolluckJerry SeinfeldRich SchneiderSmothers BrothersRobert TownsendRobin WilliamsJohnathan WintersStephen WrightOther Who is your favoriate female stand-up comedian? No AnswerSandra BernhardEllen DeGeneresWhoopi GoldbergRosie O'DonnelPaula PoundstoneRoseanneRita RudnerJudy TenudaThea VidaleOther What kind of comedy do you prefer? No AnswerStand-upStorytellingFeature-length moviesSituation ComedyJokesAudio/Albums/CDsMagazines/BooksComicsImprovisationSlapstickOther Of those listed, which talk show do you think is/was the most entertaining? No AnswerDavid LettermanPolitically Incorrect Tonight Show/Jay LenoTonight Show/Johnny CarsonLate Night/Conan O'BrienDennis Miller ShowPat Sajak ShowArsenio HallChevy Chase Other Of the following comedians, who's the best comedy actor in movies today? No AnswerDan AckroydJim CarreyChevy ChaseBill CosbyRodney DangerfieldChris FarleySteve MartinBill MurrayEddie MurphyRichard PriorDavid SpadeRobert TownsendJim VarneyRobin WilliamsOther Of those listed below, what in your opinion is/was the funniest SITUATION comedy show? Once again, there are too many to list, but at the end of this survey, you can write-inyour own answers No AnswerBrady BunchCheersDream OnFrasierFriendsGilligan's IslandHome ImprovementI Dream of JeannieI Love LucyLarry Sanders ShowM.A.S.H.Murphy BrownNight CourtSeinfeldYoung OnesDick Van DykeMary Tyler MooreOther Of those listed below, what is/was your favorite comedy show? No AnswerIn Living ColorKids in the HallLaugh-InMad TVMonty PythonSaturday Night Live (Not Ready for Prime Time Players)Saturday Night Live (late 80s; Piscapo, Murphy)Saturday Night Live (Carvey, Hartman, Jan Hooks, V. Jackson)Saturday Night Live (new season)The StateOther Have you ever enjoyed comedy via the following:(check all that apply) - Visited a comedy club - Purchased an album/CD/tape - Purchased a CDROM - Comedy performance at other event (music concert, etc.) - Television - Cable/Satellite TV - Rented comedy videos - Attended feature-length movies - Purchased a comedy book - Pay-Per-View event Want to comment on another comedian or favorite show/sitcom that's not on the list? Want to tell us your favorite joke? Enter a few sentences; do not press ENTERunless you're ready to submit your entire survey.(let's keep it clean though): Thanks very much for participating in thesurvey! To submit your survey choices, select: or You can view the latest survey results after you submit your answers. We hope you will also participate in other surveys online as well. Please note that you shouldonly complete each survey once. Copyright ©1996, /InterCommerceCorporation, All rights reserved worldwide Send comments to Webmaster@Survey.net WT02-B22-29IA060-000333-B019-454http://www.survey.net:80/sv-pol4.htm 204.107.221.240 19970115053656 text/html 10387HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 15 Jan 1997 05:30:32 GMTServer: Apache-SSL-US/1.0.3+1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 10204Last-modified: Mon, 25 Nov 1996 20:26:49 GMT SURVEY.NET - 1996 Presidential Poll #4 Your source for information, opinions & demographics from the NetCommunity! ANNOUNCING: The Internet's finest interactive, totally-automated,immediate survey system. We can take any form and instantly create adynamic demographic database and show you the results as soon as youcomplete the survey! 1996 Presidential Poll #4 Who is going to be president in 1996? How do you feel about the issues the candidates are talking about? NOTE: 17 Complete networks have been BANNED from participating in ANY Survey.Net polls as a result of unsuccessful attempts to spam the surveys. In each case, our records have been turned over to the provider, university or company/agency so that they could identify the person(s) responsible for trying to taint our data and appropriate action has been taken. DO NOT SUBMIT MULTIPLE SURVEYS! This destroys months and in some cases, years worth of work! It is a criminal offense! I've received some complaints that this survey is overly polarized towards one side or the other - let me say that this is done for a specific reason. Itgoes without saying that most people will always choose "in-between" if theyhave that as a choice - but it proves nothing. When you are confronted witha question covering two opposed concepts, in lieu of the ideal answer (whichis utterly impossible to list for everyone), choose the BEST choice and notwhine about your ideal thoughts not being summed up in one of the multiplechoice answers. Hey, it's sorta like real life don't ya think? Thanks - Ed. Your political affiliation: No AnswerRepublicanDemocratGreen PartyIndependentLibertarianReform PartyUnited States Taxpayer's PartyNot registered to voteNot a US citizenOther Even though not all of these candidates are necessarily running, if the presidential election were held today, who would you vote for? No AnswerLamar AlexanderPat BuchananHarry BrowneBill ClintonBob DoleBob DornanDavid DukeSteve ForbesNewt GingrichPhil GrammJesse JacksonAlan KeyesRichard LugarRalph NaderRoss PerotGen. Colin PowellHoward PhillipsPat RobertsonArlen SpectorRick TompkinsPete WilsonOther Of the following TWO potential presidential candidates, who would you vote for? No AnswerBill ClintonBob Dole Of the following presidential candidates, who would you vote for? No AnswerBill ClintonBob DoleRalph NaderHarry BrowneHoward Phillips Who did you vote for in 1992? No AnswerBill ClintonGeorge BushSomeone elseDid not vote in 1992Was too young/not registered to vote in 1992 Did you watch the first Clinton/Dole debate? No AnswerYesNo If so, who do you think fared better? No AnswerI did not watchClintonDoleIt was a draw Do you feel Ross Perot should be included in the Presidential debates? No AnswerYesNo What is your opinion of Ross Perot's presence in the 1996 election? No AnswerHe is a legitimate candidate who cannot be ignoredHe is a diversion and has no chance of winningHis presence is an embarassmentHe has a good chance of winningHe is one of many third-party candidates who are discriminated againstHe is not worth paying attention toHe serves to elevate critical issues in the public eye Do you consider yourself... No AnswerVery ConservativeSomewhat ConservativeModerateSomewhat LiberalVery LiberalSocially Liberal, Economically ConservativeSocially Conservative, Economically Liberal What political concepts do you agree with? (check all that apply) - We need less government regulation in general - We need more responsible government regulation - States should have more responsibility than the Federal Gov. - The government should NOT mandate moral standards - The government SHOULD mandate moral standards - Tax breaks are more important than reducing the deficit - Reducing the deficit is more important than tax breaks - Unions are destroying American productivity - Unions protect the worker - The economy is more important than the environment - The environment is more important than the economy In your opinion, what is the worst problem with our society? No AnswerThe national debtCrimeWelfareRising healthcare costsGovernment intrusionDrugsEducationIllegal immigrationThe mediaAbortionNot enough religious influenceToo much religious influenceEnvironmental damagePolitical/government corruptionBig business influenceOther What do you think about Bob Dole's 15% tax break plan? No AnswerIt is a great ideaIt is a great idea, but I'm skeptical as to how it would be financedIt is typical election rhetoricIt is not feasible if he plans on reducing the deficit and not cutting major programsIt is a bad idea; reducing the deficit should take priority over such tax breaksDole is vague about the details so it makes me suspicious of his platform Of those items listed, what should be our next President's highest priority? No AnswerReducing crimeReducing governmentImproving educationImproving the economyImproving world relationsProtecting the environmentProtecting civil libertiesFighting communism, socialism, totalitarianism, etc.Improving our moral foundation There has been argument over whether personal growth and morality is a factor primarily of the "family", or the "village". Are we products of the "family" or a "village"? No AnswerFamilyVillage Without turning this into a partisian/rhetorical argument, who do you want to see for president in 1996and why? (Limit this to one or two sentences) Thanks very much for participating in thesurvey! To submit your survey choices, select: or You can view the latest survey results after you submit your answers. We hope you will also participate in other surveys online as well. Please note that you shouldonly complete each survey once. Copyright ©1996, /InterCommerceCorporation, All rights reserved worldwide Send comments to Webmaster@Survey.net WT02-B22-30IA060-000333-B027-186http://www.survey.net:80/pol2c3.html 204.107.221.240 19970115060633 text/html 87978HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 15 Jan 1997 06:00:11 GMTServer: Apache-SSL-US/1.0.3+1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 87795Last-modified: Mon, 25 Nov 1996 20:26:45 GMT SURVEY.NET - 1996 Presidential Poll #2 - User comments (ARCHIVE III) Your source for information, opinions & demographics from the NetCommunity! ANNOUNCING: The Internet's finest interactive, totally-automated,immediate survey system. We can take any form and instantly create adynamic demographic database and show you the results as soon as youcomplete the survey! Political Survey #2 User comments [ARCHIVE III] Who will be president in 1996 and why? Harry Browne, because he will drastically reduce Government Harry Browne, the only choice! Bill CLinton A woman. Harry Browne, with the hope that Libertarians gain respectability and government intrusion is seriously reduced. Harry Browne -- because he is the only candidate who knows how to fix things and fix them now. Alan Keyes because he stands for the moral fiber of this country and the basis that this country was founded! Pat Buchanan: He will restore integrity, credibility, bal. budget, quit over spending, restore our military to a strong national defense, bring our troops home from where we have no business, I could go on and on, and on about Pat. Clinton - The only candidate that has proven a leader Pat Buchanan. Honest,he will change the "government as usual" attitude. Restore integrity, honesty, get rid of corruption, lobbiests, etc. He will balance the budget & quit over spending, Strong defense. we don't need another voodoo econimist republican running the right wing newcommers in the congress. Bill Clinton, closest to liberal Alan Keyes Trust Harry Browne. He is the only candidate who will dramatically cut government. Steve Forbes, because he has business sence. Harry Browne. Break out of the old "two party" system Browne, cuz he's the only candidate honest enough to admit that government doesn't work. Harry Browne - The best Libertarian candidate. Someone not currently envolved in government. You don't know why? Bill Clinton. Dole is too old, and after the State of the Union rebuttal, too lame, Buchanan brings back the worst of the Nixon years, Grammm talks about family values and makes porno flicks, Forbes talks only about money, not foreign or domestic policy, Keyes is a lunatic, etc... Clintons not the best, but he backs the common man! Alan Keyes; because of his consistent, principled vision for this country rooted in a Godly ethic. Harry Browne(LP) - His is the ONLY candidate talking about reducing the size and scope of government, and expanding individual liberties. Steve Forbes - Flat Tax, and less govt. in social issues. Harry Browne, I have already seen what Bill Clinton and Bob Dole think is important; I believe that Harry Browne should be given a chance. Harry Browne--he stands for what I believe in, including laissez-faire capitalism Clinton, is working hard to hold the maniac rightwing tide! Harry Browne ... we need a change NOW Harry Browne - read his book :Why Government Doesn't Work." Harry Browne because he will seek to cut the federal government to 1/2 or less of its current size. Steve Forbes. He will bring economic reform and growth. Steve Forbes: relative political outsider Alan Keyes; his priorities focus on the nations true problems and offer the only real solutions. Steve Forbes, he is the only candidate with a clear message for where he wants to lead this country. Government is completely broken. Harry Browne is the only candidate I've seen so far that understands that and knows how to fix it! Powell Alan Keyes - he speaks to the issues of morality which undergird our social and economic woes Bob Dole Why? Because serious in balancing budget Clinton. He has done great things with the economy,and believes in education and the environment. Alan Keyes, because he represents true moral leadership Steve Forbes or Harry Browne. They're the only ones committed to large reductions in the size of the government. Steve Forbes, He has a very strong and postitive message. It's also about time that a non-politician holds the office. Alan Keyes, he has a vision of restoring America back to the basic Constitution, Declaration of Independence, and moral convictions of responsibility that made this country great. He is inspiring, positive, and causes us to think. His messages transcend across all ethnic, religious and racial boundaries.I think he will restore some morality, dignity, integrity and respect to the office of President. Harry Browne -- Best represents my views. I'm all done voting for the lesser of two evils. Pat Buchanan with Alan Keyes as VP . For a return to constitutional government and Traditional American Freedom! Alan Keyes, because he has his priorities straight. I would like to see Harry Browne as president because he is the only candidate who understands the evil nature of government and, at the same time, has a cogent and workable plan for getting rid of as much of it as possible, given present social conditions. Definately Steve Forbes. Dole is an old fool, and Clinton is a CRIMINAL Harry Brown. A voice with a clear governmental philosophy anyone who would reduce the scope of the federal government to comply with the constitution of the United States of America. Harry Browne -- Want to see LESS Federal Government Harry Browne to truly reduce the size of government Any Libertarian worth his/her salt!!!!! Rick Tompkins - the most principled defender of liberty. Steve Forbes as President, a Balance Budget, and welfare reform Pat Buchanan, because he is the only true conservative candidate Harry Brown, because he is a man of real principle. Browne would truly limit government. I would like to see Harry Browne in office to enable America to reclaim its former status as all around great place to live! Steve Forbes because his solutions will bring econ. grot Harry Browne - We must get government under control and return to the philosophical basis upon which this nation was founded. Bill Clinton, because he is the only major Presidential candidate running who even closely represents my views. phil gramm I belive America need a candidate with good character and the right beliefs that can lead us and I belive Harry Browne is the man. I'm undecided on a candidate at the moment -- I just would like to see a candidate that can present a vision for the future of the country.... that includes a balance budget. Pat Buchanan. Pat is not afraid to tell you what he thinks. He is proud to be Pro-Life. He wants stop illegal immigration. Harry Browne will not have the government take taxes Harry Browne - well-versed in historical effects of government intrusion and why it doesn't work. Alan Keyes - he has the moral fiber to turn this country around into a great nation again based upon sound moral principles! Someone committed to freedom. I,m not happy with either party right now. At this point in time I think that Bill Clinton will win another term. I'm not happy about it but Bob Dole doesn't have much of a chance. Steve Forbes ALAN KEYES--He is the only candidate that truly understands that of all the problems we face in America today, our moral crisis is indeed the most important and is at the root of all our other problems. Forbes because he will not be influenced by peoples money Keyes because he knows that we have moral problems, not economic ones Phil Gramm. I believe he offers the best leadership and ideas (of those running) for directing the future of our country. Bill Clinton because 4 years is not long enough to really accomplish anything meaningful. Harry Browne is the only "Libertarian" with principles. Steve Forbes, he represents almost all of the views I like to promote Alan Keyes, because he is a man of pricipal Alan Keyes, because he has identified the real issue -- we don't have money problems, we have moral problems Alan Keyes, The only candidate that recognizes "money" is not our number one problem. Harry Browne - He will try to actually reduce government influences in our lives. Harry Browne, the Libertarian Party consistently stands for individual freedom and responsibility Alan Keyes - the only candidate with backbone to speak the truth! Alan Keyes, the Abe Lincoln of our generation! Alan Keyes - To lead this nation back to righteous living. Alan Keyes - The number one problem is the disintigration of the family Harry Browne, is the only one running who's not after your life & Property I am voting for Harry Browne, because I want the government reduced to the role prescribed to it in the Constitution. I want Harry Browne because the federal govt (especially, but all govt) is too large and intrusive. He will do what is necessary to change the situation and restore Constitutional bounds on govt. Pat Buchanan: I disagree with GATT and NAFTA. We should limit immigration. The country's religious base is eroding. The government is too big. I believe that Pat is closest to my views on these issues.is closest harry browne. He is the only strong, true advocate of our founding fathers' intentions. Harry Browne. He would save the federal government from explosion, due to its hugeness. Keyes-because he will return this nation to its moral roots Integrity Bill Clinton has an idea of where he wants the country to go and should be given the opportunity to take it there. He has reduced the deficit more in three years than in the past 20. Forbes is a businessman. The government is now a business! Harry Browne�so I can afford to educate my children with my family�s values, rather than working half the year to pay off the tax collectors, and having no choice but to send my children to public schools. Alan Keyes because our problems are moral not monetary Clinton--has better policy on internet than Dole Harry Browne. The only one who will actually *cut* government. Harry Browne - the only real challenge to statism Phil Gramm most accurately represents my ideal candidate Alan Keyes because quite simply, he is the only canidate who understands the root problems in the country and how to fix them Harry Browne, to get REAL decreases in the size of Government! and not just cuts in the rate of increase. Phil Gramm because he is concervative and has strong convictions Alan Keyes - We have a moral crisis..not a $$$ crisis!!!! Jack Kemp - He is a brilliant, articulate and positive conservative like Reagan, Rush, and Newt Alan Keyes because he is the only person the underlying problem in America today - the moral decay that is encouraged by the government as it exists today. Jack Kemp, he is well qualified and ideologically in sync with what I believe Alan Keyes because he most clearly articulates the "conscience of America"!! His stand on family values and the abomination of abortion is RIGHT ON. Alan Keyes. It's about time we had a man of convictions and integrity in office who understands how far America had strayed from her roots. A leader who recognizes that the root problem this country has is a loss of morality Alan Keyes, for the vision he has for America and Americans. bob dole , because he is presenty ahead in the polls and because of whitewater Alan Keyes - Best reflects my views and what I think the country needs Alan Keyes. Alan stands for what made this country the greatest country in the world. Alan Keyes: only man of true integrity, courage, vision available Harry Browne is the only one fighting for personal freedom Alan Keyes because he understands the moral breakdown of our society and how to remedy it. Alan Keyes because of his vision for restoring America to the Principles of the Declaration of Independence. I believe Alan Keyes is the best choice for President because of his clear vision of the moral decay that is the root of the country's problems today. Harry Browne clinton, because any republican vote is a vote for Gingrich Harry Browne. We have too much government. Alan Keyes: He is the only candidate to recognize the root cause of this country's economic and social problems. Browne. The best society is that in which people are free to solve their own problems in the way that they see fit, instead of relying on government to solve their problems for them. more honesty, more "for the People" benefits, less wasted monies given for perks and/or exorbitant expenditures for ridiculous items i.e. $400.00 hammers or $600.00 toilet seats, also wastful and extravagant allowances given to either individuals or office holders that border on resentful by the every day "average" citizen. Would like to see elected indivuals and office holders live as the average taxpaying person has to live..we have to live on what we are allowed to take home...no freebies are availale to us because we have a particular job..what would it be like if Washington had to live on their paychecks only..as we do. Rick Tompkins phil gramm Harry Browne -- Live free or die! Lamar Alexander He has a proven record as Governor of Tennessee. I trust him. Pat Buchanaan, he is the only mainstream candidate who is a true conservative Forbes - He has fresh ideas, and has more of a backbone than anyone else there. Harry Browne--to cut govn't down to what is Constitutionally authorized & to return control of our lives to us! Harry Browne: Is the only one to abolish government that does not work and that I don't need. Colin Powell. Since he's not running, then Steve Forbes Harry Browne, the only candidate who will actually cut govt Harry BROWNE FOR PRESIDENT Lamar Alexander- Bcse he has the most experience in running a large organization and appears to be truly committed to making things work better. Bill Clinton Alan Keyes I would like to see Harry Browne do well in 1996 because Browne is the only candidate is consistently against big, intrusive government. We need to put principles back into politics. Harry Browne would be a principled, honest leader who would stand by the libertarian principles this country was founded upon. Harry Browne or other viable Libertarian: to eliminate taxes on income& inheritance, reduce size & scope of govt., and promote personal liberty with personal respocibilty Harry Browne to restore the constitutional republic. Harry Browne - The Democrats and Republicans have collectively failed to fulfill the USA's potential over the past 100 years Pat Buchanan, he addresses the problems of foreigh trade deficit and keeping jobs in the US BILL CLINTON I FEEL HE IS MORE CONCERNED ABOUT THE WORKING MIDDLE CLASS THAN THE REPUBLICANS Pat Buchanan, he can make us proud to be Americans again. Harry Browne, return country to constitution based government. Harry Browne, because of his positions I would like to see Harry Browne elected to the office of president. The republicans and the democrats are all the same and it is time for a major change. I want the government out of our personal lives and pocketbooks. Bill Clinton - He cares about education, environment, economy. Harry Browne, to cut the size of Gov't We need somewhat who will stand up for the principles we believe in. Mr. Clinton Alan Keyes, because he is speaking the things this country needs to hear. He is right in his solutions to the problems this nation is facing. Either Harry Browne or Steve Forbes. Anyone else does politics as usual!!! Pat Buchanan - Every one of his ideas are the best for this country. Harry Browne - Cut the Government down to size. Harry Browne - Lessen Govt intrusion into individual's lives Harry Browne - Reduce Government Now!! Clinton I think he is very well spoken and I wouldn't want the position if you paid me. I want to see someone that keeps the government out of my life and lets me decide what and how I want to do something. If it doesn't effect someone else, why the hell should the government care! Harry Browne, because the two major parties will never really reverse the growth of government. Harry Browne; we need radically smaller government Harry Browne - Maximize freedom, minimize taxes Forbes - His appeal hits a common foe to all Americans ...the IRS phil gramm Steve Forbes. He is the only candidate talking about growth. Bill Clinton because I can't stand the right wing element of the Republican Party. I want a candidate who supports small, unintrusive government Jesse Jackson because he is more liberal than Clinton and better then the Republicans. We need a voice that cares for workers, students, the poor. Harry Browne - libertarians want LESS government Any Libertarian. Because I have sworn by my life and my love of it, that I will live my life for no other man, nor ask any man to live his life for me. Bob Dole, because he has integrity, character, and knows how to get things done. Harry Browne-we need redical change, we need freedom. clinton, moderate with a cogent and compassionate agenda. Bill. He is more concerned about our country's problems than about his own image. Examples: health care attempts, crime bill. harry browne. he has the integrity to keep his promise Harry Browne -- we need a radical change in the way government operates!! Harry Browne we need immediate change Anyone who ends the War on Drugs, which is destroying non-White communities. Clinton- has gotten stronger on all fronts through his term. Don't want to elect a republican president because I am truly frightened as to the course a Republican Congress and a Republican President would take. Steve Forbes Flat Tax and an outsider i would vote for a candidate who had strong moral values who would also defend America from her enemies Pat Buchanan - He stands for what America used to be, concerning freedom, rights, and morality. Steve Forbes: He's and Washington outsider taking about issues like FLAT TAX and supply-side ecomonics. clinton, i'm tired of seeing all of the ohter candidates just running their mouths about what clinton is not doing Browne - Break from 2 party monopoly Anyone that can get shit done and balance the budget! Rick Tompkins powell...integrity, honesty, courage Clinton because he is better than the rest that are running. phil gramm Least Political ties that can speak the truth about the budget and Big Brother. Harry Browne: No more using the military as a global renta-cop; no more income tax; no more War on Drugs; no more being the worlds leading arms merchant; no more Watergate's; no more S&L scandals; no more Iran-Contra's; no more Iraq-gate's; no more Waco's; no more Ruby Ridge's; no more October surprises; no more Warren Commissions; no more Vietnam's; no more Panama's; no more national debts; and no more censorship! Elect somebody who doesn't want the job, but is too honor-bound to let his/her responsibilities slide. Harry Browne. I do not trust government. I do not like big government. We need to cure ourselves of the governmental ills incurred the instant our country began to take care of those who can take care of themselves Charles Collins -- Wants to reduce size and scope of gov't Bob Dole, because he's a mature adult with sound judgement who won't base his decisions purely on political considerations. Buchanan or Browne return to judeao/christian values Harry Browne because a Libertarian would not play favorites. Bill Clinton. Despite the media derision, he's doing a good job. I want to see someone who will not forget that we have limited resources and too many problems and that the answer to those problems is to equally address them and not to punish an organization because of debt. Bill Clinton is the only one preventing the lunatic fringe Republicans from getting their way. Until they go the way of f Hoover, vote for any Democrat! Phil Grahmm because he is less likley to cave into liberals I will back the libertarian candidate. This I feel is the only chance we have of getting actual government cuts. Alan Keyes - He is the only one w/courage to address real problems in America clinton, because none of the other candidates have given me a reason to vote for them, they only seem concerned with trashing clinton, which is why i voted for him in 92, because that is all Bush did. Without turning this into a partisian/rhetorical argument? Who's arguing? I like Steve Forbes, Jack Kemp, and the pro-growth wing of the Republican party. Harry Browne - to return Fed. Gov. back to Constitutional constraints Harry Brown-He knows what needs to be done and is not afraid to do it. Alan Keyes; he's cool Dole. He seems to have a clear head. He has been in the military and if he had the soldiers go to war he would know how they feel and not send them on a whim. Bill Clinton is doing a good job despite what the media says. Bob Dole or other front-running conservative to carry out the conservative policies regarding taxes, welfare reform and the reduction of other entitlements. Harry Browne; he is serious about reducing the federal government. LESS TAXES AND LESS GOVERNMENT WASTE AND SPENDING Harry Browne, he is the only candidate that represent REAL change, supporting the unalianable rights of free Americans Alan Keyes- He says that as important as issues like a balanced budget and otersuch things are, unless America stops its moral decline (abortion, acceptance of homosexual lifestyle, etc.) we're goners even if those other type of issues were satisfactorily fixed. I am in complete agreement with him about this. I also feel that if Dole gets the nomination, he would be wise to take keye as VP candidate. It would shore up conservative support and increase Black support. Rick Tompkins. He's serious about getting government off our backs. At this point I wish someone great would come out of the woodwork. Colin Powell - He has a tremendous life story, and he has the command experience to make it work. that one cool guy because hes cool Pat Buchanan I like what he stands for Irwin Schiff, he is commited to abolishing the IRS completely which is the single most destructive form of goverment!!!! Any Libertarain, since I believe that individual liberty (in the classic sense), is the most important value. Rick Tompkins is the only candidate who is consistent in his support of individual rights and limiting government. someone who will cut spending and reduce size of government harry browne ; will restore constutional function of gov't Dole because I'm not satisfied with Clinton Bob Dole, he's more conservative and we need that. Colin Powell - bipartisan, reasoned, leadership Harry Browne because of his ideas to limit governnment I would love to vote for Harry Browne or anyone else with his idea. Unfortantly if I voted for him/you you would have no power with the congress or media Alan Keyes good sound conservative ideas for our nation Alan Keyes . bob dole is a squish and is like Klinton in 92 Klinton need we say more. Keyes is very Conservative and like his views i think you should know that by now I am very disalutioned with politics right now and cant seem to think of any one I would truly like to see as President Rick Tompkins, because he is a staunch libertarian. Forbes- He at least has some economic sense and several great ideas Bill Clinton-because I now like the way he is standing up against the nasty Republicans i think my dad would be great, but that's somewhat unrealistic as he's not running or even a politician. i like change to small government withough the hypocritical morals of dole et al ==> harry browne I believe we must do everything possible to oust Clinton. I don't believe abortion should be even involved in congressional matters. I would like to see someone get our financial affairs straighten out. Steve Forbes some one who will limit immigration and get rid of the welfare programs and not censor the internet Bob Dole Harry Browne-I want government to return to its function as described in the Constitution. Pat Buchanan because he wants to send the wetbacks back to Mexico where their dirty hides belong. Bill Clinton: sound judgement Harry Brown, because he is the only one that really want to reduce the power of the US government. Harry Browne - I'm tired of the high taxes I pay! Pat Buchanan. America first policies are the primary reason. Any liberarian candidate, because it's the truth Bill Clinton because he's supporting a federal gay rights law. Alan Keyes or Howard Phillips -- Christian, will do what is best for America. a candidate who will return the government to the foundation that our 'forefathers had set up ... going back to William Penn's days, particularly with a greater spiritual emphasis.thers' Harry Browne Because I belive he is one of the few politicians who would keep his word and not become preconumed with Washington. And free my children! Steve Forbes, his flat tax can more that double economy. Jerry Brown Harry Browne - I'm a Libertarian Harry Browne. Reduce government; don't just reduce its growth. HARRY BROWNE - LOWER TAXES, RESTRICTIONS IN SPENDING Gen. Colin Powell - although he is not a true conservative, I feel he would do a fine job as president. I want a libertarian; To rein in government, and set us free. Anybody but a Republican or Democrat they've created the problems we have, it's time for new ideas Clinton for vision, dedication, understanding of the populace Clinton - we need someone to counterbalance the conservative GOP Phil Gramm Best of the current running people. Would prefer Jack KempP/Colin PowellVP I would like to elect a person who would have compasion for the country,( its people) an interest in seeing that all people could live well and be educated to the best of thier abilities. someone with whom the congress and the courst would cooperate. How about Barbara Jordan! ROSS PEROT. He seems to be against big government and beaurocy.He believes in letting the public vote on All issues.I am 38 yrs old. I dont vote. Im not registered to vote. Im not interested. I could be killed in a head-on car collison while driving to the voting polls. Not in this lifetime and not for a politition. DMC-B'ham AL ''RollTide'' Rick Tompkins. He seems more honest than any of the others. Steve Forbes- I believe it's the only way to get the message thru that the average voter is totally disgusted with professional politicians and backroom deals and compromises. I believe President Clinton is doing an excellent job: he is young, understands politics and knows how to handle foreign policy. "I will vote for him again in '96." Colin Powell won't accept, so I'll just suffer under Clinton for 4 more fucking years! Bill Clinton - He's not insane. Browne.The Dems and Reps are basically the same party anymore. Too entrenched, and too beholden to every campaign contributor Alan Keyes Harry Browne because he wants to reduce the size and influence of the gov't. Harry Browne, because I believe he would take action to significantly reduce the size and scope of government, rather than just slow down its growth. Bill Bradley Bob Dole... because we cannot endure another four with Clintons I want Steve Forbes. He knows business, he is not a career politician A Republican I am really not that pleased with any candidates! None of the candidates really excite me. I was supporting Bob Dole, but some of his recent statements question his views. I currently am for Steve Forbes. I like his flat tax proposal and his ideas about using supply side economics. I also like the fact that he is not a "career polititian". Phil Gramm -- Best of the lot; Forbes next. Dole can't beat Clinton, IMHO. Anyone who believes in drastically cutting the size of the Federal Government. A radically liberal candidate, of which none are running! Harry Browne, the only candidate with a vision of Jeffersonian liberalism, aka Libertarianism ME! Alan Keyes Firm stand on moral issue as basis problems Harry Browne. Government is too powerful. Bill Clinton Harry Browne because he will truly work to reduce government Harry Brown sounds like he'd be the best but look at the odds. Alan Keyes. He has good moral views Abaent Colin Powell, Bob Dole because of his ideals and leadership abilities. Bob Dole. Republican all the way....we have got to get spending under control in this country. Democrats surely arent going to do that. Forbes - Flat Tax so far, Rick Tompkins, since he seems to actually be able to reign in government, and is not hung up on abortion like H. Browne Harry Browne; I agree w/ his ideals, & want non-Demo/non-Rep. Clinton. Look at the rest of you creeps. Phil Gramm;says most of the things I feel need to be done. Harry Browne. He is the only candidate who will actually cut government to the scope outlined by the constitution. Anyone who is not a politician. Can't hurt and will probably help a great deal. Whom ever is the best candidate Harry Browne - keep more of MY money that I EARNED and is currently used to by votes from government-slaves/sheep Anyone with a new and PRACTICAL approach! Anyone but Clinton. Rick Tompkins. Most consistent adherence to libertarian philosophy. Bob Dole, as a conservative is needed to make the tough decisions, but too many years of true conservatism have happened recently, and need to be tempered. Colin Powell Bill Clinton because the other possibilities are far worse I want a president who cares about all liberities and freedoms, such as pro-gun and a free trader. Rick Tompkins is the only candidate I can see that I could trust. H. Browne. He most closely reflects my views Harry Browne because he knows that government doesn't work! H. Browne to initiate a return to the beliefs and social responsibilities that were present throughout much of the country's history. Anyone who is a constitutional candidate I want to see him take the lead in ending party biasness by appointing both republicans and democrats to the executive branch, courts, commissions Forbes, because he'll work on the "business" problem of government. Harry Browne, he can make this a free country AGAIN! Gramm, but since he won't get the nomination, Dole will get my vote. Bill Clinton Alan Keyes for his moral convictions and strength of character. His ideas are innovative and bold. bill clinton, he is for the little people Alan Keyes Bill Clinton - at least he has 4 years experience - they are all the same. Other candidates not interesting. Phil Gramm - I believe he will balance the budget so that my children won't have to be taxed 85% of their income for paying the debt. I also believe we need more privatization and less government. I don't believe we should abolish government, but it is WAY TOO BIG! Alan Keyes - Family values Harry Browne. Anyone who will reduce taxes and make them fair. He's the most honest and seems to care about the little people. Also, I'll vote for Clinton just to piss Newt off! Harry Browne or Rick Tompkins - Libertarian PRINCIPLES! Harry Browe; we need someone intelligent in DC Daniel Patrick Monyahan he's way to smart to run Rick Tompkins, the Libertarian. He is the only candidate I know of who takes a principled stand, and doesn't change it with political winds. Gramm. I agree with him more than any other alternative. Pat Buchanan - he tells the truth Clinton - he will maintain the government programs we need. Bob Dole; he's an adult who can bring people together and get things done. A candidate who believes in a lesser, more efficient fed. gov't. Any 'true Libertarian'; I want my child to live in a free society, not socialism. Not Clinton! A Conservative with a good economic platform, and a backbone. That will minimize "big government." I'm not sure. Bob Dole is a man of character and integrity, something that the current President doesn't seem to possess. Rick Tompkins. Harry Browne, he may be the only non-corrupt politician in the world Harry Browne, He is what this country needs Forbes, because it's time to get someone in there with a business background. Someone that is also not affraid to commit to changing the IRS. Colin Powell seens to have some integrity. William Bennent - He knowledgable, and a good citizen. I like him. He seems to have a positive outlook that problems can be solved. He gives me hope about government, makes me feel good about my country, and allows me to dream about a good future. Phil Gramm, because he's the only viable conservative Alan Keyes Alan Keyes -- Strong moral position Alan Keyes because he understands our country's moral problems Harry Browne is the only person who will get the U.S. Federal government OUT OF MY LIFE! John Engler, he has proven that he will make the tough choices and will not waiver from his convictions. This is rare in a politician A libertarian; mildly prefer Browne because of the service he has done libertarian politics through his books. Harry Browne, Libertarian views are the logical choice Harry Browne, because he is on a sound platform, while the other candidates strike me as pure, 100% politicians. Anyone who will stop this idiotic "Drug War". Harry Browne- There is no difference between the rest Clinton, He has accomplish more than given credit for. Colin Powell, a fine decent man who was born a leader Phil Gramm-the true conservative Phil Gramm - and why don't you list him in the "best of seven"? He typically somes in among the top three. Alan Keyes - because he stands strongly for what I believe in. He is a strong leader and a wonderful speaker. As an embassador, he is strong in foreign relations also. He is the kind of leader America needs in the 21st century. Phil Gramm because I feel he has the experience and the vision to best lead this nation Leonard Peikoff (Associate of the late Ayn Rand) Jack Kemp Bob Dole or Ross Perot because they have common sense, Clinton does not. Anyone but Bill Clinton I'd really just like to see a female candidate- that would be REAL change Rick Tompkins - I now feel that the Democrats and the Republican parties are starting to read like stale bread. Most of the other third-parties are only single issue parties. The priciples of liberty and total freedom expressed by the Libertarian R.T. are the only way to rid the people of the gridlock in DC Anybody but Clinton. He is an idiot. Bob Dole; He has served his country in war and wounded for it. He has integrity and the ability of leadership that our country needs in this great time of transition in the World. Ross Perot--he doesn't have as many obligations to others Jack Kemp- He seems smarter than all the other candidates. Perhaps that is why he dropped out. Alan Keyes, he is the only one that's sincere. Clinton. So he can continue to undo the 80s if he gets a Democratic congress back. Pat Buchanan because he's not a globalyst Any intelligent,diplomatic,Christian,fairly conservative person Anyone with a libertarian viewpoint, Harry Brown or Steve Forbes Harry Browne- because he alone will do what the Republicans dream and talk of doing - save the country. A republican Anyone who favors legalization of marijuana Harry Browne insists that we citizens own our bodies. Alan Keyes-listen to him, it's obvious ALAN KEYES BECAUSE OF CONSEVATIVE STAND ON MORAL ISSUES. Colin Powell - he's too intelligent and honest for the job I would like to see ANY third party candidate elected, I feel that there isn't enough choice offered in the two party system and see no other way to undermine that system. Alan Keyes is the most articulate, far-seeing candidate. He also has the most solid foundation of principles. Browne because he will cut the government the most. Phil Gramm - he best represents my views on the issues, has a strong track record. Jello Biafra - he can sing better than all the above candidates Phil Gramm Harry Browne, to reverse the encroachment of government into our lives. Alan Keyes Alan Keyes; he speaks out about root causes of our problems. Rush Limbaugh Rick Tompkins - he reflects my ideals (or) he will reduce government Forbes because he seems to understand the direction the USA needs to go. Lamar Alexander, because he is the best exemplifies what I think the majority of the country believes in. Harry Browne! Because the federal government can and should be at least 10% smaller than it is now. Alan Keyes. He is the only candidate who is really speaking to the problems facing this country, as well as the solutions. Support for the two parent heterosexual based family. Harry Browne, Socialism doesn't work. Harry Browne because he is the only one that seems to really care about what the Constitution REALLY says. Pat Buchana because he tells it like it is and addresses this nations needs. He is consistant in his stances and he is not afraid to tell the truth. He has the charater and integrity needed for the office of President Anyone but Bill Clinton Harry Browne, because he will uphold the constitution. lamar alexander - return power to the STATES Bob Dole Best prepared Steve Forbes...............flat tax Steve Forbes his flat tax plan and pro-choice platform is a winner. Bill Clinton-He's a better president then everyone thinks, and he can do good things for this country as a whole. Harry Browne..Haven't even registered to vote for a number of years since the choices were so absurd! Bill Clinton or someone who is prochoice and also supports our right to bear arms. I don't think such a candidate exists at the present time. Bill Clinton appears to be the only prochoice candidate. Also, I want a candidate who DOES NOT FAVOR tax cuts for people with children, unless they are the working poor; i,e, a family of four with an income of 40K. Harry Browne; he will reduce government the most. Kemp - a true moderate; social liberal, economic conservative No spams from AOL--my address is bookter@ibm.net---I support Phil Gramm because he's the most conservative candidate who has a chance of winning David Duke is the only true Republican Harry Browne because I want government reduced. Harry Browne: he has the same principles as I. Keyes. Loads of good sense. I honestly would love to see Rush Limbaugh because he is the real voice of conservative politics in this country. Harry Browne. Because he is the only candidate that would truly cut the size and cost of government. Harry Browne-We need to live in a FREE country Clinton. He's very adequate, and is a much more rational leader than any of the other current choices for President. I feel he is the best candidate for the job, especially including his views on educational spending and AmeriCorps. Steve Forbes: because he is best suited to improving economy Harry Browne. We need a lot less government. I would like to see President Clinton re-elected for another term and for the congress o get all of those crazy republican, Gingrich brainwashed freshman outso that the people of America can really have their needs met. Harry Browne Alan Keyes - He is the only guy who has it right, Gov't can't solve the problems. Give power and money back to individuals and let the family survive. Bill Clinton, because both parties need control Harry Browne because unlike all other candidates, he has the sense to realize that what is wrong with government is its sheer size. The unprecedented tape-worm like growth of the state this century is choking our freedom and our livelihood. any one but Clinton Browne, There are no other good choices! Harry Browne Bob Dole because I feel he is a proven leader who would take America in the right direction. I would like to personally see Lamar Alex. but I feel he doesn't have enough support to actually win. Hillery Clinton because she can bullshit bill an america STEVE FORBES HONEST USES HIS MONEY ALAN KEYES, BECAUSE HE STATES THAT HE IS A BELIVER IN BIBLICAL VALUES AND MORALS. Alan Keyes, because he bases his campaign on a return to what has made our society so successful -- the uplifting of the individual with their corporate responsibilities to each other under the supremacy of Almighty God. Alan Keyes- he names it: licentiousness, relativism HOWARD STERN!!! Harry Browne: His political platform is firmly grounded and based on principle rather than politics. Harry Browne, because we need some Libertarian thoughts in government. a Libertarian (pick one) Steve Forbes because he's not sold to the religious right. Phil Gramm. He's the ONLY one who takes our liberty seriously! Rick Tompkins. Just look at his Web page! He's got it right. Bob Dole. stabilize the financial markets Phil Gramm - he sticks to his positions, not a waffler Alan Keyes-his moral agenda is what is best for the US Alan Keyes, he exactly identified the problems Colin Powell because he knows what it is like to live on a budget, but without Congress knowing it really doesn't matter who is president. ANY libertarian - no more big gov't Bob Dole, because of his experience Gramm represents my conservative beliefs in reducing government. FORBES, CHANGE THE SYSTEM! I would like to see Harry Browne as president in 1996 because he understands that government doesn't work. He has the courage to shrink the federal government back to the size our founding fathers meant for it to be. Clinton because the alternatives are so dreadful Harry Browne -- I love this country, and I'm worried. Alan Keyes: He echoes much of what I feel is wrong with America and is an excellent man. Bill Clinton -- his heart is in the right place, even though he has some personal(ity) flaws Colin Powell, He is not politically motivated Browne & Forbes are the only ones who respect the people at all. Alan Keyes is the strongest candidate for our moral downslide (including abortion) and also supports limiting government involvement clinton - he best represents the majority of the people Colin Powell. He is a very good person with great ideas and I totally agree with his views A. Specter, Bill Weld or Pete Wilson. I am looking for a moderate to liberal Republican! Harry Browne for *real* cuts in spending and government programs Harry Browne-for a society that condemns force and coercion, whether initiated by the government or private citizens Bill Clinton. I feel he has done an excellent job, and would like to see him continue to do so. Harry Browne - complete revamping of attitude toward goverment Bill Clinton because of his vision and compassion Alan Keyes--The only candidate with a moral compass None of the ones you listed, I don't like any of them! Bill Clinton has done what we can call a medium job but he has good ideas and we should let him try again Bill Clinton. I�m afraid of the new Republicans. Clinton will slow them down. Harry Browne - Time to overturn the farce that is the Status Quo Bill Clinton: His interests go beyond only helping the rich Put the country back into the hands of the people and away from goverment especially the Federal goverment. We need to return to our heritage and fundamental beliefs that made our country great: a Judo-Christian ethic, hard work, individual freedoms, schools that are more concern about basic education than putting a wedge between children and their parents, aid to only those folks who cannot work because of a real problem and not because they become nervous when they sweep a floor. Colllin Powel: The Messiah! Bill Bradley -- fresh insights Harry Browne - give us the freedom we should have Harry Browne (The Republicrats have been reaming our butts for too many years already) Clinton. I feel that the Rep. party has sold out to the religious right and is much too comfy with the big business sector. H. Brown; Need the right change of leadership. A conservative Republican who will get this country back to honorable values and self responsibility. Harry Browne He offers the best opportunity to reduce Bill Clinton - Smart and has good ideas Rick Tompkins. He will seriously cut government. It ain't happpening this century, but Harry Browne Virtually anyone with a true sense of social responsibility and an understanding of why our government needs to shrink. Phil Gramm not Clinton, Clinton-Lite, Clintonette etc. A Libertarian (HB) because the only difference between the Republicans and Democrats is how they spell their party names. Harry Browne - He has actually READ the Bill of Rights Anyone but Clinton. We need someone who's going to do something other than sitting on his ass! Libertarian Harry Browne - To End The Drug War - Legalizing Marijuana is my #1 Issue, Social Liberty is my priority, Including gay equal rights, anti-censorship, anti-gun control, Fully Informed Jury Amendment; Civil Liberties and the Bill of Rights. I would also like to see the Minimum Wage raised; in 1965, the minimum wage had double the buying power it has now - but there's no minimum wage in jail, so I'm voting for Libertarian Harry Browne in 1996! Considering the available candidates running, I would like to see Bill Clinton continue to be the President. I think that the approach he is taking is the right one. He just needs to regain the support of Congress, hopefully that will happen with a change in who is in Congress. Harry Browne. He'll defend the Constitution. colin powell because he has good ideas and experience Harry Brown; He will turn your country upright again Pat Buchannon to put America First! Alan Keyes - Because he has the right message Dick Army-I believe he is an honest politician and a trustworthy public servant I could tell you who I don't want...any of the people that are running at this time. I would hve liked to vote for Pete Wilson, but now I'm leaning towards "none of the above". Phil Gramm Browne, the only candidate who truly wants to reduce the size and scope of the federal government. alan keyes.Why?It's the breakup of the family,stupid! Rush Limbaugh SHOULD BE PRESIDENT, he doesn't have his head in his fat ass like certain fag loving, flag burning , pot smoking, lying, enviormental tree hugging, anti-gun, criminal sympithizing, draft dodging, stalin wanna be, LIBERAL COCK---SUCKING PUSSY HATING GAY LITTLE FAG BOYS that run our so called government now! phil gramm Harry Browne, change the system for real. everyone says they will reduce government only a libertarian (Harry Browne) has the guts to really slash it. Libertarian Harry Browne. Because if the National Debt isn't brought under control, we'll have an economic collapse. alan keys I like his views Bob Dole, I believe he unites and is able to get the jobs done whether it be through compromise or otherwise Bill Clinton He is doing as good as anyone else could have considering the mess he has to deal with CLINTON, I can tolerate democrats more than republicans. Harry Browne. I just read his book and I agree with the Libertarian platform whole-heartedly. Harry Browne: Because I believe in his philosophy of "government doesn't work". Action needs to be taken immediately and I believe that he would do what he says and that these immediate actions would have an immediate affect on the populace. The media would begin to take notice just as the Republicans have of his opinions. Things would begin to improve from the first day. Alan Keyes - To address moral problems with our nation Harry Browne, we need to return to the American Dream a fair and honest american Bob Dole.We do not need an extremist neither right nor left. social lib/ fiscal conserv. because if we control spending then tax can be lowered in the future. Pat Buchanan because you know where he stands on the issues Rick Tompkins because he believes in freedom; believes taxation is slavery, opposes gun control; wants to drastically cut government; refuses to compromise principles of freedom I wish that Dan Quayle was still running for president because I think he was the most sensible conservative vying for the position. I think he could have turned his campaign to change his national image into a full-force blitz all over the country that would have united the Republican party and forced Bill Clinton to fight harder than he ever had to any time before. Oh well, I'm looking at either Dole, Alexander, or Forbes now. Noam Chomsky - who else makes better sense? Harry Browne because he has best chance of reducing the size of government and can point out the danger of the reification of abstractions such as 'the economy' and 'the society'. Bob Dole because Clinton has not demonstrated an ability to carry out the duties of President of the United States effectively. Harry Browne because we need less government. Clinton - only democrat who can do it - he already learned a lot and will hopefully be able to apply it. Harry Browne - He will reduce government to the size it was when the country started (about 1/10th its present size) Harry Browne. Government keeps growing and becoming more expensive, yet it has made us no happier, healthier, richer, or safer. No other candidate is really willing to prune government. Alan Keyes because he believes and follows God. The l ibertarian candiddate or Steve Forbes, they understand that the income tax system must be replaced. Harry Browne - To get a better life for me & my kids. phil gramm Harry Browne-I believe the libertarian approach to governing is appropriate for the federal government. Alan Keyes: He is committed idealogically to conservative beliefs Forbes the abolision of all parties tomkins or brown, too much government already Patrick J. Buchanan - We need to return to a constitutional government! Phil Gramm because he seems to be most serious about question #13 of this survey, and the will to do what is needed to get Goverment under control. Alan Keyes seems to be the only candidate who realizes that the problem of the US is not financial - but spiritual and moral decline Bill Clinton Harry Browne; it's time for new blood in the white house -- somebody who will reduce the size of government across the board. powell; pro-choice Phil Gramm. He was DYNAMITE in the SC debate tonight! I want to see any candidate who can rise above party limitations. Dole--for a change Harry Browne because he is the only one serious about cutting gov't spending. Lamar Alexander, He is smart and knows how to run gov. Rush Limbaugh - he has a no-nonsense political approach. Rick Tompkins - a man of great integrity and commitment to liberty Rick Tompkins - a man of great integrity and commitment to liberty Rick Tompkins. He is unquestionably the best candidate. Mental paitents, domestic livestock, or Aliens before another term of Clinton and her husband! NO ONE RUNNING NOW-THEY'RE ALL IDIOTS OR JERKS Richard Lugar - experience, national sales tax!!!! Richard Lugar - experience, national sales tax!!!! Harry Browne, because no one else has the nerve to really cut government. COLIN POWELL COLIN POWELL COLIN POWELL--because I've never voted. I've been able to for the last 2 elections and didn't want to waste my vote. I want to be PROUD of the person I stand behind. Colin Powell is honest and decent--hard working and really cares--no lip service from him. I would be honored to be able to cast a vote for him. Colin Powel. I trust him (I worked for him). I haven't made up my mind on which Libertarian candidate is best yet. Any of them would be infinitely better than anyone put up by the Republicans or the Democrats. I am very upset about the massive encroachment of our rights and very angry over the disasterous interference by the Federal government in the free market. Dr. Keyes. He is the only candidate who clearly speaks from his heart. Phil Gramm because we need a REAL conservative President who stands by his statements and principles, and will continue the conservative changes that are needed. A libertarian. Harry Browne will do but any libertarian is fine. We need to dramatically reduce government and do it NOW! Harry Browne - or any Libertarian, to really return to a Constitutional government. Alan Keyes Powell, he is well respected Alan Keyes, because he is the best man across the spectrum of issues. George Bush, We need his integrity, experience & leadership A guy who is willing to make tough decisions on the budget, foreign policy and crime. One who is honest and whose word you can trustt Harry Browne - To reduce government and eliminate the IRS. Alan Keyes understands the essential problems we face today -- he bases his position on issues by philosophy, while other candidates' philosophy is to follow the issues... Clinton, the best of a sorry array of choices. Bob Dole best man for the job Bill Clinton. The debt has come down under his admin. Jerry Brown Clinton again -- right wing conservatism on the radio has seriously damaged any chance Clinton has had of becoming a popular/effective president. The right-rhetoric has made this administration almost impotent in its efforts and FUBAR to most (misinformed) Americans. Clinton should be given a second chance without all of the right-wing hype and paranoia mongering -- he's a good man with good intentions. Browne - True Libertarianism can save my country Harry Browne because he stands for more individual freedom and personal responsibility and less government. Bill Clinton--shame on those who follow parties at the cost of our human rights and protection!!! I have never seen such childish acting adults--all for the sake of their parties and election. A perfect example of this is when republicans built a show around bigmouth Limbaugh to make a mockery of our new president and our country!!! Many people support my views and think w we are digracing our countriy and its value--how can our children be proud if this continues??? Harry Browne Pat Buchanan is the only candidate who will preserve the U.S. Constitution and the sovereignty of the United States. Ideally: Harry Browne because we need some drastic changes Bill Clinton Phil Gramm Phil Gramm's taking on the whole damned Washinton establishment, almost single-handedly, and he's only a Senator. As president, he'll whip those statism-addicts into shape! Alan Keyes - He is the best man for the job. Rick Thompkins, because he is a true Libertarian, and only Libertarians are true Americans. (If you don't support ALL Bill of Rights, you are not supporting the highest American law) Harry Browne, just as a slap in the face to wake up the Demopublicans. Phil Gramm, the only one with the guts to say we should fire all the furloughed workers since they're non-essential. personally, i think all politicians stink. i would only vote for a few people...that being god, pee wee herman, alain jourgansen, or myself. i woul ddestroy the government, if i could. None off the current choices. Perhaps myself. We need someone to leed. Gramm- I like his stand on issues Bill Bradley -- honest, smart. hopeful Bill Clinton, to act as a check on a GOP congress Rick Tompkins, he knows what needs to be done. Paul Tsongas but since he is not in the race -- Bill Clinton. lamar alexander best ideas, executive experience Rick-he doesn't compromise his principles. Phil Gramm, who will cut government. I will most likely vote for Rick Tompkins, and I would like Anybody but the clown that's there now Harry Browne Bill Clinton - I admire the way he upholds his ideals and stands up to the rotten money-grubbing repulsive Republicans out to help only their rich friends and themselves. Forbes: right ideas, right direction, seems to be competent Harry Browne, dramatic government cuts, honest guy Harry Browne - get rid of wasteful government Powell: he's a moderate, Excellent role model for inner-city kids, unites blacks and whites bill! because he has done a fine job up to now, and he is the only canditate who thinks of the not so forrtunate in society Harry Browne Harry Browne--less government and taxes Bill Clinton -- Only if he stops bending over for the radical right-wing who inflame issues of little significance. C'mon -- wasn't it Reagan who sent the deficit skyrocketing? And since the military industrial complex gets one-half of the budget, why don't we leave welfare (who get, including food stamps, 3% of the budget) alone??? Really, people are starving and killing each other -- let's help them!!! HEY! We need a VEGETARIAN to run for President!!! Buchanan, sick and tired of the other parties candidates Clinton...he's better than any of the republicans! Christie Todd Whitman � It�s time to give a woman a chance! Harry Browne: Huge tax cuts NOW Reduce Gov't NOW Dole because he's a patriot, not a draft dodger. He,s experienced. Harry Browne: Shake things up a bit! Alan Keyes. He's a conservative Christian (prefer him over Buchanan). lugar he is the best man for the job Phil Gramm. Harry Browne, A third party needs to be involved in national politics. Steve Forbes because he understands free enterprise Gramm is the only member of the Senate who is still defending the tax cuts and fighting Dole's efforts to cut another Big Goverment deal with Clinton. A political revolution takes two elections. The last time, it was 1930 for Congress and 1932 for Senate. This time we must elect Phil Gramm in 1996 to complete the revolution started with the 1994 election. Gramm. He's the toughest budget negotiator we've got, and we need that in the White House to actually CUT spending for a change. Phil Gramm has integrity and a limited government ideology. Harry Browne; send wrecking ball through gov't. Dole. Need Republican in White House to allow the changes proposed by Congress to go through, unity. Rick Tompkins because he would substantially reduce government. Alan Keyes most closely (so far) represents my views on the nuclear family. Richard Lugar's proposal to scrap the income tax in favor of a national sales tax will promote saving, providing our economy with needed capital, while removing the penalty on earnings. He offers a serious and mature foreign policy. He is also strongly Harry Browne He is a promoter of freedom Rick Tompkins, because his main opponent keeps changing his positions on important issues. Phil Gramm,because he wants to eliminate large government Currently, Harry Browne, because Powell isn't running. Harry Browne, because I very much agree with his assessment on what ails our nation. Phil Gramm is even now holding out against the Doles and Lugars who want to compromise with Clinton to do away with taxes cuts and spending restraints. Phil Gramm. The only one who knows how to work the system without being part of the system--so the only one who can cut goverment in the real world. Harry Browne is a much more credible and honest fiscal conservative than any republican and the only supporter of the Bill of Rights in the field. harry browne abolish taxes Harry Browne- (The Republicrats have already done enough.) Phil Gramm, an honest economist, not a sleazy politician, media head, or rich boy. Harry Browne represents REAL change! He is the only candidate who stands for returning responsibility to the individual. Ross Perot. He will control Congress, not vice-versa. Colin Powell. I feel that he is able to relate to all races steve forbes more electable than Browne and probably able to do more since he would be a member of the (probable) majority party controlling the Congress Dan Quayle; He best represents the conservative and moral values I am in agreement with. Dole, he has the experience! Phil Gramm. Consistent, conservative and courageous. Anybody who'll leave me alone. Harry Browne He seems to be the only one that isn't a member of the CFR, Trilateral Commission, or the Bilderbergers Phil Gramm reflects my beliefs in liberty and morality. phil gramm Phil Gramm Harry Browne to reduce government. Frank Sinatra Harry Browne because he is good at business and close to freedom. Harry Browne. He is the only one who will cut government; not just slow the rate of increase. Phil Gramm. He is consistent, understands the common man, will return a healthy economy, will restore family values me! i'm the ultimate outsider. ross perot I want to see Gramm. He'll deregulate, replace the current mess with a flat tax, and balance the budget. Phil Gramm. He's the most honest conservative, and will REALLY cut government as president, not merely reduce the increases like Reagan did. Alan Keyes. Because he is talking about the root cause of our problems. Phil Gramm. Steven Forbes...only one with any direction or common sense Bill Clinton; he has achieved a lot more than he's gotten credit for in a very antagonistic climate. We need a candidate to return America to its roots - liberty, small government, seperation of church and state. Bill Clinton. He has represented my views well. Bill Clinton. We need the difference that Clinton makes with the Republican control congress. I am very angry and concerned about the control of the "relgious right". It is very interesting that they want government out of their lives, but on the other hand they want to control how you have sex, abortion, and whether you belong to a "christian org" or are "born again". The fear that the American people should have is that they are trying to control us and place on us their "so-called family values" which is filled with nothing but hate for anyone who is different from them. A 3rd party unknown---too much "business as usual" in DC probably Clinton, because he is fairly liberal and familiar Somebody who can a will stand up to the 'Big Boys' Harry Browne -- Because "Government doesn't work!" Alan Keyes - Raise morality, self-help and heal racial tension Bob Dole. I feel that he will be more cooperative with congress on important issues such as balancing the budget.budget Harry Browne, to illiminate all government not authorized by the Constitution dole Bob Dole, We tried "change" and that didn't work Gramm will cut big business subsidies too. Gramm. The best advocate of limited government and individual liberty. Phil Gram- a disciplined intellectual who understands the harm that the extensive federal bueracracy has inflicted on the US economy. Harry Browne would get gov Colin Powell he is an outsider If Harry Browne is as bad as Tompkins says, Tompkins. Otherwise, any principles Libertarian. Harry Browne--clear libertarian views bill clinton has done a lot for this country that no one knows about, simply because the media emphasizes only what is going wrong with his presidency i would vote for him mainly because he is opposed to cutting social programs that are important to me an Harry Browne, as the libertarian philosophy is the only ethical platform for government Harry Browne-less government Phil Gramm. Honest, conservative, tough, smart. Bill Clinton -- I have been pleased with most of his decisions Keyes so far, I'm still learning about Brown-I do not vote straight Party No one is running I would like to see as president. Ross Perot, he is a good business man, he would do wonders for this country! Clinton. He needs time to get us out of the mess the Republicans got us in to. someone who will be a true statesman and servant of truth Charles Collins -- the best hope for a return to the Constitution bill clinton the republicans are putting the social fabric at allout strain Harry Browne. A Republican congress would keep defence up, and harry browne + repubs would abolish alot of other things. He is no politician (careerwise at least). Bill Clinton to continue compassionate care for all citizens Phil Gramm--the only candidate who filibustered both the Brady Bill and the ban on so-called "assault weapons." Bob Dole Phil Gramm. The only candidate who can balance the budget, get a flat-tax passed, and protect our property rights. Alan Keyes because he has been consitantly against abortion Harry Browne because my political views are closer to those of Mr. Browne than any other promiment American public figure of whom I am aware. Steve Forbes because his running issue is a 17% flat tax rate. FAmilies making under $36k would pay no taxes. This idea would jump start the economy unlike anyone has ever seen. Harry Browne, reduce government Bob Dole, because you can't get much worse than Billy Boy Clinton Ross Perot, because he,d run the country like a business.Hire Lee Iacoca as Secretary of Finance, etc. He is rich enough that he doesn't need to worry about who he pisses off. Gramm is the only one tough enough to cut government while not being so shrill that he turns off half the members of his own party. Clinton- Economy strong and he is not an idealogue Gramm Clinton/Dole will continue big government Phil Gramm is the only candidate who can get elected and come very close to representing all my views in favor of limited government. STEVE FORBES, WE NEED A BUSINESS MAN TO RUN THE GOVERNMENT A Libertarian - Only party serious about reducing govnt. Any one who is pro choice on everything because I like to think for myself. Phil Gramm - he's the only one who is consistent about what he stands for. Alan Keyes, because all our major problems are ultimately moral. We need to take responsibility for ourselves, rather than have the government always come in to "fix things" Clinton...clean up congress, he could do a helluva job Gramm - consistency, honesty, openness Phil Gramm--our only hope of completing the Republican Revolution. Phil Gramm/You know where he stands. phil gramm Any Libertarian. Failing that, Steve Forbes. Less govt!!! agree with more of his views than others Bill Clinton as he seems to be the only candidate not running in support of the wealthy. Bill Clinton because he tends to support my views while others don't Bill Clinton, because he's done a good job so far, but the work needs more than four years to complete. Alan Keyes -- Strong moral position on issues Colin Powell, as I feel he as this time the only individual who is able to heal America's deep racial wounds and he is a bonafide leader who would lead persons from all parts of society in creating a new and better country and world. Bob Dole, since he has the most experience and the best repututation. A black woman who wants the government to keep out of my hair and help its constituency. Clinton, because he stands for what is right much more than the Republican contenders. Harry Browne. He's Libertarian. He can win. Phil Gramm - He is THE canidate that is firm in his convictions and will committ to doing what he believe is right for America. Why don't you list Phil Gramm in your "Pick 3" or "Pick 7" lists? He is clearly the only conservative candidate with a chance of winning! Rick Tompkins is the only candidate I know of who would not compromise his insistence, on principle, that government be pared back to the limited functions envisioned by the Founders. That would mean an end, at the very least, to all forms of the income t Alan Keyes-Strong moral character,integrity Phil Gramm won't cut deals with Clinton like the GOP establishment is aobut to do on the budget. Anybody other than Bill Clinton. STEVE FORBES..WE NEED TO RETURN TO THE GOLD STANDARD Alan Keyes, because he is the only genuine candidate anyone but Clinton !!!!!!!! Gramm because he is a fiscal conservative and I believe the he along with the Republican congress can balance the National budget and stop robbing our children I would like to see someone who sticks by his/her campaign promises. Someone who really believes in what he says and does not compromise his position or beliefs. Bob Dole - protest vote. Alan Keyes Howard Phillips of the U.S. Taxpayers Party - the only one who supports the same Biblical and Constitutional principles of our Founders ALAN KEYES!! HE HAS THE ANSWERS TO THE PROBLEMS WE FACE AS A NATION Alan Keyes because of his position on the moral problems w/country Phil Gramm because he's a conservative Republican Pat Buchanan Harry Browne-Local, State, and Federal governments consume about 50% of our GDP with absolutely no reguard for our Constitution. Phill Gramm - moral integrety, financial responsibility government redeuction demands Bill Clinton. He may not be our best or brightest, but unlike all of the Republican potentials, he IS NOT in the pocket of the NRA, the rich, or corporate America. He is seeking to defend the values of the working class and is fighting the Republican efforts to pay off the huge drfecits created by and for the wealthy under the Reagan/Bush years by the poor and elderly today. gramm - most electable libertarian leaning candidate Harry Browne. He's the only candidate who truly wants to eliminate a large portion of the Federal Government. Harry Browne - Personal responsibility/choice; free markets; minimal govt. Rick Tompkins (Libertarian). He will end the war on drugs and the war on all our freedoms. He is the only candidate who knows that it is necessary to convince people that they have to give up their dependence on government, and the idea that they can get something for nothing. Alan Keyes ... honest, forthright and *correct* Gramm; His view are the most reasonable. Phil Gramm - He's the only true conservative running Not Clinton, Not Dole - Clinton: the Great Waffler, Dole:Conservative only when election rolls around Phil Gramm, the smartest advocate of free markets and limited government. Gramm does what he says he's going to do--that means less government. Gramm. Conservative, consistent, courageous. Phil Gramm Supports My Beliefs Phil Gramm Phil Gramm- principled, steadfast, non-conformist, non-compromising Phil Gramm Phil Gramm. Head and shoulders above the rest in terms of limited government ideology, knowledge of issues, and courage to carry out the libertarian resurgence. GEORGE BUSH: BECAUSE I BELIEVE IN HIS VIEWS Colin Powell - We need someone who is not on the inside of the Washington political structure. Phil Gramm. He always stands firm on conservative principles and doesn't waffle or pander. Phil Gramm, the most libertarian conservative. Gramm. He's the only one who understands the economic consquences of Big Government. Harry Browne: the country was founded on libertarian principles, and our current problems reflect our distancing ourselves from these principles. Only the libertarian party has consistently emphasized these principles in formulating solutions to our current problems. Steve Forbes is the only mainstream candidate who honestly wants to reduce taxation and government and who is not tied to special interests any civil libertarian, preferably one who is fiscally responsible. Bill Clinton; all the Republicunt candidates are jokes, and Bill deserves 4 more years to finish destroying the Democratic party nobody - for a change Phil Gramm has the most consistent conservative message. Phil Gramm--the candidate most hated by the liberal media. Bob Dole!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!! Phil Gramm: read his three books. Any libertarian candidate is better than the other parties. phil gramm I would prefer to see a libertarian candidate take office, however if one is not available, I would vote for Pat Buchannan since I only disagree on the social issues and free trade Rick Topmpkins (Lib) - understands Libertarian principles Phil Gramm - He most closely represents what I believe, and sticks to his position Lamar Alexander, We need to decentralize our fed.govt. Phil Gramm: he's devoted to the rights to life, liberty and property, and he can win. Phil Gramm. Tough, capable, brilliant. Harry Browne - demonstrate the I am serious about need for major change in Government Harry Browne. Read his book. Bob Dole so congrss can agree on some direction even if it is wrong. We can sort it out in the next election if we are wrong. Gramm will protect all our constitutional rights. Ross Perot - Change Gramm. the only candidate committed to protecting private property rights. I'd like to see Phil Gramm. He's the most consistent supporter for liberty. Phil Gramm--the only candidate who has what it takes to really cut goverment. Phil Gramm. It's about time we had an honest economist like Gramm, instead of slick lawyers and media-types. Phil Gramm has the courage to stand up to the moderate Republican establishment and the liberal media. Bill Clinton-He has helped my party become powerfull. If you take the good attributes of Forbes, Buchanan, and Keyes, and remove their defects, you have Phil Gramm--the only choice. Gramm is the only candidate who supports both free markets and morality. Phil Gramm is the only one really committed to cutting government and restoring out liberty. Harry Brown or Steve Forbes--A change from the politics as usual Harry Browne, Someone who can try to make dramatic changes without concern about re-election of party. Bill Clinton, Why Newt, Bob, Armey, Kasick, Dementedici, The Freshman clsss of Congress! Harry Browne.I believe he will return this Country to the Constitution, and eliminate the corrputness in our Government, Politics, and Laws, and return to the letter of the Constitution - on which this country was founded - and return it to be the Great Object which our forefathers formed. Pat Buchanan: The number one and two issues are bringing jobs back to America and reducing the size of government. The nation needs a STRONG defense, witness the Indians and their lower war fighting abilities and what happened to them here. Barry Goldwater--He is the last American from politics. 1. Harry Browne, 2. Steve Forbes Harry Browne, because he is the only canidate that wants to reduce all of the federal government. Steve Forbes.... Harry Browne (L) - He is the only candidate who will actually cut government Harry Brown- I like your ideas Harry Browne, because he will end the "war on drugs" I would like to see Steve Forbes, because he is an outsider, if not he, then Bob Dole I'm still undecided-The Federal budget needs to be balanced. Programs will not exist in the future if efforts are not taken today. The issue is greater than balancing the budget. Trillions of dollars in debt need to be paid. We are in for a long, hard, economic future. The greatest issue facing our nation is immorality of all kinds. We have lost our solid foundation to build on. We believe that we can build on shifting moral sand, but we can't. Unless we change in our hearts, it's not a matter of regaiing our prosperity, it's a matter of how long we can forestall disaster. someone with the vision to lead, not another politican Jack Kemp Harry Browne. This country needs a radical change in the political landscape that reflects the actual American Citizen's desires and needs. Rick Tompkins, because he is the only candidate we can trust to keep his promises. Bill Clinton, he is the best of a weak field Harry Browne because he WILL reduce spending Phil Gramm - we need a REAL conservative to continue to reforms currently underway. Bob Dole is a moderate pretending to be conservative now to get elected. Rick Tompkins Gramm is the only one who has the right position on immigration--crack down on illegals while maintaining the right of harding workers to come here and WORK--but NOT to receive welfare. Gramm, consistent, intelligent, conservative Billy C. to counter Reps. Keyes: No one else is talking about the moral collapse of America someone Diogenes would have liked phil gramm Harry Browne; he is the only one who will actually reduce the size of governemnt Harry Browne for real cuts not just slower government growth! It really doesn't matter, they're all just professional politicians (read crooks) Haven't seen any "Great" choices, but Dole is OK Non of the above James Baker = he is honest Of the current political field, I think Bill Clinton is the most palpatable choice. Non of the above Rick Tompkins. He is the most honest Libertarian. Steve Forbes or Pat Buchannon; they say what they mean and mean what they say Gen Colin Powell - To run this country less politically! I only want an American that is, and HAS ALWAYS been willing to serve his country. I can't figure out how the hell we managed to elect a draft-dodging Motherfucker and put him in charge of sending our children to fight for him. We need to get that SOB out of office. ANY OFFICE!!!! Harry Browne. Because he is the best chance I see for true cuts in government unlike Dole's lip service to the topic. Rick Thompkins, he can ge the public to accept less government Phil Gramm. He will slash goverment. I'd like to see Gramm, the best conservative. Rick Thompkins, He is a principled libertarian Phil Gramm will drastically downsize the government; he's the only one who knows how and has the guts to do it. Phil Gramm would be the best because he's always fought for lower taxes and spending. BOB DOLE IS MODERATE HAS MORE POSIBILITIES I DO NOT WANT TO LOOSE MY VOTE. Bill Clinton-to this non-American he seems a fair minded example of what the USA ideally stands for. Gramm always does what he says--and that will be to relimit government. Phil Gramm: committed to balancing the budget by cutting spending; committed to deregulation. Phil Gramm because he is a consistent conservative who keeps his word. Gramm: anti-tax, anti-spend, pro-freedom. Harder crime laws/punishment, cut welfare, immigration restrictions. A Powell-type moderate NOT from the Military ranks Phil Gramm is the only one both libertarian and moral. Phil Gramm, defender of liberty. Dole. We need conservatives and only he can win (with Powell phil gramm Phil Gramm--the only advocate of limited government who can win in 1996. Robert Dole or Lugar Phil Gramm is a great American. Bill Clinton because he's trying to do something for America Alan Keyes addresses lack of morality in country Harry Browne-The only candidate, other than Gramm, who understands that big government is the problem. The other candidates feel government can be reformed to become more benign, or even helpful. And Clinton, of course, has never seen a problem that can't be cured by bigger government. Dole, I think he has good Idea's like Newt.... He's the only candidate who has the will to actually abolish or cut back government programs, government intrusion and taxes, especially the income tax (he would abolish it); and balance the budget. He's the only one who really understands what the problems are, what's causing them (the government is), and what it's going to take to solve them. He is not afraid to stand up and say "Government doesn't work." phil gramm Somebody besides who's going to win--the main problem in politics is and has always been that the Rich make the government, then the laws, then more money, etc. Nothing against the wealthy, but everything against those who use it to further their own ends at the expense of others. Politics is corrupt because it was intended to be. I'd like to see someone elected from outside the current Old Boys system who doesn't happen to have the nasty side effect of being a fascist. I'd like to see a female presidet and predominantly female supreme court (I'm a male)--we need a new, more humane perspective--a quality that sadly many males, especially those long in power seem to be lacking. Jack Kemp Phil Gramm. I believe he is the only one for smaller government. "The Hemp Lady" --- I forget her name. Phil Gramm is conservative on all the issues. Harry Browne, He is the candidate with political views closest to my own. The Libertarian Party should run a candidate who is marketed as a "mainstream" candidate if only to circumvent the ridiculous system that exists; once elected, then implement monumental change Alan Keyes - he is one of the few who truly believes what he says. Phil Gramm needs the power of the presidency to balance the budget, cut taxes, and cut spending. Phil Gramm because he is the only candidate who is serious about balancing t Phil Gramm Phil Gramm: wise, principled, tough conservative leadership. Bill Clinton - the best man for the job Harry Browne to make the USA free again and all that it implies. Even now Phil Gramm stumps for a balanced budget while Dole waffles and puts the Revolution on hold. Harry Browne - best articulates the argument for reduced taxes, lower spending, and less government intrusion Forbes, because he will cut loose the american economy Phil Gramm. He's the most principled conservative. Jesse Jackson...his views are real and although I am not black I believe he can make change. phil gramm Rick Tompkins or Harry Browne, to cut government Gramm. He's smart enough and determined enough to keep his promise to do his best to reduce the size of government by a third. Harry Browne is a trustworthy man who WILL reduce government. A liberal Democrat willing to stand up for his beliefs Phil Gramm - the candidate closest to my views who appears to be electable Harry Browne - stands up for what he believes is right - not just politically expedient Alan Keys because morality is the central issue and the cause for discontent and instability in the US Phil Gramm is an outstanding leader and principled conservative. Phil Gramm. he got the Reagan spending restraints through Congress, and slowed spending to the slowest rate with Gramm-Rudman. I like Phil Gramm. He knows the difference between the family and the government, unlike all the liberals and the preachy Republicans who all want to be our families. President Gramm will never send U.S. troops to die as useless "peacekeeper," or to engage in "national building," or serve under UN command. Phil Gramm is the only Republican who appeals to the working stiff. He started out poor, not like Buchanan the elite media guy with a masters degree in journalism or Keyes the preacher. Joe six pack has nothing in common with those two, only Gramm. phil gramm Gramm saved real welfare reform in the Senate. Gramm is so serious about scaling back government that he was willing to end the Reagan rearmament in order to get Congress to exercise some restraint of federal social spending. Count that social spending as dead meat if we elect Gramm. Colin Powell - an honest man, approve of many of his stands on issues Phil Gramm. phil gramm Questions, comments, suggestions? Contact us. Return to theHome Page. Copyright ©1996, /InterCommerceCorporation, All rights reserved worldwide Send comments to Webmaster@Survey.net WT02-B22-31IA060-000333-B019-152http://www.survey.net:80/letters.htm 204.107.221.240 19970115053442 text/html 18825HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 15 Jan 1997 05:28:27 GMTServer: Apache-SSL-US/1.0.3+1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 18642Last-modified: Mon, 25 Nov 1996 20:26:44 GMT Survey.Net / Letters Your source for information, opinions & demographics from the NetCommunity! Here is a sampling of some of the feedback we've received on various surveys... This area will be regularly updated so check in often and find out more about what people think of the surveys and results. By the way, if you do or do not want me to list your name or e-mail address if I reprint a letter, please say so. Comments from the Editor: I want to apologize for not updating the site as promptly as it has been in thepast - this is strictly due to the fact that my life has been incredibly hectic as oflate. Aside from this, be assured that I've carefully considered every e-mail I'vereceived, and yes, I'm still aware that my spelling sucks. - Ed. Miscellaneous Comments: I'm a ninth grader and my history class is doing a project on the 1996 Presidential Election. My topic to research is polling questions. I need to know how people who write polls come up with the the polling questions that are asked. Thanks for the help! wsnyder@trex.idbsu.edu - I can't comment on how anyone else comes up with questions, but Itry to create objective and non-pointed questions, giving respondents the opportunityto select a diverse group of answers - enough so that almost every viewpointis covered. It's difficult given the diversity of people; no matter whatyou come up with, chances are there's always some group of people who claimthey're being discriminated against. - Ed. I noticed in the Survey that you(plural) had too many 'polar' choices,and not enough in between 'gray area' choices. The Political Survey #3 was extremely hard to answer, because in orderto pick almost any of the given choices I would have to comromise mybeliefs. I don't know how you can improve on this though without addingmore choices. Robert Evans When are you going to have new surveys? You've had the same ones for months and it shows... the O.J. Simpson Poll? No one cares. John Brown - I agree. I've been long overdue in adding new surveys; this has notbeen the result of laziness -- just limited time. My latest project, an Online classified database system (ofwhich I'm currently running a regional prototype) hasbeen ongoing and I regret not spending more time on Survey.Net. In the future,much more time and attention will be spent on this system, including lots ofnew features including tables, charts and graphs of statistics, and of courselots of new surveys. - Ed. I just finished taking/reading all of the surveys. I think this is a good idea whose time has come. Keep up the good work. johnson@iavbbs.com ;Survey Suggetsion: The Interent and healthDo people use the internet to find information out about their health ? and if so, what information do they look for ? How do they use the information they find ?, where do they get it from ? and why ?ie. Is it very personal and they don't want a face to face meeting with their physician. Or do they feel that the issue is too trival to bother their physician. How many people consult their physician via the Internet ? Your site is the coolest and most fun place I've seen here on the 'net. Well yes, my opinion is a bit biased because I'm a survey freak anyway,but I had such a good time taking all of your surveys!! veronica kish Dear Sir/Madame,I am doing my MA dissertation on the media coverage of the OJ Simpson case. Iwould like you to email me any information you have on the international mediacoverage of the case. Particularly, I would like to know in which countries theevent was transmitted by television.Thank you for your attention, please write back as soon as possible. My email address is khoury@coventry.ac.uk khoury@coventry.ac.uk It's cool to see everyone's beleifs but it's also kind of scary.But, that's not your problem. Just wanted to say Hi. Have a nice day. :) nthony Steiner Political Survey and other rantings sorry but this letter is basically just a bitchfest about the type ofresponses that we read. we were shocked at some of the obnoxiousresponses made by the predominantly white pro-life conservativeright-wing religous older financially secure male zealots. many of thesepeople were probably the same ones that voted for reagonomics.and we allknow where that led to, the biggest national debt in the shortest timeperiod. aren't we still paying for that 2-term debacle? they complainabout scandals but what about iran-contra and "i don't remember or i donot recall".does america need another senile president leading us intothe 21st century? on that note,people bitch about clinton's lack offoreign policy skills, but i don't recall clinton puking on any foreigndignitaries lately. people seem to believe that the country can only berun by upper-class white christian men with antiquated ideals. wake upand smell the cappuccino!!!it's a new age and we demand equalrepresentation. wtorres@bucknell.edu Um, Libertarians are socially liberal? Where does that come from? Libertarians are a conservatives conservative. Less government. Period. Doesn't get much more conservative than that. sravet@bangate.compaq.com It seems to me that the results of this survey suggest that your virtualballot box has been stuffed by some busy-fingered Libertarians........ walden@radix.net The recent poll that I took was a joke. Keep your propaganda off the net. It was suppose to be a poll not a Harry Brown campaign ad. Here's some advice. Don't disgrace your candidate or your party with stunts like this. If you have anything that you want to say in defense of your poll please send me your arguments. James A. Jones Jr - I keep wondering why people automatically assume I'm Libertarian. I'mnot. If you all must know, I'm officially registered as an "Independent". As I'vesaid in the past, the Libertarians seems to be more active and organized online,thus they appear more prominent. - Ed. how do you explain that a man with the clinton record could even be considered as a serious candidate.And how about his health problem...do we want algore as president?how can the American people be dumb enough to reelect a coward who is corrupt morally and in every way worth considering? do we want a man of this caliber leading us? He hides continually behind his fortress in DC and we should be so ashamed that we cringe when he is ever on the boob tube. JAMES B. CARSON, III Dear Sir or Madam:Could you please update your presidential election survey to include candidates who have entered the race?I am especially asking that you include Howard Phillips of the United States Taxpayers' Party in the listing. Phillips was nominated by the United States Taxpayers' Party on August 18, 1996 at their national convention. Adam Valle In your survey.net political poll, you have inadvertantly omitted HowardPhillips, the nominee of the U.S. Taxpayers Party (which is on the ballot inover 40 states and is growing rapidly).The web site is at http://USTaxpayers.org.Please make the correction on your poll options so it can represent the fullspread of available candidates nationwide. Greg Moeller Please add Howard Phillips of USTP (www.ustaxpayers.org) to your poll asa candidate. He will be on 42-45 state ballots this year, many morethan Raplh Nader. USTP is one of 6 national parties recognized by theFEC. I think fairness demands he be listed. Mitch & Cheryl Turner - Howard Phillips and the USTP are now on the ballot - Ed. About the only thing that I've seen from any poll on the net is that amajority of people use the net are white, rich, and libertarian... Eventhough you claim no scientific accuracy, I would go as far as saying thatthis type of poll is absolutly worthless as an indication of any sort ofwider voter trend, as the demographics of people likely to use the netare too limited to make anything more than a pitifully small and non-representative sample. Brent McKibbin - I would argue with you on some of your points. I agree that the Internet'sdemographics are different from the mainstream (then again, anyone who claims toknow exactly what defines "mainstream" is probably not on the mark either), but I sincerely believe that thetrends and attitudes exhibited online are a preview of the overall trends of oursociety - after all, tens of thousands of new people come online each month; the reachof the Internet is invading almost all political, cultural and economic areas of society. What we're seeing now online may be a preview of the overall future outlookof the majority. - Ed. If Harry Browne is not invited to the Presidential Debates, then I can onlyconclude that we ALL our Slaves of the Liberal Media and of the advocatesof the New World Order; Heaven Help Us. Browne has met all the criteriaof the PDC. Peter L. Sroufe Please ask how many people believe that Harry Browne and otheralternative candidates belong in the debates. I think most people willsay yes. Then give the results to the Commission on PresidentialDebates. Maybe there is a way to e-mail the commission directly. Theirstreet address is 601 13th St. N.W. Suite 310, Washington, DC 20005. Alice Lillie Who in hell is Harry Brown? Murray S. Haber My Spelling? Surely you jest! Under the Whitewater question, you've spelled "proportion" wrong. Ken Your surveys look very interesting. Would you like some helpproofreading them? PROZAC.You spelled it Prozak. It is a trademark, and it is spelled with a 'c'. Kevin Newman - I was going to correct this error, but right now I'm too depressed. - Ed. In "What qualities are important in a President?" "laywer" should be"lawyer." Terry Webb Please correct spelling of lawyers to this: Barry Scheck Johnnie Cochran Alan Dershowitz Waterlilys@aol.com - Note that I require a $1000 retainer and $300/hour to correct the misspellings of lawyers' names. - Ed. Comedy Survey Ya gotta catch Chris Parnell in the Sunday Company at The Groundlings in L.A. He's also in the upcoming Arnold Schwarzmovie "Jingle All The Way", which starts in November. He wason one of the latter episodes of Hope & Gloria (The one wherethey were caught in the cablecar on the side of a mountain).Watch him! He's gonna do it! Jack Parnell I like MAD TV's "My White Mama" its so funny, they way they guy gets so mad, and then is real happy, and then mad agian. I just thot i should say that. Graham Clark I am not sure if you can help me or not but I was told thatChris Tucker, the actor and comedian died a couple of weeks ago.Just in case you are not familiar with him, he was in the moviesFriday and Dead Presidents. I really loved his work and I wouldlike to know for sure if has died or not. If there is any infoon the WEB could you let me know also. Thanks alot. Av Ron Trabue You think you get weird mail? Tom, blond, 26, Germany.WANTED:GIRL, 20-35, blond, schlank, sch�ne H�nde, mit elegantemStil BYE! e-mail convenienently unavailable subject: irs and its extreme inefficiencyi followed the following steps to receive my refund:1.)up to this time i spent 46 hours of time and $200 of my money for calling irs, regarding my refund2.)i suppose to get refund of ~$4500 on ~02-20-96i received only ~$1200 due to some error in 1989 taxes in californiato find what was happening it took until ~03-20-96 and pursue further by my insistance irs arranged a �problem resolution case worker�she found it is a computer error,not your error3.) case worker told me on ~04-20-96 my check for ~$3600 in mail.i called case worker after 3 weks,she told that it was mailed to my california address(even though i had given my present address in typing)4.)austin case worker on ~05-10-96 ask me to call irs fresno california to re-issue this check to my present address in texas 5.)i called on ~04-10-96 to california .they told me i have to fill out a �tracer�(form 3911) form and i received it after 2 weeks6.)i mail �tracer� form on ~06-10-96 to fresno.irs told me it will to trace the check 6 months to 1 year and longer7.)i called irs fresno on 9-10-96 to find out my tracer form.they are invesrigating whether the check cashed or notirs told me it takes one to three months to find outi asked what is after that?if check is not cashed(at least 3 months) ,irs will send a form to me(2 weeks) and it take another month (one month)to re-issue a check after completed form received from me (two weeks)if i am lucky i wii receive check in five months from to-day(9-27-96)that is some time in march 19978.)at this stage i am confused and helpless , said to myself be patient and wait a year or year and half until irs re-issue check.as you know, irs never even reply to me,even if they reply it does not make any sense 9.)the way it looks to me irs calender runs to solve problems in increments of one(1) month,three(3) months,six(6) months,one(1) year and longer thanone(1) yearby talking to irs about 46 hours,i came to the conclusion, people in irs are inefficient,ignorant,under-educated,lazy,tardy,easy going,fish-brain,non-trainable group of people! what a pity it is !i hope you work on a legislation to make irs changed to better managed efficient organization DEVANA RAO - By the way, the above letter was originally in all caps - I at least spared you all the enjoyment of seeing it in its original form. - Ed. I would like to contact some Hermaphrodite people.You think is possible?Can you help me? Thank you very much Antonio Drug Survey Marijuana never killed anyone, unlike more dangerous drugs, like alcohol and tobacco!!! carla@eic.arauc.br I feel that your survey is tilted to the drig user. As a former law enforcementofficer I DO NOT condone drug use including Illegal drugs or legal drugs taken illegally. Norm Dudek - Just to set the record straight, Survey.Net also does NOTcondone drig usage (or drugs for that matter). Return to theHome Page. Copyright ©1996, /InterCommerceCorporation, All rights reserved worldwide Send comments to Webmaster@Survey.net WT02-B22-32IA060-000333-B026-219http://www.survey.net:80/sex1c9.html 204.107.221.240 19970115060257 text/html 78272HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 15 Jan 1997 05:56:37 GMTServer: Apache-SSL-US/1.0.3+1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 78089Last-modified: Mon, 25 Nov 1996 20:26:47 GMT SURVEY-NET - SEX Survey User Responses (ARCHIVE X) Your source for information, opinions & demographics from the NetCommunity! ANNOUNCING: The Internet's finest interactive, totally-automated,immediate survey system. We can take any form and instantly create adynamic demographic database and show you the results as soon as youcomplete the survey! User comments [ARCHIVE X] What do YOU think about Sex & the Internet? Oh Baby, I like it, It feels so good...mmmm more, more aah!!! MORE FOOT FETISH STUFF! True there shouldn't be child porno. That should be erased, But as for all other things it should be left open. If PARENTS don't want their children to access the internet they should buy a "Nanny Patrol Device!" like tony the tiger they're gggrrrreeeeeaaaatttttttttt! Sex on the Internet is allowable if some form of regulation is made available. Like all industries people have a right to make a living. The problem is that pornography can be degrading and demeaning in content. Built in blocking devices should be built into the system and it would be up to the consumer to remove them if they so choose to do so. Bestiality, child pornography, and torture should not be allowed and violators should be prosecuted to the fullest extent. I feel that the Internet needs to be appreciated for the good it can do and currently does. Like all things in life there are positive and negative aspects to the Internet, but avoiding the negative (or what you consider to be negative, offensive, etc..) is not difficult. You have options with your, you have or where you go on the Internet, you even have the option NOT go on the Internet al all. It is not difficult to avoid the things, subjects, pictures, etc... that offend you. People who complain themost are the ones who do not want to admit that they found what they were looking for. I have tried to find some porno on here several times and can't I think the net is open and anyone should be blame for Sex. I think you should put more pictures of males on the internet LONG LIVE!!! let it rip I came across hard-core porn for the first time on the Net. It's stinks. Beastiality, Bondage, oral sex etc. so easy to get pictures of these. The age check is just an eye-wash! My experience in the short time I have been on the Net is that sex is big business on the net with many people including myself willing to pay for pornographic material and dating services The Internet is just another medium through which sexual material and thought can pass. Acting in a sexual manner with others is easy because of the anonyminity, and lack of responsibility for actions. Very degrading, only particiated in survey in hopes of getting it OFF net! im no writer but , it is there and should be there. if some of these so called parents of children would get off there butts and know what there kids are doing we would not have this problem... IT ROCKS Sex is good. Internet is good. Sex and Internet is equally good. it is an educative media for do best sex The Net is a convenient and safe place to meet and converse with people of like and differing mindsets. Let it be. I think that I can view sexual materials at home and I do not bother anyone else no response The Internet is a great place to learn about and experience our sexuality. Let us not allow the prudes to rob us of that. it's great because it's mostly free I think that freedom of speech and free expression is a valid part of life, but it must be done responsibly too. I think that parents and guardians have the responsibility to their charges to monitor children's Internet use, not just in the case of sexual material. This is the same way I feel about parents and what their children should watch in the way of movies, cable tv, commercial tv and magazines. Not everything is appropriate for everyone, but it shouldn't be taken away from everyone because a ew don't want to see it. Sex on the net is overall pretty cool and is harmless It is great for ideas for use in my personal life. I think it's very interesting. I am in the process of looking for information for a class and I ran across this. I am hoping to find some survey that I can use for my computer class about sex, Sex on the Net is cool. Many people find it nice because you dont have to go through the normal routines. Bi and gay sex is great here. i greatly enjoy sex, real sex, not seeing images on my screen. Interesting and enjoyable. Not harmfull. It makes masturbation so much fun! I think that Son on the 'net is acceptible and should be free to all who wish it Gives individuals the chance to "experiment" with alternative sexual ideas without having to leave home to seek them out. morality is a tough issue, however, the internet is public. I wouldn't want to see Play Boy on a bilboard for my kids...much less some of the stuff on the net today. I think that depending on how it is treated, internet sex is harmless. My girlfriend and I share erotic E-mail, and I feel it is healthy for our relationship, but as far as hardcore material floating around such as child pornography should be banned, and I support every effort to do so. Like I said earlier though. If you do not like what is seen, don't view it and go on to something else. What groups actually have the right to tell others what is right, and what is wrong? The net has amplified the game of sex just like all other human games. People can be what they say they are, rather than what they really are. I find this to be a drawback to the net, not just in a sexual context. And my experience on the net shows that we, as a society, are -way- too obsessed with sex. Seems like a harmless diversion. impersonal Its perfectly fine generally. Everyone to his own. There should be a means at the terminal level to cut off home use for access to children and those whom may feel offended. It encourages release of sexual energy without hurting anyone and can be turned on or off at will. You really do have to look for it ! The "net" Has answered a number of questions I have had about areas of sex where I had no experience. I feel adults should have access to all information about sex!!! I do not understand why a man who loves a woman can't find everything he needs in her. No Comment!!!!!! It goes hand in hand I guess. People talk about and think about sex everyday so sex is naturally on the net...no problem! I love it! The Internet has opened a channel for the democratization, univeralization of sexual ideation. It's easier and less dangerous than bars, xxx stores. It's a freeing experience. I think there should be more sex on the Net, and more chatsites devoted to it. magic It rocks my world. Where else can you have cyber sex with a miniature horse mare? Information I could not get anywhere else is available. I think it's a disgusting display of something that should be kept private, if anything at all. I personally feel that it should not be regulated,The net is an enviroment wher eall materials are open for access,If matierials are to be regulated then they should be regulated by parents and guardians not the government or any other outside groupe. it's not bad just need more access to the male nude photos, there seems to be plenty of women nude photos and just not enough of the men. Good Good potential-would like a free chat room-is there one? I think sex on internet is fine, pictures can't hurt anyone. I like it. Sex on the internet isn't going to make the world end, but there shhould be some regulation for children. (net nanny) sex on the internet is a new form of sex that if taken in the right way can be an outlet at times with no bad results Since I have a sexual-themed web site (http://www.c2.net/~valadan) I admire the way that the 'net allows people to discover others like them. I also support (and use) the voluntary rating schemes, though. I've never given it much thought beyond the occasional scan around during boring times at work The anonymity of the net encourages folks to 'come out'. It is a wondersully open media for harmless sexual interests Great, fun, instructive I LIKE SEX IN MY TEEVEE It makes me wet. I like the comment above mine. ^^^ He is intellectually stimulating and turns me on. I agree. Who is that hot chick on the bottom of the form? I couldnt resist it, now im all messy. :-( I don't think that it is all that bad. You can find stuff if you look and everything but i fyou don't wanna look or see than you don't have to I think it is healthy and informative Hard to answer some of your questions, as my first experience was with a male dog (: Censorship of the net is not the say to go. Parents should start the censoring (if any) at home... they, not an 'all-mighty' organization should say what's on computer screens. I think its a boon to the airlines.. all those net based relationships :) I think it has opened many peoples minds to sexual activitys Call me a stick in the mud, but I don't think anything beats a good person to person sexual encounter with your spouse... I t is how God designed it and there is a purpose for it... man has deminished it through self gratification. If you are interested, where do you find it. I'm not looking for images just info & chat lines (not for dating purposes) just to talk openly with someone else about sexual issues. Heaps better than talking to a psychiatrist i like it I am engaged to a gentleman I met online. We participated in some net "friskiness", once we get married and I lose my virginity, I'll be able to check off another box above! It fucing rules I think its good, but you might add some beastiality related categories/questions/response answer options to this survey Free speech must not be compromised, not even to keep some people innocent for a few more years. Also, remember this: Net sex is safe sex. I'm new to the net,so Ihave not formed any opinions on this subject,however I'm generally not in favour of sexual regulation .Violence should be banned,not natural healthy consentual acts Enjoyable, a nice diversion from daily drudgery, some good ideas. It has turned my 25 year marrriage into a wedding night every time my husband and I get it on. Will keep on exploring the net for sex. My wife and I are both Cu-SeeMe players My sex life has benefited greatly from things I have learned on the net. Sex must protect in internet for adult only not for children Sex on the internet is safe, harmless, and better than nothing...what is the sound of one hand typing??? I believe that the internet in general is a gigantic encyclopedia and Sex is part of life (in any form) which should not be excluded from this gigantic information source. All the girls on the Internet are getting 1-900 numbers If you don't aprove, there are thousands of other sites. Personally I think it's one of the important values of the net as long as the sleeze aspects are kept to a minimum, regulated by the demand. We are talking freedom of speech!--Complete openess is necessary. Parents must monitor their childrens' access THe hard core perversions are not a necessary part of life, they need not be included on the web. We do not need to feed these desires in this fashion. I dont like the cencorship damaging and addictive I think that people are going to find the hard core stuff if they want it. But as for mild stuff, it can be a fun turn on for couples, and a way to expand your sexual knowledge. A very "Safe Sex" release when you're horny! Sex on the internet is good thing. In Amsterdam far example, children are able to get hardcore sex on street. If there is a good elevation of children no prohibition is needed. So sex isn't a problem of the providers than of parents. Last but not least fuck the Pope and all the crazy christians... I feel it should be up to the person that is on the Internet to monitor there own activity and use their own judgement if they are over 18. Sex must be on Internet because it has a very important role in the life of everyone Kids and sexual content: Same problem as with drugs. If there were enough sex-education this would not be a concern. it is great love it I think that since the internet is a world-wide net all the countries should have a say, for instance if Denmark wants child pornography or Sweden wants open prostitution they should have it but for the whole world and not just themselves because the Internet is about bringing people together, right? it ok Love It!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!! I have participated in C-sex on occasion, I enjoyed it, and will do it again if I get a chance It's amazing how easy it is to find soft porn (nudity, etc.), even by the electric library. Thanks to the internet I would have never known about other infantilist as myself or support groups like DPF. I think You should let enjoy them selves on the net and if they want to look at or be part of anything of a sex nature then let them. Internet is coolest thing in this century!!!!!! enjoy pictures of beautiful women on the net. saves money on playboy and my wife has only caught me once! I love it Take me now I WANT MORE!!!!!! I want more erotic stories, kinky ones, too. The pictures DON'T interest me. I'm just getting started looking It�s something that should be there. You�ve got to have a choise Ithink the net can be used to help educate children in sex education matters, but it must be monitered by parents. there for those who want it I don't know I think that a lot of people is so obsessed with sex that they want to find it everywhere, they should relax, take a breack and find that life has so many other incredible things to offer other than sex. SOCIETY WOULD BE BETTER OFF WITHOUT IT It really dosen't do much for me, but I look anyway. is good, sex may be in anywere :) The internet should not be regulated. It's a forum for the world, and if people want to use it for sex, they should be able to. It's up to parents to keep kids off if they want to. As long as it is not hurting anyone GO FOR IT!!!!!!!!!!! I think it's invaluable for adults to be able to express themselves about sex on the Net. I think that people have the right to put whatever they want on the net, but make it harder for minors to access it. i think it is more about information that porn It has its uses. I look for specific things i am interested in. Like finding a survey like this, for example. With the right attitude/precautions it looks like a great experience! We just love sex ... don't restrict it in any way to anyone Fun, exciting anf safer than RT sex I actually did stumble on internet sexual material by accident--really I did! What people do in the privacy of their homes is their business and I feel government has absolutely no business interfering. If I had children I'd keep them away from it as I would erotic movies, etc. Extremely interesting to see how it's dealt with in cyberspace. I find the legality of issues in cyberspace interesting--case law stemming from it, etc. its a benign outlet My only concern is that children shouldn't have easy access to it. There's a thing called 'freedom' here in America and only parents have the right to decide what their children should see, not the government. I am tiny married on a muck, We do more than just make tinylove freedom of expression It is fine with me. I don't really care for it, but if some people get enjoyment out of it,Great for them. I do think that the parents of young children should have the ability to censor pornography. The sex should not be censored of any way!!! I have to check I think that there's nothing wrong. The human race is evolving. Times are changing, and so shall the people. It is over-rated. But has potential to be a problem with using the Internet as an elementary classroom resource. Free speech , and choice of what you want to see or do on the Internet should be left up to each person. Censership should be left Webmasters/Site providers and the site users . Most sites want comments good or bad to help improve their services. If you don't like it don't watch it !! Hey, why not? It's okay, there should be more community though - less impersonal I think that too much is made of sex on the 'net. I am 16 and I have not seen anything that I did not want to see. I found this survey while looking for sex links. If I want to see it, let me see it. Pornography hurts no-one if it is open and above-board. parents should take the reponsibility to control Fun, harmless. Kids have to be monitored in every other aspect of life, what makes this different? Although I am sure that there are plenty of opportunities to access sexual materials on the internet, I believe that too much attention is being paid to this issue. There are many things far more important and interesting on the internet to dwell on just sexual materials availability. wish there was more of it, for free! I love the openness of sex on the internet...It gives me new ideas of things I can do...My girlfriend and I are always looking for something new to try... If that's what you're looking for, I guess you can find it. I have never looked, and have not bumped into any at all. I personaly prefer making it off-line. ;) COOL no opinion love and freedom it's like a comic book Except for the hard core stuff, I think it is informative to questions I wonder about. I is cool ! i am only lately starting to discover it I finally found a place that is adult--for adults. I enjoy being who I am and doing what I please on the net. I pay for it, so who has the right to censor any of it. I love sex!! The more of it the better, and the more explicit the better too. More cum shots, please. And where do you go to find personal ads and places where you can "chat" openly about sex? Someone please e-mail me on this. dcaseyent@juno.com Thanks. Ok. I wish I could find my Fetish a little faster. Sex and the internet, well im for deregulation on everything-let the private sectors handle it-free speech, if it wasnt the material would still exist(illegaly) but at high costs. So let it happen and the liquidity(money)-economy) will be higher. I find it to be entertaining as sex should be. A cool outler for people to share views and ideas I think that people should see what they want to. If parents or other adults don't think that children shouldn't be exposed then they should watch the children closer. More "patrol" systems should be offered for people with children around. it�s a choice. I love it. What I really like is tickling feet. But the sex is cool too. I think that there never will be a sure fire way to ban sex from the net because you will always have individuals that will do it anyways, just like all other laws. It will probably make some people want to post sex-related materials even more. Sexual madness has destroyed this once proud country. We are now no better than Sodom or Gommorah, and I suspect that God's judgement shall soon rain down on us all. I LIKE IT ,I LIKE IT ALOT The net has been a source of entertainment, and sex is only one part. I think it's better than buying magizines and its alot harder to hide under the covers. could be nice, but real one is better ok by me Too Commercial To each his own! very interesting for adults, cheaper than renting porn movies I think you can find some very interesting information on the net I love it. It's great. Iget to see all kinds of people having sex and get to meet other people interested in the same kind of stuff. In an age when sex is actually a tense subject and a sexual revolution is on the uprise, I think that the net needs some kind of regulation as to what kind of things are accessable. However, it does provide a good opportunity for those - older people - simply looking for something to satisfy either curiousity's or desire of the moment. It's cool. Have downloaded Kama Sutra for my girlfriend (she needs some pointers on blowjobs). Now if I could only corupt her some more... what harm can it do, to mature adults,enough sensoship the internet is the next big scape goat parents and politians can point at as the "root cause" of our problems. This with be easier than accepting their own failures and responsibilities I think if you want to find it it's not too difficult, but it's not at every corner!!!! okay The Internet is a like a phone, The Government does not censor the phone lines nor should they censor the internet. If a Parent or Leagal Guardian does not want his or her child viewing sexually oriented material, then there are numerous applications that restrict viewing that are free to all. not enought straight sex/couples areas or pics I think it can be fun.. But you need to also be careful I don't think anybody should be able to limit what I look at or do on the internet. This whole idea of regulating sex on the net is stupid. If parents don't want their kids to look and pornographic material on the internet, then they should monitor what their children do. Also, if kids really want to find sexually explicit material...they will. I think it's a great education for anyone but as long as they are responsible for what they are doing. it is not easy tofins erotic email correspondence It's cool!!!!!!!!!!!! Keep the right to free speech It is like everything else, if you want to find it you can, if you don't want to find it, you won't. Just like TV, if you don't like it, turn it off. great I think that if you don't like sez on the internet, don't look at it. No one is forcing you to look at it. Let people decide for themselves what they want to see and to read. i can easily view nude pictures on line and i find that it's great to have such an easy access. it has opened me to new experiences an i have learned about thungs that i have been curious about I have not found much for myself. I am a female and do not see much for females. The sex on the internet is more for males and gay people. I do not care for that. I want more for myself. Also, more shopping at sex stores. Show items that can be bought. I am interested in seeing what is available. Thanks. Try a harder to please females. Its there - so what! Otherwise, let's close drug stores because they sell condoms and suggestive magazines or shut down airports and train stations for the same reasons. Or Let's shut down the White House because Billy Clinton plays around with other women. I feel it is great my girlfiend and i "surf" regularly in the privacy of our own home. She and I really enjoy some of the stuff however, some pages you do have to suscribe to before they get really deviant No one should be able to restrict someone elses access to pornography based on their own values or morals. Everyone should be allowed to make their own choices. i like it I think adults (18 & over) should have access to sexual content on the internet. Parents, guardians, & internet service providers should set boundries. Sex at Internet is very surprising I still haven't found any open areas. This is the Red Scare of the 90s. The Internet is like cable TV: entertainment. If I want to watch Real Sex IV, I should be allowed to. If I want to go to a site with naked men, I should be allowed to. That simple. It is great vent for sexual fustration! I wish it had less 1-900 advertisements! I wish there was ssex chat box! I think that Sex on the Internet is hidden well enough that you have to search for it to actually find what you want. I enjoy reading erotic articles and so does my partner it`s open as it should be its great I Love It!!! Bait and switch, much promised, little provided, spam, spam, spam. Make Money Fast for the sexually frustrated. its cool and safe sex is wonderful and great! someone who is offended by sex needs to get counselling or just GROW UP! it is parents responsibility for minors. NO MORE LAWS!!!! I think its a safe way to endeavor into things people normally wouldnt its great education, by choice goes on my way I feel that a person has the right to read and view what they want to. The government is not in the business of policing public morals. I like it different all the times, should not be boring It helps you learn things that you do not want to talk to others about. It covers the basics of the arguments about sex on the net. I believe this survey is thought oriented and not some desprate plea for peversion. It is a very entertaining, erotic outlet for otherwise "proper" people. whoa! Thats cool. ha ha ha To each his/her own!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!! I think it's truly wonderful. Better than watching murder and violence on the evening news. not access controlled enough it is fine the way it is It's been great foreplay in my relationship of choice (monogomous marriage) and fun to exchange stories and pix with a close circle of mutual friends it's a good thing when it's used in a good mature fashion Temporarily separated from my spouse, and I feel either of us looking now is ok, but I feel when we are together we won't need to search the net for sex. We will have each other. It is pretty good,, It is something to see when you are bored. I like it. it is too het.male oriented, just like the printed porn... can be a good source of information or bad, just like anywhere else. I think that it is simply another form of media and that it should be as accessable for adults to access sexual content here as at an adult store. I have found that there are a lot of perverted people. I was lookimg for love on the internet and instead got all of this gross kinky stuff. I guess it should be allowed, freedom and all but some of it is too disgusting. People should try to find other ways to indulge in their fantisies in a private way. Sex on the Internet has gotten out of hand. It needs to be regulated from the youth of America. Someone/Something needs to be implemented. It's a shame you have to pay for a majority of the sex related sites, either to view pictures or simply get in through a secondary provider of passes, and this sort of thing. You have to be looking for sexual material to find it. You have the ultimate say in looking at it or moving on. there's not enough of it! Sex on the net is like sex on TV, sex in the movies, or sex in a magazine, the only difference is that it can be accessed in complete privacy. This may be too easy a temptation for young impressionable minds. Those who access and those who provide pornography on the net should be more accountable. SEX ON INTERNET DOES NO HARM. I ENJOY IT. i'm new at this and not had much success finding the right spots. The Same AS I Do About Anything "Controversial" EveryOne Should Just Lay Off. So What? It's There, Take Of Necro/Beastie/Kiddie And If You REALLY Want To Monitor Your Kids Minds And Raise Drones, Moderate Them. But If You Believe You Taught Them Responsibly And You Can Let Them "Create" Their Personality, Then Monitor WHATS There, Not That They Can See "Oh My Gosh Golly Gee, Nakedness". I build a lot of sites that have caused a lot of controversy. I do all I can to keep children off the sites, i am single but realize how influential media regardless of the form can be. The interent community needs to make available, and is, the tools to allow adults the opportunity to censor that which their children have access to. Not an easy subject... I realize. WELL SOME OF IT GO TOO OVERBOARD Sex is fun, so is the internet...of course they're together. Lots of hot stuff to look at and read what an easy way to get a tingly good feeling It is unfortunate that some people use the internet to peddle pornography but that is the price we pay for freedom. sex is in advertising, on t.v., talked about around water coolers, and whether a person admits it or not they like it. A rating system similar to the movies would be sufficient and have your computer set up so that if your child logs on, he/she won't be able to access rooms above a PG level. I think people make too much of a deal about it. Parents should monitor what the kids do and if they don't want their kids to have access to it they should control it. Most sexual content is protected. You usually have to state that you are over 18 or 21 to enter the sites. Most sites that have major pornorgraphy available cost money. I think it shows that the public is becoming more open about sexuality and it is no longer something that needs to be kept a secret. I also believe that I do not need moralists in the government deciding what I see or like to do in my own personal time. A person should be able to see or do anything they want as long as it harms no one. I think it shows that the public is becoming more open about sexuality and it is no longer something that needs to be kept a secret. I also believe that I do not need moralists in the government deciding what I see or like to do in my own personal time. A person should be able to see or do anything they want as long as it harms no one. If you don't like it then don't look for it. It should be there for people who want it. The Internet should be a free forum for anyone who wants to express their opinions to go ahead and do it. If you don't want to go into it, DON'T!! Most sites (ie. Webcrawler) offer summaries, and if you don't want this material on your computer at all (because of religious convictions, children, or because you basically think it's disgusting), then there are Internet policing programs out there. I think that if juvennals want to access sex on the net they should be free to do so. There must be a lot of desperate women and guys out there. Since my "significant other" left me for a professional wrestler my life has consisted of booze, and netsurfing. Cyberporn is an atiquate replacement but its hard to clean the jizz off the keyboard. I have went through several keyboards in the last year. 17 to be exact! n/a I THINK SEX ON THE INTERNET IS HARMLESS. ITS A WAY FOR LONELY PEOPLE TO GET THEIR THRILLS. IF YOU DON'T WANT TO SEE IT, DON'T LOOK FOR IT ON THE NET. is it really any different than stealing your old man's playboy magsand showing them to your buddies in the neighbor hood i did that as an adolescent and i didn't grow up to become a sex offender . it will great for single or any one need to know or love arts and passion. The hysterical 'censor it all' types don't seem to understand what the internet is! theres a lot out there I believe sex on the net is fine, assuming it is with/for consenting adults or with adult supervision/permission/knowledge. It's safer than one night stands, more anonymous and generally more interesting as you never really know with whom you are having it with. I enjoy the element of mystery in net sex... For me, its a chance to flirt mainly. I think there should be some way to restrict access to those who have been sex offenders, whether in real life or just on the Net. I have been harrassed by men and women on the Net. There is very little that can be done to protect myself from their advances. Changing nicks doesnt cut it because none of the people I do want to talk to know me then. On the Web itself anyone can access the sexual content. I have been to some of the sites and it is no challenge to see nything you know how to spell. What an individual does on the net is up to them. If you don't like it don't look ! Goverment regualtion and censorship have gone too far. You can not legisltate morality. It is up to the individual as to what they consider moral. have never participated Lame Violence and Social Exclusion are the problem, not sex. I think it is crap and teachs kids at a young age what they should not be doing till they are married in my opnion I think the should band it from the internet!!!!! You don't have to be subjected to sexually-oriented material on the net unless you choose it. The nonsense spouted by those who don't even use the net is harming those who do. Censorship is vile, yet as a people we seem to encourage it by our panicky behavior. Let's tend to our own kids and their morality. I raised my kids right! it's knowledge. ignorance is not bliss. I have been surfing the net since I was sixteen. I have enjoyed the openness of the net. I think that it is that openness that makes the net what it is. If we as a people try and censor or restrict access to it we nothing more than communists who work to control even the thoughts of their people. I believe that it is vitally important to keep the net (our last stronghold of freedom) open to all. I like it!!! Here's my address: www.ee.// He!he really increased bs I think it's a lot of fun and provides a safe release. its great,but i wish its was easyer to find hardcore stuff I think the net will become the new whipping boy for any political types that are in desperate need of an issue. I feel it is perfectly fine in the form it is currently regulated in now. You are just opening a can of worms when you try to have some entity, government or otherwise, impose standards everyone must follow. cool! exiting Don't sweat the petty things. Pet the sweaty things! PICTURES TAKE FOREVER TO DOWNLOAD MOST SIGHTS ARE PAY SIGHTS ECT.. I think that sex on the internet helps people in a confidental way and allows freedom to explore and accept things. You could try out new things and not have to worry about catching anything because the only thing your are touching is your own key pad I think it is wonderful, provided that it is not misused. I find it a wonderful outlet for my sexual frustrations and to play out my desires. I love sex, and want to find more about it, even pictures, it's nothing to be ashamed of. If you really think about it..what's it going to do??? I think that any attempt of the nat'l govt. to censor sex on the net will not work. If you go online, you must be aware of the stuff you may run into. It's the same with watching a movie, watching cable TV or listening to a CD. If the porn pages upset I think It's GREAT! I wish I had this as a teen - especially the open talk and pictures - they should be more graphic. The Internet really isn't a good as people say it is. for me is only an option in the net.of course I have more important subjects on my mind but I have nothing against the sex in the net. For me, sexual content on the net is a harmless outlet to pass the time. However, it is easy to see how it could be dangerous and damaging to others. it is cool. I like it! Two world slapped together... Not good it rulz!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!! ??? Sexual, and particularly sexual/violent material needs somehow to be restricted from kids...kids who know more about computers than their parents. I cannot take it too seriously, but it is fun. I think it`s good and any1 that wants to could enjoy it.Even teens like me.No1 forces us to do it but we r intrested.I say let us if we want to.But if they don`t want to don`t force them. informative,interesting, but to some point too extreme Encourages openess - helps information disemmination It's great I use it for fun and info. good Sex and the internet can be viewed many different ways. I think that being exposed to many different types of people opens your mind... I would think that having sex on the internet is a safe alternative then going out and having sex with people one does not really know. It is a safe environment to try new things, because if one is becoming uncomfortable, s/he only need to log off. Though, doing so on a regular basis can produce such strong feelings for the partner, and then adultery will become an isue. Just a quick little thoughts since you only wanted a few sentences! huh? It is wonderful whilst we have freedom of speech (etc), as with most things if it offends your sensibilities then don't look. Pedophillia should be made a capital crime world wide I have no comment none i like it 18 Sex and the internet are great! In most cases, it is good clean fun.. I love it But to many lil' hidden costs. starting on internet is atractive,but after lost interest Have not found yet! It is about as discreet as you can be and only there if you look for what you want. It has opened up private avenues in which to "experience" various things without having to commit or go out on a limb It is a great way to do it safely! It is harmless fun. It should be regulated with programs like Adultcheck i am the net beginner I think it's fine as long as young children aren't subjuect to it. it is harmless as long as people don't abuse it. intresting when i get time to view it i enjoy it No answer No answer its just another business, and another way to seekthat form of entertainment It helped me meet people I can talk to and helped me to not feel alone. I am new to this. Too early to tell. IT IS A GOOD OUTLET FOR SHY PEOPLE TO EXPRESS THEMSELVES AND BECOME AWARE OF THEMSELVES It's fun I think it is great!!! I Want to FUCK THe INternet!!!! too commercial Very exciting I want to see more of it!!!!!!!!! I believe in sexual freedom for adults. As for children, parents or guardians should monitor their activities on the net. too easy for kids to find I think there is plenty of sex elsewhere and folks should use those traditional forums instead of wasting bandwidth and legislation here. I love it!! sex is like any other human like or dislike .... we'll do it if we want too I wish I could find more free access to people looking for GREAT sex. I see nothing wrong with it. It's nobody elses business what I do with my free time. So censors BUTT OUT! difficult to find what i wanted ...its a free country...if you don't like it,don't look...fuck the self rightious asshole that does more shit behind closed doors than the law allows!!!!!!!! I think it is ok Sex and the Internet: It is free expression, a way to explore new avenues, to see new things. Everyone like to looks at a beautiful, sexy person..hey I don't care who you are your going to like seeing them. People should be able to keep the right to browse the internet for sexual material. Hey maybe some perverts will stay off the streets and satisfy themselves on line. If you like that type of thing, you should be able to access it! I have a very strange personality, morals, ethics, and philosophy. One that I have never seen anyone else have even close to. My thoughts on sex and the internet tend to vary with my personality. In conclusion, I cannot yet express exactly how I feel on these issues in less than a few pages. However, even if I could, most of the people in the world would think me very strange. Let's face it, the net is not a regulatable entity. It is international, dynamic, user dependant, extremely large, rapidly growing, etc. Whether people think it should be "regulated" or not is mute; It can't be regulated. The net is no more controllable than the phone system. In many places it is "illeagle" to use four letter words on the phone. Has anyone ever been arrested for this, I doubt it. It is illeagle to transmit certain types of pornography via the mail. It is also illeagle for anyoneto search through your mail to see what you recieve. Again, mute. Determination of what is or is not appropriate must remain in the hands of the individual, or the guardian of the individual. It is also well within the rights of service providers to stipulate what materials can be accessed/served by their systems. People who are pushing for greater regulation of net content are silly and misinformed. You can try to regulate it all you want but it won't work. I like it. but I do believe that software will mature to the level to controll child access to sexually oriented materials on the internet Great mystery for me, why sex is such a dominant topic there. I think you must get a condoom when you sex. i love it There's a lot of it around, and it's much more accessible than other forms of pornography. But I think it satisfies many people's curiosity. But its availability to minors should be controlled through local censorship that can be imposed at parents' request. The only thing i`ve got to say is, get rid of the child pornography on the net. NOW!!!! What people see or do on the Net is thier own buisness. Legislation by any government that would regulate the contents of the Net is unconsionable. fun and interesting I think it broadens horizons when the sex is not illegal, i.e. pedophilia and actual rape!!! It's there.... it's just another thing in this world. Nothing big should be made out of it. its fun, with few consequences... Where is it? I have never seen it on the Internet I am just learning how to use the innernet for my own sexual response. the one guy i had met from my e-mail was a total blast and we practiced safe sex also. ;::: Love it! Keeps me home at out of the bars! There is too much WHO CARES. As long as no one gets harmed, there should be no regulation for Sex on the Net. Me was only lookin for some pics the first few weeks - you know, like first looking up some dirty words in a dictionary...Ah yeah, and don't forget SEX is FUN!!! Most sex i've seen on the net is pornography, but there is some healthy sex education for children and their parents. ttttttt I find it to be a release for some pent up desires and informative on some subjects i did not know much about. Fairly easy to find, probably too easy but against gvt. sensorship. I like it because i have access to nude pictures if I am horny and want to masturbate erotic, exotic, sexy, fun, sexually stimulating I THINK ITS COOL its something one should have access to when one wants too is the best way to promote safe sex i wish it were easier to acquire pixs I think that sex on the net should be more open and eisier to find also I would like more perverted sex pictures. very eccitting, funny and open closed minds I enjoy it. But feel like I should not. A bit conflicted. good I have only seen it when , out of curiosity I went looking. I suspect that if you look for it and learn how it will be there in abundance. It is, after all, a very powerful instinct. It's fine to check out pictures,etc every once in a while More than 50% of my on-line time is spent looking for pornography. I hope that changes as the novelty wears off. I'm presently having difficulty regulating my use of the net. MASTERBATION IS FUN!! Sex is a essential part of life. - So why shouldn't it be a 'part' of internet. I like sex. I like the internet. Sex and the Inet go hand-in-hand; like prostitution, it's not going away. We are a sexual race and the inet provides a safe outlet for fantasies that we might not be able or comfortable expressing IRL. So be it. I watch my kid when she goes cruising and you should watch yours. Regulation is impossible - and it should stay that way. It's a new perspective of doing IT SEx is everywher and anybody who want it can have it. Sex on internet is good. cool...so far! I think it would be great if you were able to connect with someone and get an online handjob! Education sex is okay on the net, but I think porno on the net is kind of sick. I feel you can't really have sex on the internet. Sex should be between two people that are in physical contact with each other. Sex on the Net fuckin rules, I can sit and beat off with out anybody laughing at the size of my meat, and it adds suspense because you never really know what you're wackin' off to, it might be a women, dirty old man, child or whatnot. I enjoy the sexual freedom on the 'net. The whole concept of regulating the internet is stupid. No one can and no one should. If you don't want your family looking at something, don't let them. I think its Greeaattt!! I think its Greeaattt!! VERY RELAXING,AND ENTERTAINING I think it is the parents responsibilities to limit how much a child sees on the internet. I have a 4 yo, and when it is time, I will watch over his use and lay a law on what he is able to link to. I think free speech on the web is very important as much as free speech in the public community is. enough of puritarian North Americans trying to enforce their narrow minded, repressed, self righteous, sanctimonious, right wing, bible-thumping views on the rest of us! Thanks for the opportunity to voice my opinions. I wish there were no membership fees. Clits rule!! Sex is a natural act and should not be hidden Sex and the Internet rule! I enjoy looking for different sexual experiences on the internet Cencorship is a bunch of bullshit Let everybody decide for himself what to see, but protect the children I feel thatanyone putting explicit material on the net should endeavor to make it hard for children to access, but ultimately it's the parents responsibility. There are plenty of programs designed to block these things. its okay its okay the internet is a place where consenting adults can explore their sexuality in private without fear of judgement. Sex is great at all lievels. I feel that the sexual material on the internet should be expanded. More people should experiment with themselves and others. Allowing yourself true sexual freedom is a cure for many of modern societies true problems. I am 25, and love lesbianism, threesomes and orgies. my friends and I are eager to particapate in these activities I was introduced to bi-sexuality on the internet, and since then, i have had many lesbian sexual encounters. I am thankful to the net for opening my mind and body. Let people express themselves. Sex and the Internet are a great couple! Way to go! I think it can help in some instances.. I think that the internet is akin to an electric america and we should all have our first amendment rights protected there is nothing without sex,right.Why internet should be? i think its good Why not use internet for sex and love when TV is used for violence. Let's have a competition between love-line on Internet vs violence on TV. Who wins? sex is great the internet is great and the work well to gether I believe that parents should know what their children are seeing on the internet. There should also be a rating system that includes a certain password that is sent to the person's home via regular mail and not e-mail, it is too easy to access through the e-mail. I will subscribe to a server who agrees with my views, and there should be that option available to all users I do not see a problem. I like it. I'm in a Long-Distance relationship from the net... Her and I get along wonderfully and she is the first to really be compatible sexually. a mechanism that enables parents to keep children from accessing explicit sites has to be developed Parents should monitor the activities of their childern on the Net as well as TV,music etc. Every time that society has tried to limit access to information about sex, there is a rise in sexually transimitted diseases, unwanted pregnancies, etc. I enoy some of the stuff I find on the internet. Some is stimulating, some funny, some sick. But all good! Room for Improvement..... Know any good sites??? ;) I hate too foul of material, hate bondage and that shit, like erotic, clean, tasteful, and a little raunchy stuff. If you're offended by anything just don't look at it. It can be there for the people who want to see it. The choice is yours. I don't think the internet should remove sites with sexual content. I think it is the responsibility of the individual adult to decide whether or not to view these sites. Parents should monitor their children's use of the net or use one of the many parental control programs available. !!!!! GREAT!!!!! So many of the sites are paid that it would be rather difficult for one to stumble upon the sex stuff, but it is certainly an entertaining diversion. If you're into looking for it, it's there. If not, it does NOT get dumped on you. I run an Adult Web Site and feel that that it is Parental responsibility to police it. It's great! I thin sex on the internet Is very intriguing. Except I am continuously glaring at my boyfriend telling him to stop beinboorish and vulgar. People want access to such material and should have a right to it, but safe guards should be implemented to protect those who are shocked by such candid material. I think Sex on the net should be totally free to anyone who wants it. I oppose censoring companies because money most be paid its a.o.k. some is good, but some kinds of sex go too far! It's the anonymous nature of the Net that leads to the greatest excesses. I've encountered only the mildest sexual stuff on the Web. It's the newsgroups that are most often beyond the pale. I think it's nice to be able to get sexual materials from one's home. It's my business what I do on-line, not the government's, There is alot more people who enjoy sexual stuff than you think keep it open to all...censorship sucks!!! Sex on the Net? Kind of reminds me of the "Orgasmatron" in a Woody Allen movie. I need to feel the skin next to me. Can be really bad , but can also be quiet interesting. I Love It!!!! Sex and the Internet are a natural pair. I've had great netsex on IRC, and _very_ flattering responses tomy own pictures. I feel more attractive now. I enjoy looking around for sexual pictures, to laugh at with my boyfriend, or just become aroused by. But I do not agree with it being so easily attainable, especially for children. What can we do? i love sex &use the net all the time Sexualy content should be governed closely by user. There is no problem if there was some way of keeping the "hot chat" people out of regular forums. Please see my responce to #13. Thank you. WOW !! good or bad ?? Sex should be open on the internet but providers and guardians should have devices to prevent underage exposure The USA is the most sexually repressed major country on earth. The net helps us to see the world on many levels. Sex is one of those levels. The more we educate ourselves the healthier we will be. sex is the shit that don't stink I think it gives me some great ideas. I get very upset when someone IM's me with comments I consider rude. Keep it to yourself unless you're asked. Grow up. Most Internet Sexual Content is spamming by Pay Services. I use the net as as I would a library. There is nothing wrong with sex on the net as long as everybody takes control of their own childrens actions and takes the responsibility themseleves to either look or not to. the Internet is for communication...sex is a form of expression...let people be!!! sex is afun thing specialy when it is on the internet not enough free hardcore I have no problem with it,sex is fun Don't care about it much. But I would help fight any censorship. And don't fall for that mis-leading view that only conservatives want to censor. I've seen more attempted censorship and civil rights violations from the left than the right lately. Note the Terrorism Bill - a total affront to the Bill of Rights. It is not like unwanted mail - you have to look for it. You therefore can't complain when you find it. i love sex and jacking off the cum dripping out of apussy turns me on so lets keep it on the net Sex on Internet is a nice thing - but it's a shame, that everybody tries to make money with it. I met my current girlfriend in a forum chat (she's a former playboy bunny) I wouldn't have ever met her if I had not been allowed to access forums containing sexually explicit material. THANK YOU for sex on the net!!!!! Sex on the Internet promotes the safest sex around, wanking it in front of a computer screen. If parents think that kids are getting off over online pornography they should be glad. They should send a letter of thanks to the provider of the pornography. T I believe a social revolution is well n truly on the way thanks to the Internet i think that cyber and posts are the best thing that ever happened 2 it...and that even though i am a "minor"...freedom of the net!!! I think sex on the net is no big deal.......it's not like I'm going to get AIDS looking at pictures!!! Don't censor, educate how to keep kids out. Just like permitting a kid to an adult book store. There are registrys on the net regarding age, use them. It is a good survey, but "it" has a great potential for destroying a marriage. I think it's all right. I think kids should know what's going on in the future and sex is in the future. It's just a future. machines are machines, people are people It's Great, but I do think it should be easier to get around in. Sex on the Internet isn't bad I don't know I haven't seen any I'm new to the net not to reach by children I can'T seem to find it, how con I find it?. IRC is poison...ruins marriages and relationships and I speak from experiance. Love it! It is a nice safe private outlet for consenting adults Makes my day a little brighter! I find no problems with sex and the internet. It is a fun thing to combine. There is nothing wrong with cyber sex that I can see, as long as the people are mature. Not until the I experimented with the net did I feel comfortable with my self in regards to my foot fetishism. It is because of the open atmostphere of the internet that I am as comfortable sexually as I am. i like downloading mpeg Sex on the net is a unique experience i think, for the mot part, it's perversive stuff that freaks me out that's on here. k? Gooooooooood & Nice!!!!!! very important Porn is not a major thing on the Net and you you have to be hunting it to find it. (Unless you're on IRC). Parents should be watching out for their kids anyway, not the Fed. Why do I have to fill out this thing just to see the results I think it's a nice way to relax and veg out. If people don't want to see it, all they have to do is stay out of the sites that include sexual content! I haven't found much on the net, haven't really looked for it. Sex is wonderful, as long as it is for love. it is mostly fiction There should be more catagories in the first part on the survey. Dislike of turned off by. its fine for conscenting adults Some of the stuff is kind of out of control like child porn, which is wrong. The Internet provides a easy way to get it and destribute it. Why don't you try a  tag here? Remeber to close it with a tag.... Where did you learn about forms? Oh I like the chick at the bottom of the screen! In think that as the net becomes more open to the public and in widespread use that we sure put into place some of the same restrictions that now apply to other areas of communication. It's a great entertainment and information tool for adults love it good place to find useful information it is a private means of satisfaction No comment Sex is a natural part of life. I see no reason why it should be banned form the net or anywhere else for that matter. As a parent it is "my" responsibility to limit what my children may or may not access. Just like a library or bookstore you HAVE to LOOK for IT..to find it! But if you really want to find it you can! most of what is out there is trash, or teasers to lure you into spending money. It was helpful to introduce the idea of D/s to our marriage, now it's a lifestyle for us and our relationship, sex, communication are better than we ever imagined. I've seen that the Internet has been used as a vent for frustration and in some cases i'm sure this will help people. its great wish I could find more preteen sex on line I am so curious. I like Sex & the Internet. Good stories, photos, and no sexually transmitted diseases. too many services are requriing monthly fees--BOGUS!!!!!! People have blown a "problem" way out of proportion, the Internet is the last vestige for true freedom of speech. Lets keep it that way!!! I think sex should be allowed on the internet, I think the internet should be free and open to whoever wants to use it. If they are offended, click off the page, and if it's children, parents should be monitoring it. It is up to the parent, not the government. No one forces you to look at porn, you have to be in search of it to find it I think it's great. Saves money from buying mags and movies. sex is great; on aol it was easy to get pictures from other people which were fantastic to jerk off to and sometimes to meet other people but newsgroups i do not know how to access them plus chat sessions i have not figured out access yet be nice if there was easy menu; sex should be open to everyone now no response. Welcome to a subject that man has had to deal with for centuries. For the way some people act about sex in general, it's a wonder that the human race is even here at all. I enjoy sex on the internet. I have learned more in these past few months than in my entire adult life. Too much sex. In doing searches on something completly unrelated to sexual things somehow there usually ends up being something about sex there. Still lacking in jock mount technology it sucks that you have to pay for most sex sights. there should be more free sights. I like it it is fun to jerk-off to. There is not much difference to videos. I got hardcore videos in the age of 15 without problems ... (and I think it hadn't made damage to me, it opened my eyes how primitive hardcore could be ...) I use my computer like I use the library to seek information and education. I also happen to know people who use the library to pick up on people, it is all based on you and your way of life. SEX IS GREAT ANYWHERE! It's good if you use it properly Free access to all forms of information and content earns the internet a serious PG rating! Look for open nntp sites I think the government should leave the net alone, and that parents should stop whining and do their fucking job!! Sex is as natural as dying, why hide it? Sex on the Internet seems to be driving the technology of the internet. The sex advitizers I have seen have the most advanced systems for presenting their product than any other group on the net. I feel the internet is a fantastic outlet for the sharing of ideas, including those relating to sex. I think it's great. If you want look at it you can, if you don't know one is twisting your arm to look at it. It's great!!! I'm not getting it from anywhere else. We deal with sex everyday. It is an American tradition that everyone (well just about everyone) goes through. It is enjoyable and fun if it used in the right way. Sex on the net is definately a plus for me. Please start putting more pics of black naked men. They get me so horny and hot. I want to FUCK THEM ALL!!!!!!@!!!!!!!&*(*(&*%^w#*@*#% The amount of sex on the internet is completely dependent upon how hard to look. Look hard and there is lots, don't look and there is none. I've heard of things going on throughout the Net and I'm curious to see what's out there. Sex is ian interesting topic to a lot of people. A forum for open public input without the possibility of embarassment or feelings of discomfort is a positive thing. Sex isn't that shocking. The fact that many fear discussing it in schools or with others is what greatly influences individuals insecurity with their bodies and sexuality. its great I think it's good for some people and entertaining!!! Can be usefull, if the Net'e people are honest and decent (from Portugal) Found two of my fetishes and have e-mailed a few folks becasue of it. I think it is a wonderful forum, and anything that helps promote communication to others is good for society. keep it clean Would like local free phone sex numbers. Sex in Internet - it's so good ! Just one area of information on net that the best I don't see anything wrong with adaults entering these areas, I just wish they were easier to find it will open you up to the things that you never knew about while living in a close-minded world I think it is fine with consenting adults Sex should be open in the Internet. It is a safe way of learning about sex. To each his own Software such as NetNanny can help parents/guardians keep children from seeing objectionable material. It's there so I look at it/ I'm 17 year old male. It is a choice that you need to make for yourself, althought an option to block porn should be given free by the government to parents. I think there should be no censorship on the net but I do think there should definitely be some kind of parental lockout available for pc users. Not much. It should be there for learning purposes. My wife and I are experimenting with each other in a very safe and controled manner. We are trying to find information on the Internet and being computer virgins, it's hard. A good thing! Sex repression in a nazistic behavior. Sex is an expression of freedom. Sex is rad... it is nice to see anywhere, anytime. Sex on the net is fine as long as it is used by mature, responsible adults. good it is a lot more easy than going to sex clubs and far more safe. It's better than buying and reading the magazines. I think sex, or anything else for that matter, should be on the Internet. If people have problems with the topic of sex, then, they should go to other Internet areas and sites. As far as children viewing inappropriate material, I think that this is the responsibility of the parents to watch what their children do and to monitor their Internet access to prevent them from viewing things of a sexual nature. I think it's wonderful. I have made a few very close friends by discussing things like exhibitionism, voyeurism, and masturbation. I have learned a lot from my new friends and have had many wonderful orgasms while talking with them! I have no problem with sexual content, but I strongly oppose child porn, it's abusive to children and needs to be stopped. The internet provides a forum for it to go on without restriction. only if your really looking for it (say enter it in a search on the net) then you'll find it. there's enough to do on the net that you dont hafta bump into sex related things FUN! i dont think the problem is that bad when you compare to anything else in society its just another way the goverment wants control.... It's a double-edged sword. It can promote open communication about topics not normally discussed face-to-face, but accountability is less of a factor, and deception is easily done--and common. The Internet is populated by people, and therefore mirrors soc Sex on the Net should be limited only to particualr subcribers Although I may not appreciate all the graphics of sex on the net, I think anyone over 18 has the right to access any material of their choice within the guidelines of state and federal laws. fun! It's no worse here than in any other media forum; Internet sexual content is a mere reflection of degenerating societal standards; if there were no demand, there'd be no such content available. it's great It's out there, easy to get if you know how, and kids will find it. Parents should use whatever measures necessary to restrict the use of these sites by software or even use separate accts for adults and children. U.S. society has a ridiculously schizophrenic attitude toward sex: overly prudish and controlling on the one hand, it shamelessly uses sex in advertising on the other. In my opinion, society (in the form of government) has no business whatsoever regulating private sexual behavior, as long as all parties are mutually consenting. Similarly, the government has no right to censor any form of sexual expression. You're ether involved or you'ra not. I think there should be more available, parents who are concerned have options to protect their children from viewing such material. How would you deal with the issue of regulating sexual/offensive content? Produce computers with the V-chip installes so access could be blocked right away. Make it an option to remove the chip after the purchase at your own expense. Tell them to screw off If you dont like it, dont fucking watch it! It's the parents responsibility to raise their children, NOT the government's. establish rating with "V chip + varification system" If you don't like it, don't view it. How hard is that to understand? Establish a standard 'potential offense warning' system personal/family opt on program tell them to kiss my fat hairy ass Parebts should take responsibility for raising their children and not expect the governement to step in as a babby sitter Tell parent's to use "Surf Watch" and other such things to "protect" their brats. let the parents control what their children see I have no aversion to sexuality on the net but I am totally against exposing children to pornography Absolutely NO kid porn Let parents get software to monitor or block what their children can look at If they've got a problem with it, they don't have to access those sites nudity is ok, but the pornographic sites should continue to require passwords to get in. I have no problem with sex on the Net because there are babysitter programs to prevent kids from seeing things they shouldn't, and if you don't like it, don't look at it. The only kind of pornography I have a problem with is kiddieporn. The rest is between two consenting adults, but kiddieporn is hurting children for some pervo's kicks. Anyone caught distributing or downloading that smut should be shot and pissed on, and so should the providers for those pages. USE PASSWORDS FOR ADULTS TO ACCESS Parents should have the ability to censor we dont want it censored of any way!!! develop better filtering software impossible. forget it. parents should take care of it themselves the parents should take care of what their kids watch on the net a person doesnt have to look The net should be open, the parent should be aware of what their children are accessing parents should monitor their children, not blame the governments. and adults should let other consenting adults do what they wish. supply lock-outs Parental Supervision It's fine now, concerned parents can use blocking software and monitor their own children keep current systems The net needs to have more for female veiwers you should be able to request certain material be omitted Let them monitor their own kids and leave everyone else alone. Parents are responsible for their children; and adults are responsible for themselves. Burn the censors already enough laws. use of internet is personal responsibility best education their is put more pussy on the net Individual censoring access control a Net browser with capabilities similar to the "V-chip" for private, individualized censorship of pornographic material entering the home on-line. you have to go looking for sex on the net intentionally -- it doesn't insert itself onto your screen unbidden -- w/ 2 kids having online access I trust them to follow our rules and if I chose to could purchase a "Net Nanny"-like service Let people make up there own minds Leave it to the individual to decide. If they don't like it, they don't have to look at it. Develop some sort of adult "key" Give Up Trying To Control Other People's Minds, If They Are Old Enough To FInd It, They Can See. After All, They Once Bathed With You. Provide tools to allow adult the ability to censor younger surfers ie. cyberpatrol, netnanny, etc. The government should not enforce morality If people don't want to see these things they don't have to enter the web site usually you can click out of any site before they would see anything offensive to their eyes. If people don't want to see these things they don't have to enter the web site usually you can click out of any site before they would see anything offensive to their eyes. "Net Sitter" software to all homes with kids That's what parental locks are for. Chop the kids hands off so they cant type or play with themselfs have parents monitor their children, not the internet if someone doesn't want to see sexual stuff on the internet then they could always turn it off establish a rating system that would serve as a warning, but would not bar or ban ANY sites...FREE SPEECH! Let the service provider decide. The market will take care of the rest If it's that omportant to keep it off the net..just don't let your children on!! some just go to the net if they like to go !!! MAKE IT HARDER TO ACCESS Sex is nature...we should enjoy it all..nomather how old if the person wants let him!If not don`t force him! Parents should monitor what their children see on the internet have access words parents choose to keep children out of certain web sites Let censorship be handled at individual basis The net should be completely open. I will not be held responsible for other peoples children, that is the job of the parents. I will be responsible for my kids, I don't need any help from strangers. It will never be solved to everyone's satisfaction or reluctant exceptance Local domains and net providerts are fully able to establish rules for content. Let people use their head. Pay-per-view / membership; too easy to find free pornography What people do or access on the Net is thier own buisness. let the parents decide what's approriate and not Have some what morality standards but, also a type of blocking program for parents, to keep their children away from sex on the net and away from perverts. In my home, I set the morality standards make the effort, do a good job of educating your kids at HOME. In this area, and MANY OTHERS...that's the biggest problem with society and its ills! fuck 'em, it's not any of their business the parents take care of it. Cyber Nannys or surf watches are fine If they dont want to see keep there azz out!!!!! If they dont want to see keep there azz out!!!!! Don't like it? Don't look at it If they wish not to see, do not go looking everyone should be responsible for themselves, parents should be responsible for thier kids... what happened to parents? Parents should control their own kids. encourarge "blocking" software all sites cannot be left open for any child to access limit access of children to the net Tell parents to monitor kid under 16 at all time then from 16-18 have a talk about filth on the net and let them have own judgement. The choice is yours. Look or don't look! leave it to the parents to police!!!! free speech Find a way to really keep children (0-16) out. Come on, everybody likes it... If you don't like it don't look. No one has forced you to see it. Who clicked the button to get there in the first place? If it involves pornography, rape, incest etc. it's illegal anyway and has no business here. Otherwise just do me the courtesy of NOT sending it my way unless I ask. use your own discretion, if you don't like it don't look or read it If they're so "OFFENDED" they don't need to go there!!! I think that it should be fixed in a way that children can't look at certain materail without a program like a password.But yes I think is should be open. Parental education to prevent access. Parent Control if under 18. It should be left up to the parents if they have young children weither to block something out or not to. completely open, except for beastiality and child use limiting devices there should be a band on child pornography The parents should do their jobs and watch their kids shut down anything related to child porn/pedophilia, snuff, anything illegal, and prosecute I say anyone with young mind around should be paying attention to what goes in those minds. Keep the net open. Codes so youth won't be exposed. these things are constitutionally protected! if you don't like it don't look!!! Stay closed minded then, and stay away from the sex sites Parents are responsible for the proper upbringing of their own childre Filtering/blocking software parents can watch their own children. Tell the parents to get off their ass and for once take responsibility of *their* children. Let the parents regulate their own children!! Parents should do their jobs so we would not have to worry about 9 year Bobby fucking his pillow every night. Incorparate Passwords to Adult sits through server or browser Let parents do it TELL THESE GROUPS TO FUCK OFF!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!! the government should create a net blocker for free which should be offered to people opening new accounts. Establish rating system; not allow anything related to child pornography have better child-blocking software, only censor illegal (child porn, rape...etc...) let each person monitor their own I dont believe in censorship shut down child porn PARENTS are responsible for teaching morality/ethics. Prohibiting it would increase the desire to do it; let it police itself. if we do not police our own pc's we must start Let Parents be parents and monitor the use of the net parental guidance Questions, comments, suggestions? Contact us. Return to theHome Page. Copyright ©1996, /InterCommerceCorporation, All rights reserved worldwide Send comments to Webmaster@Survey.net WT02-B22-33IA060-000333-B021-183http://www.survey.net:80/drug1c.html 204.107.221.240 19970115054245 text/html 46827HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 15 Jan 1997 05:36:29 GMTServer: Apache-SSL-US/1.0.3+1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 46644Last-modified: Wed, 15 Jan 1997 02:14:59 GMT SURVEY.NET - Drug Survey #1 - User Comments (Latest) Your source for information, opinions & demographics from the NetCommunity! ANNOUNCING: The Internet's finest interactive, totally-automated,immediate survey system. We can take any form and instantly create adynamic demographic database and show you the results as soon as youcomplete the survey! User Comments Previous comments are archived: Part I Part II Part III What are your thoughts on drugs/drug usage? I personally have tried very few drugs, but have seen their effects on friends and family. Some people become dependent on some drugs more easily than others do. I *do not* like most of the effects of most of the 'street' drugs on my friends. Incarceratin I think drugs should stay illegal, I also think the authorities should have more stringent laws against the more dangerous drugs. ALCOHOL KILLS SO FUCKING MANY PEOPLE. JUST SMOKE WEED! I am proactive in AA. BUT, with early preteen education, 90% of the population could benefit from educated use and the GOV. would go away take care I use it every day and hate not being in control, to say this is to much. Sober up BEFORE you drive or go to work; otherwise it's nobody's business but your own. There is too much drug usage. I see prohibition as creating the very problems it is supposed to solve. By creating a scarcity market and driving prices up, it creates a huge financial base for organised crime. Further, there is no possibility of quality control - death due to adulterated drugs becomes commonplace. Finally, it really is a metter of individual liberty. Legalize Marijuana. Alcohol is no less dangerous than pot--I drive better high than drunk, for example. Other drugs, though, we need to try something else--the War On Drugs has been a failure but not because the war itself is unwillable--we just have incompetent fools running the ship. I wouldn't take that shit, but hey if there is no harm done, what is the problem. It is nobody's business other than our own to decide what we will and will not put into our bodies. As long as someone is not harming anyone else in an immediate sense, it is their own business. Kill ALL drug dealers!! Prohibition fails to meet the needs of drug abuse in our society and should end. Whether regulation, legalization, decriminalization, or whatever, replaces it, that's still to be decided. But we have to stop putting people in jail for drug use. They can lead to worse things. Education starting around second or third grade, along with tough penalties and catching troublemakers before they become violent and into drug dealing and other major felanies is the only way to effectively lower drug use to where it was in the eighties. It is certainly a problem in this country and seems to be more prevalent in the lower social-economic areas of this country. Drugs and alcohol are the root of all evil and stronger penalties should be used to deal with people who deal or do drugs. Alcohol is too easily accessible also, that should be regulated more. There is a difference between use and abuse. It should be an individual choice whether or not to use drugs, and penalties should be assessed only in situations where abuse occurs. Legalize but tax quite hard and campaign against use Drugs that cause social degradation by causing individual degradation should be controlled while drugs such as ecstasy which motivate people and make people feel better about themselves should be more readily available. Bin there, done that. I don't recomend it. I don't know about A majority of the drugs mentioned here but I don't see any harm in legalization of the ones that don't affect people besides the user. People dont choose not to do drugs because they're illegal anyway. They don't do it because they don't want to. It shouldn't be up to anyone else what you do to yourself. Drugs and drug usage can be very harmful when in excess and when involving the more mind altering types. Whatever the drug, our main problem is dealing with addictions that are so strong that simply making a law or enforcing existing laws is not going to help people get off drugs.s Drugs are a choice a user makes. He or she is not harming anyone else. To each his own I do not support the use of drugs but I do support its legalization. No government has the right to make personal decisions for a person and it is clear that widespread regulation of drugs has promoted its existance in society, if anything. I think that many of the natural drugs such as tobacco, alcohol, caffine, marijuana, and hemp should either be legalized or remain legal. The effects of marijuana so closely resemble the effects of alcohol that I personally do not see why one one is legal and the other not. Too me the intoxicating effects of both these drugs can produce both positive and negative consequences when used. I personally have turned to marijuana over alcohol because of the lack of physical addiction to marijuana. I alsorefuse to use marijuana to relax me or ease stress, as this is the easiest way to become mentally addicted. I have yet to understand why in our society people feel that it is better to become physically addicted to nicotine and alcohol, with the blessing of the government, then allow the use of marijuana which is less expensive. The hipocracy of many of the lawmakers and close mindedness of many citizens amazes me!!! How can they pronouce marijuana as wrong and a 'gateway drug' without ever experiencingit themselves. Allow "classical" drugs like alcohol and tobacco. Ban the rest It's a stupid idea to do drugs and for them to be allowed, well, as long as it's not medicine you need that's not abused. I think that drugs are cool. All drugs should be mandatory for use by everyone. Especially Rock cocaine. I have never tried any drugs (except caffeine, which is not that bad) and I think that we should abolish these mind-altering substances. I am 14, love chemicals. People should be able to do what they want without the government stopping them. I love marijuana and alcholhol and lsd. Less government spending to outlaw drugs. MAKE IT LEGAL! please. I beg of the government. Decriminialize marijuana and tax it as a way of reducing debt. However, politeness guidelines would have to be set up so that you don't have rude assholes smoking it everywhere. As the parent of a teenager, I find myself much more wary of the things I consume (alcohol) because I do not want him to think that it's OK for him or his friends. I have never consumed much alcohol as an adult and haven't tried pot or cigarettes in many Whatever someone wants to do is okay until it affects others. If you can use drugs in the privacy of your own home and it doesn't affect the safety of another person..more power to you. I think that drugs should be legalized becauseit would cut down the crime rate, could provide the governments with badly needed tax money, and the drugs would not be as likely to contain things such as strycnine or other lethal chemicals found in street drugs. marijuana should be legal and taxed like alcohol,age set at 21 and dui penalty for dumb drivers. Used in moderation i think its ok. Too many abuse drugs and alcohol and that leads to violence very often domestic. It can destroy lives. It is an indicator of the state of society, street drugs are no accident, an effort to drug society is occurring I think that drugs are stupid, and there needs to be stricter penilties to drug related crimes. Substant abuse has this country in Chains of self abuse, self hatred and a loss of respect for ourself and it'S HAS DESTROYED COUNTLESS LIVES! I think that we need to solve the cigertte problem first. This is a legal substance, that is highly addictive and will kill you. drugs and usage should be monopolized by the government, with strict regulation at low cost. This will remove the criminal incentive for stealing etc... marijuana isn't as bad as the other stronger drugs. it isn't hurting anyone. i think marijuana should be legalized Drug usage is a natural phenominon found, to some degree, in nearly every species. To seak an altered state of mind and spirit is the basis of many religions and philosophies. To wage a drug war on one's own people is a crime against the very freedoms our country is founded to uphold. The prosicution of one man for getting high, by another man who goes home to his alcohol and/or pills is hipocritical and unjust. This country needs to stop protecting it's citizens from themselves and allow us the fredom guarenteed by our constitution. I do not care much for drinking anymore. I will have a few beers monthly but do not feel the need or urge to drink to get drunk anymore. I am strictly anti-pot now & strongly believe marijuana is addictive in the long run & should never be legalized. Kids already can get ahold of it somehow, it doesn't need to be made any easier for them. They should legalize some drugs. And they should lower the age limit for alcohol. I use to be a heavy user of drugs and alcohol, until I got saved ,(born again) in July 1985 at the age of 24. I believe that is the only answer to the problem in America! as above They are all dumb and have adverse affects. It is best to say away from them. I enjoy recreational drug use and still lead a productive life. Counselling should be made readily available for everyone who can't cope with problems in their life, be it drugs, alcohol, or whatever may be causing them grief. The Government should be tougher on repeat drug offenders Any addictive drug (with the exception of alcohol which I do not believe to be addictive if used in moderation) should be illegal, including tobacco. The drugs business today is the same as alcohol during prohibition. It is a sleazy and dangeruous underworld. Drugs have been found to fuel crime among users, such as theft, prostitution and assult. It also fuels more serious crime among dealsers and distributors. Clearly, legalizing certain drugs will go a long way to control their use as proven in trials with heroin in places such as Geneva and Amsterdam. hey, if you like it....... Drugs should be legalized and regulated in order to eliminate the crime associated with drug smuggling, and dealing. Drugs cause most of society's problems today I am very against drug usuage. It is harmful to society in a lot of ways. Drugs overall are harmful, but the law enforcement where I live is more harmful!!!Especially siince they indulge too. Depends on the person.If you can handle it do if you cant stay away. Legalize all psychedelics, at least. I wish marijuana t and It's so stupid that marijuana is not yet legalized for all! I can no longer afford it but I miss it and still like it! It is especially great for listening to music! Ecstasy is kind of a ripoff - There is no simple solution, but all solutions should be attempted, and if they have validity, adopted, even if the value is limited. crime is up because of the legalities-legalize them! Ques.#3 doesn't allow for those of us who may have beer OR wine with a meal depending on the meal permisive cultures don't seem to have less problems then nanny cultures Anything in excess is bad for you, Regaurdless the substance. Use moderation and you will go far. Life is fun enough without altering your conciousness - deal with it! Use of intoxicants are the result of a deeper social problem rooted in a desire to escape the reality of suffering forced upon many by a growing gap between rich and poor, the devastation of the environment from our backyards to the rain forests, an economic system that rewards greed and punishes humility, and our own internal struggle between our natural desire to find happiness and the unhealthy ways in which western industrial societies often teach us how to "succeed". Everything depends on the person who chooses to indulge. What I mean is this. You take someone who is very mentally unhealthy, put them into ANY situation where the results are not in black and white, thenyou have a problem. Its like the old saying, gu any illigal drugs should stay illigal. alcohol is good if you don't abuse it. I think that the mexican border should be more watched for drug dealers and drug dealers get the death penelty STUPID! The drug war is a war on people. It is dealt with stupidly by authorities. If the government doesn't want drugs in the country, they should stop producing them, selling them to our people, taking them back, and selling them again. We should concetrate on users not dealers (no demand no offer) Education is neede to deglamorize the drug world. Some illegal drugs do have positive uses and these should be examined. Tobacco should be slowly ilegalised Drug are good for you so use them daily. Just kidding. Drugs and other such elements are fine if used in a correct fashion. I was raised by a domineering religious fanatic so I like to Drug usage should be regulated by society, not government. Misuse of drugs and alcohol cause crime and heartbreak. People will always abuse we are excessive by nature we only learn to moderate.Like the commercial says when we are born all we know is stop and go-full throtle.Addicts will infect and they will die.Alcholics will infect and die.Both leave behind a bitter,broken legacy of pain,torment,confusion,self doubt and intolerably low self image.There is no way out but to want to get out.To the end the educated and literate,the strong of heart,mind,body and soul will prevail.The weak will rot,infect and infest beore their own eyes.The strong control their own destiny, the weak follow the destiny others cast upon them. As the former spouse and former girlfriend of men who have abused both alcohol and drugs, I have seen, firsthand, the adverse affects it has on family and friends. Somehow I seem to attract people who use, even though I no longer use myself. Hard drugs should be forever outlawe. I don't like to use it any,ore I personally feel that our society would be better if drugs were legalized in the US The effects of drugs are powerful and highly personal, varying greatly with the individual and the situation. I would like to see marijuana legalized for individual growing and gifting, but I would hate to see it legalized for commercial distribution or taxed. Education is essential to encourage people to use drugs responsibly. Drugs are a serious problem in society. People need to realize that it is due to the break-up of the core of family values. Re-instate Prohibition!!!! A problem because people are spit on whether it should be treated with seriousness or not. Those who do crap are agiainst reglations, those who stay away aer in favor of regulations. they are things that really screw up your life I experimented with drugs a great deal in my youth. I am now a responsible adult and a valuable asset to my community. As a youth I greatly resented my goverment for making me a criminal with there drug laws. Now that I have children I worry more over the possiblity my children could be involved with the law then I do over the possibility they might smoke some pot. A goverment that makes criminals of such a high presentage of it's youth is not a ligitiment goverment in my eyes. harder drugs are mentally and physically harmful, however, "soft" drugs like marijuana have not been proven to be harmful. Legalizing it would be fine by me. Drugs are a social and psycho problem. Most illegal drugs should be legalized and taxed. Reduce crime and increase tax revenue! There are benifits to the drug problem in America because there is a lot less competition in schools and the workplace due to the loss of so many brain cells I live in a small area, so we don't have too many problems here. Intoxicants have always been with us. If all current drugs, including alcohol and caffeine were criminalized, humans would find some new way of getting high - snorting dandelions perhaps. drugs are what you make of them as long as you are in controll have fun and experiment I used them a lot for a few years, and speaking from MUCH experience, I think, in general, they are evil Marijuana is great because you can't overdose on it. Drugs such as cocaine and PCP are very dangerous and should be sold only in very small amounts for special occasions. Tobacco and Alcohol are okay, but stronger penalties should be placed on drunk drivers. Very few people are able to handle drug usage responsibily, including those in the medical field individual & responsible choice I believe choices for drug/alcohol use should be left to the individual UNLESS or UNTIL their behavior infringes on the rights of others. The drug problem does exist, but has been blown so out of proportion by government, church, parents--society in general. We waste far too much time and money prosecuting drug offenders while violent criminals go free. America, wake up. If an adult wants to take drugs and they're not hurting anyone else it is their decision. Let's concentrate our efforts on real criminals! Well, if it's done with in reason it's fine with me. But if it's taken out of porportion it could be hazardous to your sel and others. moderation education tolerance The movies they showed us warning us about drugs made me want to try them. Especially when I found out that smoking pot did NOT make you hallucinate and run in front of cars, I figured everything else must be lies as well. There should be more truth. Drugs never hurt my life, and although I don't do them now (too hard to find, really, I should go back to high school!! ;-) DRUGS SHOULD HAVE A HARDER PENITY People should be responsible for their actions when abusing drugs or alcohol. We as a society want the benefits of freedom but not the responsibility that comes with freedom. I think a little bit of marijuana can't hurt someone. You have to know your limit though. marijauna should be legal, all powder drugs remain illegal I'm High Drugs are evil and need to be destroyed! Certain drugs, marijuana in particular, should be legalized. This country spends far too much on "The Drug War." Personally I think that drugs that have no adverse affects on the body and aren't addictave should be freely available. Marijuana is less harmful in my eyes compared to alcohol, and therefore, should be legalized! Without suppliers there will not be users. No one has the right to tell me what I ingest into my body. That is my choice. Therefore all substances should be legal and the damm government should get of our backs. I love drugs mann.!!! THEy mak me feeel bettter..,. The only way to fully regulate and control the quality and distribution of hard drugs is to make them legal and therefore regulated by government standards of safety. This would also force the issue into the light and make education a necessity. This is mary jay should be decriminalized IF A DRUG OR DRINK CAN HELP A PERSON RELAX OR DEAL WITH A SITUATION, WITHOUT HARMING OTHERS, THEN LET IT BE. THERE SHOULDN'T BE A PROBLEM WITH RESPONSEABLE DRUG USE. If you're stupid enough to regularly abuse illicit drugs then you deserve what happens to you. The use and distribution of drugs in lower class areas is quite different than that of poorer areas. Through increased income of the poor, the use of drugs would be more for entertainment than escape. I do not personally use drugs, but I don't see why others shouldn't be able to. I think drugs should be legal and have laws that prevent a horrible backlash of problems due to legalization - I think legalization would cut down crime enormously and it would get a lot of addicts help because they no longer feel that they have to hide their habit - if it was legal after while people will look at addicts as people who have no self control because then there would be no shame in using just abusing!! It's a personal decision and free exchanges of information should be easier ... too many people know too little about drugs. i think that marijuana should be legalized. I don't feel this way because i'm an addict either. I also feel that the answer to the drug issu eis more education, such as showing bad results besides ending up in jail. i think that drugs should stay illegal and educating our children is the best way to ensure that they don't try drugs. it's gotten more attenyion in the ;ast ten years, but requires more funding to stop it's abuse, especially among younger people. Drugs should not be legalized. our culture is very consumed with the use of drugs and alchol. They are not fun, glamerous, or cute. Some people can drink on a social level and for them it's fine, for others it's not fine. And drugs ruin lives. It really is up to the end user. We can't always blame society for an individuals habits, though we should try and assist them. NOT MUCH usecaution peoples in general should not be so paranoid about druguse!!!! Drugs need to be limited to those prescribed by a physician, not including any minor drugs like aspirin or cough suppressants. We need more stringint enforcing of present drug laws. no comment Drug use is a personal choice, that I feel the government has no place in, other than controlling availability to minors. Adults should be able to decide if they want to use drugs or not. Alcohol, a legal drug causes more hurt than any other. People should be made aware at a young age the effects of drugs on their physical & mental health. There would be no dealers if there weren't any users. Education & peer pressure are the keys. Most drugs are OK in moderation. Any drug, any thing in fact can become addictive if you make a habit of it, and an addiction of any kind is a bad thing. Can't take away the only fun people have. They should not legalize. It is destroying the moral fabric of our country. i feel certain drugs should be legalized for medical treatment purposes only. other drugs that are being abused should be tightly regulated. those caught abusing those drugs should be punished and counciled so it would be very unlikely for the abuse to happen again. the war on drugs is a useless and frivoulous one, the world has always had a facination with drugs and it could never be suppressed , I think that lenient approaches such as those of the Netherlands are the only plans with any chance of success. I laudit their policies and suggest that the U.S. follow in their footsteps!! Take drugs till it kills you than take drugs until it kills you again. Drugs should be free , so the world can live in peace and anarchy . If more people would use drugs than we could give them a better chance of killing themselves than people could get high on life . its all the same so take drugs and take them again the world needs more people like that so something can be done . hahaha!! In Britain the rules concerning drugs are too strict Drug use is a matter of personal responsibility. Most substances should be available to the public, but individuals should be held accountable for the choices that they make. This is an issue of self-control more than legal control. Unfortunately, some Drugs can be a good thing as long as they ae not abused. I'd like to see more severe punishment for drug dealers. We need to stop illegal drugs coming into this country. Drugs are a stupid of a persons life! Tobacco is more harmful than pot, it should be decriminalized Certain drigs should be legalised to reduce crime by pushers etc. Special treatment centres should be set up to freely administer certain drugs to victims to get them off, without resorting to crime. used in moderation, soft drugs and alcohol help people relax i think that marijuana should be legalized, but only available to 18+. my expirience with marijuana has always been positive. i, nor any of my friends, have ever committed a crime while under the influence of marijuana. Moderation is the key. People should have a more rational approach to the drug "problem"; focus on the serious issues rather than worrying about "drugs" such as cannabis that does much less harm than alcohol. All drugs should be legal, regulated and taxed. All efforts to control abuse should be educational. Cars kill/injure far more people, but where's the furor over vehicles? It's difficult to freely explain my views, I'm under-age(17) in a society that doesn't openly except the freedom of choosing your own route to enjoy life..yes, I'm high--Get over it,I have--To each his own MANY HAPPY DAZE TO COME FOR MEEEE! Anything which becomes legal will be used to excess and we will have even more fatalities. Alcohol should be leagalized for all people. There should be stricter laws dealing with the indirect effects of alcohol such as drunk driving and addiction. Alcohol as well as tobacco laws need to be stricter. Underage minors have way too much access to these. Stricter regulatory laws and misuse penalties are needed. Press and Govt. overreact against drug use/misuse as an easy excuse for crime, poverty, unemploynment and to stimatise whatever section of society they find convenient. Theyre not for everyone, some will abuse and ruin it for everybody else I think that the Western world's attitudes to drugs actually makes it more attractive to a lot of people. Legalisation of even the "hard" drugs may not actually increase the number of users and then the situation could be far more easily contraolled. I think there is a downside to any drug consumed,I think the laws are too strict to the people caught, and people need to be more educated on all of it. I'm curious as to why marijuana and alcohol each had listed as a choice "It makes me uncomfortable and/or paranoid" and cocaine did not. Cocaine _only_ makes me uncomfortable and paranoid. My personal drug and alcohol use has been from social to escapist. I have quit most everything I used to do except alcohol and though I Forbidding anything increases its use, and such laws cause people to lose respect for all laws. DECRIMINALIZE MARIJUANA; TRY TO FOLLOW EXAMPLES OF EUORPEAN COUNTRIES (NOT ALWAYS SUCCESSFUL ) TO TRY TO BREAK THE TREMENDOUS ILLEGAL PROFITS MADE BY ORGANIZED DRUG CARTELS. I don't use illigal drugs, but I know how difficult it was to stop smoking if you seriously want to discontinue using drugs you can, after all it's your body that you are destroying and it's your friends that you are loosing. I think many people use drugs as teenagers for the sole reason that it is illegal. Legalizing drugs may increase use at first but, then it would decline. HOwever, the people that are already addicts would have no chance at recovering. I think people should learn to live more naturally. Sure, I drink coffee, and drink a couple times a year, but could definately do without. I don't know why people have to take themselves to another mental state to be happy.....I don't understand it, an It is a shame that people are ranting and raving about drugs. Everyone has an opinion, almost none are educated opinions. How many people out there know how opium came to the "New World"? How many people out there know why they were criminalized - (one The current laws are insane, and costing too much money for enforcement and incarceration. They are poor substitutes for learning to accept and deal with ourselves and our problems. Drinking doesn't wash away problems instead it irigates and makes them grow. If you want to, go ahead, just don't get caught I think there should be mandatory detox treatment for people arressted for serious, harmful drug use. Let's crowd the prisons with the dealers instead of the users. Pragmatism and medical informaton as the basis of any and all decisions on drug policy. it's a shame that people have to resort to drugs most of our problems would be eased if the majority of illegal drugs were legalized. I would MUCH rather have my child use marijuana rather than alcohol. There are things that are much worse for us, that are legal! I am a firm believer in INTERNAL FREEDOM. The problem with the U.S. is tha we are so interested in what everyone else is doing to their own bodies. Face it some humans will never help themselves...I think it's time to legalize all and live for ourselves . Let the junkie die. Experiment, but keep a strong mind and no one gets hurt... drugs are bad for me but pot seems to take the place of my doc. and his downers Chances are extremely great that they will cause you to be non-functional in other areas of your life. There will be no balance. drug use is not a crime problem; it is a public health problem. If people are actually smart they will eventually quit, however everyone needs to experiment a little .. If they get themselves addicted or to hardcore drugs, it is their own damn fault and they should just be ignored from society entirely. I think it is wrong for me to use drugs, since their are illegal. both can become a hardship to one that indulges in it, but we must remember there are hardships in most vices and most people seem not to realize that. stupid people do drugs I intend to never again use illegal drugs, alcohol or nicotine. Prescription drugs, used as prescribed, and caffiene are okay. 14 years of my life were wasted in the drug/alcohol scene while I was trying unsuccessfully to numb an emptiness and pain that only the Lord could (and HAS) healed. My religion teaches against the use of drugs, alcohol, and tobacco. I, of course, make my own decisions, but this guidance has kept me out of a lot of trouble. I don't know if just education is the answer. There will always be adicted people and people wanting to make money that will be selling and doing drugs. I wish there were an easy answer. The problem with drugs is not the drug itself, but that the drug is illegal. When there is a demand, for anything, someone will supply it. Make it legal and you eliminate the criminal element. Many people I know smoke mArAjuAnA.. they think everyone should smoke it I use alcohol and tobacco. I do not use drugs, but feel if people want to ruin thier lives with drugs--let them have them and stop making drugs a criminal activity. Perhaps this will stop the increases in dealers Marijuana is O.K. Cocaine and other drugs blow your life all to hell. Peer pressure got me to use drugs. But I decided my grades and real friends are more important. I think we need to teach our youth that there is nothing good about taking alcohol or drugs in any amount. There are times when durgs need to be used. Learning what drugs you can use and when to use them is hard. Most poeple do not understand how chemicals react in people and what makes the same drug react diffrently in diffrent poeple. The drug war is a failure, and it is misdirected People should have a right to fry their brains, but not to drive with fried brains. I feel very little pity for people with illegal drug habits, they are illegal to begin with so they shouldn't have started. Alcohol is OK in moderation like most things. Uhh... since my use is extremely limited, I gues sI don't have an opinion... I hate to be around people who are ona substance when I am not though... makes them seem so stupid! I feel that it is the choice of the individual. Personally I feel that it is a bad choice. They're a shame and a reality. We must continue to educate about the horrible effects of usage and address how to help families who seem to be predisposed to have problems. Great if we could kill the addictive gene in people. Extremely complex issues. It's safe to say that all drugs are harmful to your health. In my oppinion, people should have access to nicotine, alchohol, marijuana but should always be controlled. My thoughts are that if you want to do it on your own time, go ahead, but not when it will impact on your job, and if I catch you selling to my kids, put your head between your legs and kiss your ass good-bye. any drugs for terminal patients to relieve pain There should be better laws for drug use. I have only one friend: my marijuana. Without it's ability to relieve my stress, I would be nothing but a pile of bones in a wooden box 6 ft. under. i think it depends on the person taking the drug and how well they can handle it. some people are just not able to handle them, therefore creating problems, such as addiction. i do not, however, think it should be so easily accessible, especially to the THERE NEEDS TO BE MORE EDUCATION FOR CHILDREN AND ADOLESCENCE OR THE PROBLEM WILL CONTINUE TO ESCALATE. I think that the personal cultivation and use of Marijuana should be de-criminalized nation-wide for adults. Exchange of small amount between adults should be legal as well. I agree with laws that restrict the operation of motorized vehicles under the influence and use/sale by minors. I think this is a good first step short of whole-scale legalization. As a casual/sometimes MJ user, I see a lot of people around me who can't handle it. This is why it ought to stay illegal. I believe everyone encounters drugs and alcohol in their lives, and I find nothing wrong with occasional use. I believe that drug and alcohol experimentation is almost a necessity in order to mature. It is when that use becomes abuse that drugs become a problem, and people need to know where to go to get help. Then it becomes a psychological problem rather than a sociological one. Drugs should be legal, but business should be allowed to hire/fire persons based on usage. I think consistency is the key. MArihuana is singled out, while alcohol and tobacco, because of teh BIG MONEY backing them is completely legal. When is the last time someone smoked MArijuana and then killed someone? Who has ever died from Marijuana usage. There is a double standard that should not stand. I enjoy them on a daily basis. I enjoy the 'high' from them also. I've noticed that a lot more people are doing it. It is a bad habit and there should be harder penalties for illegal users and dealers. I think people are using and abusing to much, try to find a way to get thru life a little bit easier. I think that drug usage in moderation can be quite harmless. I also think it is absurd that alcohol is legal and marijuana is not. Who was the genius that came up with this scheme? Probably someone with a drinking problem! Marijuana seems so much less harmful than alcohol and other drugs. I've never met a violent or beligerant stoner! they are fun if used in moderation know what you are getting into I do not consider wine or beer a drug and I resent it being included with crack and LSD Drug testing is bad because you should have a right to do whatever you want on you're time off. Drug use depends on the person because we all react in many different ways than the guy next to us to many different drugs. drugs are dangerous, not healthy, and people who are adicted to drugs are never in there right state of mind and need to seek help and relize how great lfe can be without drugs. Drugs arent worth the time and the losses. The war on drugs is the source of many problems in our country, and if it was stopped, there wouldn't be the problems we have with crime and gangs. Control of drugs is more effective and allows socity to supply help when needed. While the converse forces the problem user to hide and not seek help. WHen used responsibly, drugs and alcohol are not a problem. Unfortunately, there are VERY FEW people who know how to handle them responsibly. Drugs are a form of escapism. People that use them don't have anything better to do with their time. Nevertheless, it's a personal choice, and if somebody wants to get messed up, it's their perogative. If they want to smoke crack, let them die. It's their fault. I think that the key to life in general is, All good things in all good time. All things in moderation. If you get to caught up in using any drug, or eating too much food you are liable to get yourself into trouble I'm not interested in drugs, but I don't recognize govt authority to regulate Education on drugs is skewed. I agree that things like crack are dangerous, should be illegal, and that people should be warned about the dangers of using them. However, pot, lsd, etc., in my experience, are not particularly dangerous, nor are they immoral or a threat to society. Government education programs which put across the idea that all drugs are equally dangerous do not make any sense, and I think that people tend to disregard warnings about the more serious drugs (ie. crack, heroin) becausethey realize that the warnings about drugs like pot are completely over the top. I feel the drug use is a result of poor self esteem as a result of the decay of the family and its values. I drank alcohol and used marijuana in my youth and early adulthood. I think it's ridiculous that marijuana is illegal. Alcohol is much worse. hard drugs such as herion and smack shouldn't be so readily available; pot makes you high (sure it is also addictive) but not one person has died directly as a result of smoking it. I don't care whether they legalise it or not...it people want to smoke it...THEY WILL! :-) About 4/6 of the people I know at school actively do drugs and about half of that come to class under the influence. Having used many drugs in the past I feel some should be legal I don't believe drugs should be legalized because they are very addicting. Alcohol is not addicting unless you have a disease. I do believe that we should be informed on the effects of alcohol, to keep it illegal to drink and drive, but alcohol as a whole should be legal. It is as safe as an over the counter drug. some should be legalised for people with stress problem. MATURITY SHOULD DERTEMINE THE USE OF ANYTHING moderation! Drugs should lie completely under the control of the taker. It is not the place of government or the medics to prohibit people from taking things which they enjoy. The only cases I can see in which limits should be placed on the taking of drugs would be for passenger-jet pilots or other professionals responsible for the safety of others. I am very stoned at the moment and I do not feel that it has been detrimental to my mind or body in any way, except that I can't get enough grass and I have to smoke ahash-tobacco mixture. The weak of mind can not cope, thus it probably should remain as it is. The "war on drugs" has been a counterproductive, hypocritical exercise in futility. Society is sick if drugs use is required for survival. Should all be inforced as illegal! Drugs have adverse physical and emotional effects, and should be avoided entirely. Drugs ARE dangerous to both mental and physical health. I dont think that legalizing or permitting drug usage is the way it should be controlled. Im not even sure, that it can be controllable. Legalizing those so called 'soft drugs' (hash, marijuana, etc.) is definiately dangerous. As the surveys show: todays 'hard drug' users all started with soft stuff, and then they went further and further. Nobody starts with sticking pins to their arms, but most of the previous marijuana users are becoming seriou drug(and i mean the hard stuff) addicts later. i think its because people learn that they can control their mood with various substances(starts with alcohol, probably?), and as time passes, using drugs becomes more and more common and natural to the person. Second: i dont think, that drug users should be punished for what they do - people drink, people take sedatives, others smoke - and these are socialy accepted. The ones this questionaire is about are not, but some of them do not really differ from thes ones. Besides people are seeking and taking psychoactive substances from teh very-very beginning. Even animals do. So once again - im not sure if it is a controllable situation. What could have been done: general mental health propaganda and education (and i mean not just about drugs! dealing with stress, relationships, etc. could be much more usefull. There are reasons why people reach for drugs - beside the pleasure. What else... Oh yes. Prozac is a legal drug, as far as i know. I think it has to stay tat way - it is an effective medicine, not a happy pill. Drugs (including alcohol) have become waaaaay to commonplace in our society. making drugs freely available will decrease their "glamour" as people sometimes do them just to break the law drugs are good We should stop this war on smoking and worry about real problems with drugs that are killing this country!! the war on drugs is a waste of time, money, and civil rights; this survey has serious problems Making them legal will end gang violence. Everyone is responsible for themselves. WRONG Education on the the effects on the body should be made available to the individual.\ Pot should be legal. Nicotine Illegal. I think drugs are o.k if they are not abused. It is alright to use them if they do not become your whole life, and if you don,t "need" them to get by. The major problem we are encountering now is not drug abuse bu the drug war itself. People, innocent of drug related crimes or not, are harmed every year by over zealous drug enforcement agents. Drugs are not a victimless crime; they hurt the individual and they hurt society when a frequent user turns to crime to obtain his fix. Te answer to these problems however is not 'three strikes, you're out' policies, but rather the availability of all drugs to their abusers and treatment freely available for thse same users. Education, which involves the treating of drug abusers as sick people, not criminals, is what is needed. I beleive it all boils down to how a person was raised and self esteem issues. If parents would do a better job rasing kids today, then future generations might not see as big of problem with drugs. Marijuana is probably the only drug that should be legalized. I have never seen or heard of anyone who was stoned kill somebody because of the drug. I HATE heroin. It killed Jonathan Melvoin and destroyed to many peoples lives! I am young enough to not have tried anything and now I never will. Remember July 12, 1996 forever... As political power shifts generationally, the scapegoating will decrease Marijuana should be legalized for medicinal uses only. devastating a little bit of anything isnt going to cause a problem but a lot af any drug is. some drugs in moderation can actually be better for you mentaly and physically than none at all Do what you want to do in your own home or where it is legal to partake. some drugs should be legalized. moderation is the key. legal drugs should have appropriate dosages on labels. people should attempt to use only recreationally. Its more along the lines of personal choice. Adults seem to know what up, with proper education. Drugs have been around for a long time. It should be up to the individual to decide. Lighter drugs (alcohol, marjuana) should be legalized for adults with sanctions only administered *IF* social or civil order is disturbed by its use. Return to theHome Page. Copyright ©1996, /InterCommerceCorporation, All rights reserved worldwide Send comments to Webmaster@Survey.net WT02-B22-34IA060-000333-B025-207http://www.survey.net:80/sex1c1.html 204.107.221.240 19970115055814 text/html 67079HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 15 Jan 1997 05:51:58 GMTServer: Apache-SSL-US/1.0.3+1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 66896Last-modified: Mon, 25 Nov 1996 20:26:46 GMT SURVEY-NET - SEX Survey User Responses (ARCHIVE II) Your source for information, opinions & demographics from the NetCommunity! ANNOUNCING: The Internet's finest interactive, totally-automated,immediate survey system. We can take any form and instantly create adynamic demographic database and show you the results as soon as youcomplete the survey! User comments [ARCHIVE II] What do YOU think about Sex & the Internet? Everything that humans touch turns to crap. It's because we are inherently evil. It happened with the atom, it has happened with germs, it has happened with chemicals, and now it has happened with the net. If we can find a way to bastardize and pervert something, then by golly we'll do it or kill ourselves in the process. It's the most public fourm we have ever had for accessing sexual material. I think it should be there for those who want to access it. Those who don't can refrain from clicking their mouse. Software and other systmes are available to "block out" sites which can be used for children, etc. some of itis quite explicit and should be monitored by parents. wish it was easier to find Everyone is having cybersex, but it get's boring after awhile. It's the same old thing, and it's mostly 12 year old boys on their parents computers. Parents should not let kids get on the internet unless they monitor them somewhat. Data Highway is like a real Highway Data Highway is like a real Highway Sex is going to be, regardless of rules, guidlines etc. Common sense and responsible behavior should be the controlling factors, not any type of government. Interesting -- exciting -- get away from real life. I enjoy it Just got on and I'm still looking. Really don't know what I'm doing at this point. I wish it was easier to find what I am looking for It is totally personal business. Just behave yourself. Yet another way men and women can turn each other on It is a fresh vehicle that arouses curiosity and makes life more interesting. It would be a shame if we lost it!! Should exist. However I object sites that request credit card info prior to access. I do not like being charged for something unseen. Hard core porn should be restricted and access codes provided via email. I see nothing wrong with it....it helps to pass the day at work. welcomed and enjoyable the internet would not be as popular as it is, if there was no sex on it Only a ploblem to those who want to make it a problem. I don't have much 'personal experience' with sex content on the net, but I think the net should be open to all content. I think the users should be the ones to decide what is and is not permissible on the net; I don't think 'big brother', whether in the form of the government or some narrow minded religiously oriented group, should be able to tell mature adults in a free society what to do or not do, or what to see or not see. I don't know yet 'cause it's my first visit! under anarchism it's ok Web sites with sexual themes are among the most accessed sites on the Web, which tells me that enough people know how to find what they're looking for. There are ALWAYS methods of hiding, disguising, transmitting, and posting pornography so that it's impossible to control it completely. Very intriquiing. I can't wait to see what happens in the future. If you and a monkey have sex, can you make something? ok To each his own. Depending on the mood, sex on the net is a good outlet...otherwise it's easy to just ignore. it is alot of fun it can be a great help towards a normal RT sex life, but nothing more Sex is a part of life, we will always have it, why fight it. life is fuck An aspect of the Net that will never die. I like sex, and I like the 'net. Seems obvious. :) I have a hard time finding hardcore stuff on the net. Thanks to open minded parents, my 16 yr. old son knows more about sex than most of his teachers at school.I,m all for open, honest discussion with kids. I like it a lot I like the open access, but I'm searching for a way to allow my children access without the exposure to explicit sexual material. it's there, i'm not too interested in other people, let them do as they please It's a great way to expand your knowledge of sex in general. I think it can be an open forum to learn more about a topic that may have bee I think it is a good way for people to manefest desires that are all too often supressed within our paradoxial society. If we could get in touch with what we are then perhaps we can find out who the hell we are and quit being diverted by proxy emotions. too hard to get to it i wish i could find it! I AM JUST STARTING OUT PLAYING WITH THE NET IN GENERAL why not? Sex is just one of the topics the Internet supports. It should be upto families and individuals to regulate it. there should be self discipline among the netters though and a common sense of what is right and wrong. Child pornography and such material sh sex on the net is highly over rated it is just not there in the amounts that are claimed. I'd ;ike an easy password arrangement to block 'R' and 'X' this sex sucks i was looking for something harder! it's sick and degrading It's great where do I find it Probably not really a good thing, but against any form of regulations. i think sex on the internet should stay. i do feel that child pornography should be stopped in all forms. I believe that "virtual sex" can be very intense, when done well. I believe that this is GOOD, it gives people a chance to learn about sex and their own sexuality in a pretty nearly consequence-free environment. COOL I see alot I do not agree with but it is my choice to ignore it. I would not change a thing. its ok Our fed gov was supposed to control dope in the US, which they've clearly been unable to do, how in the hell can they act as censors? It would be but again a huge do nothing bureau sucking up tax money. I'm afraid it would create far more ills, ie Salem Witch hunts, than any good that may result. If people want to find porn images then they look, otherwise they cant complain. You have to spend a lot of time seeking out true hardcore porn, it's scattered about amongst the abundance of tasteful soft images. There are too many commercial interests always trying to get you to part with your money, before allowing you access to som Uncle Sam - keep your hands to yourself! I think the GIF's and JPEG'S are great. Give me more Sex is a mojor theme for some people. I think that any kind of 'legal' solution to combat pornagraphy on the net is futile because we can't even agree on national standards of morality much less think about international ones. Self-regulation and common sense must prevail or our freedoms will not. Don't much care. While I don't bother with it, I abhor the idea of regulating it. I hope the Internet stays unrestrained and open to all. I think it is jst another way for some people to have fun and try new things without risk of rejection, or contracting a disease. it makes me horny! #15's answer is misleading. SELF-REgulation and content Flagging would help immensely. If surfers want to engage in (imaginery) sex, that is their business. If people don't want to watch or talk sex, they don't have to turn to a sex channel, but they should not try to force their way of life, or their beliefs on other persons, which I believe is true of any situation whether it be sex, politics, religion, guns, birth control, or any activity unless it is harmful to our countryor invironment. # it has reawaken my sexuality ,we have loved it!!!! Dont know yet, just got on the Internet very good forum for fantasy and reality outlets, I think there should be no regulation except that parents accept the burden of monitoring their kids use. I sense that some users (myself included) are becoming very paranoid about even surfing the net to look for whatever due to some invented legal action against them. This is sad. I sense the "unwashed masses" are in a moral panic about sex and the net and when in doubt, they just shoot and ask questions later. Let them "go play" with "BOB", or swap eceipes or whatever and stay the hell off the Net! Thank you for letting me voice my opinion:) Sex on the internet is just another form of release or exploration for many people who do not wish to take part in real-life sex, at least not at the time. It can be a good way for people to explore who they are and what they truly want in life. Serves a vital purpose in permitting all persons, particularly those who are extremely introverted or "fearful," to share their sexual desires and problems directly and with utter frankness. i'm all for it. fantastic no comment Sex in our society is presented as perverted; not beautiful as it is meant to be. Natural Family Planning within marriage is the only presentation of sex which is beautiful. True education is needed. I think the idea that sex is EVERYWHERE on the net is a pretty overblown concept. It's out there, but there is no neon lights saying "Get It Here" great I like to lok at the pics and i don't see anything wrong with it i feel that sex on the internat encourages openness and awareness I think it's great. yeah, big deal It's nice that we have FREE network, just as long it is free. There should NOT be too much "guards" around, but parents can restrict access of their children if they want to do so. great The Govt. and Media have blown the problem WAY out of proportion... so typical. It's pretty cool I am all for the internet being open regarding sex. We don't need government regulations. Sex, I love to talk about it, do it and here about it and reading. Internet is just wonderful A great idea especially for the inquisitive and shy. I think the only worry we should have regarding sex on the net is the exposure to children. Some of the material can get quite raw. Children are too swayable. Parents need to be the responsible party for ensuring the quality of upbringing of their children. Not only on the net but in everyday life... For those without a life in shades of grey Fun. it's great, be responsible. parents must be responsible too. I love it! I think it's great! It's a great place to vent your sexual frustrations. sex is good in all shapes and forms SEX ON THE INTERNET IS A GREAT THING YOU CAN ACT OUT FANTASIES IN THE PRIVACEY OF YOUR OWN HOME. Im looking for it but cant find it! How can all those right wingers compalin? Isn't free speech wonderful? Mostly mild curiosity. The anonimity is attractive, but that in itself suggests something about my perceptions in this area. Obviously, if people really want access to sexually explicit materials, obtaining it is not that difficult. Perhaps social taboos have encouraged us from not allowing this area of one's personal life from simply dominating the lives of even more people that is already does. I doubt that we could blame the pope, the church, the government or anyone else for the tendency to stil ap I think that it's just fine. I think the internet should be left open and not regulated. Keep it up! they don't mix physically, but it is good for info Like anything else, this is a First amendment right. Censorship should be done at the personal level. Geverment is not there to establish our individual moral standards. It's a great escape to forbidden pleasures! Keep the politicians out of it. Make next survey load faster, this one took forever to load due to the graphics that were not really needed. It's a matter of communication. No one forces you to access sexual material, there are many means to stop minors from accessing inappriopriate material, and for people like me who are shy, being able to communicate (fairly) anonymously about sex is good. hope it results in something positive I think it is too hard to access the hardcore porn. interesting I LOVE IT. LOOKING FOR MARRIED FEMALES WANTING TO GET LAID. I think it is good to have on the net. Sex shold be open like it is. Mmmmm.... All in all, a very valuable educational resource! It's there its a grait kik You must now adress for yourself...- Keep the government out of the bedroom and off the net! Most informative. Provides detailed answers to a wide variety of questions concering sexual activities, hazards, necessary precautions and techniques for maximizing your partner's (and your) pleasures. I think its great for adults, not children under 18 Parental Responsibility & the whole topic is way overstated Need more discussion areas and pornography, especially males I LOOK It is something that should be enjoyed by mature adults. We�re all adults here, are�nt we ? You cant shock with the stuff thats on the Net, we�ve already seen it elsewhere. As for kids, only the parents can monitor what they do. Just like life in general. I LOVE SEX Its healthy I think that if parents want to censor there child it is there right...and if the child doesn't listen thats a problem for the parent not the net To Each His Own Sex is great! The Internet is good. Help me find photos of true hermaphrodites....Nightowl@lonestarbbs.com Fine Why is everyone so upset?? Give it a rest! More important things to deal with than this stuff I am an adult. If I wanted something I'm resourceful enough to find what I'm looking for. I resent sexual overflow into channels that are not sexual, when the opportunity exists, presently, for others to learn to be resourceful, as well. I like to check it out occasionally curiosity I think that it is a better outlet for people. People will tend to learn more and be entertained by new material such as sex surveys, stories, etc. If it is regulated, people will just find ways around the regulation (they always have and they always will). After all, this is covered in the first amendment. Free speech shouldn't stop at the internet. Bad I think it's gggrrreeeaattt!!! Overall I think it is a good thing. Sex is a natural occurence, whether it's done electronically or not. I don't feel sex on the net should be an issue. If you don't like it go somewhere else or ignore it.... could be easy to find No Censorship! The revolution cant happen without sex! Great tool to pass on the importances of sex, compared to the taboo regulation of religion I wish it were more readily available. It is tough to find, and as an adult I feel that I have freedom of choice when it comes to things like that. search programmes do not seem to help if you are looking for anything above talk back comments NO CENSORSHIP Great pretty good Interesting "...let it be"; child porn should be banned; parents educate your children! IT IS THE BEST They don't mix too good. Keep sex (porno) from the net. Where there is people, there is sex; Where there is people, there is Internet. I think for the most part it is talked about too much. If people want to find sex in the real world they will find it, the same on the net. Those who want it will find it, those who don't won't look for it. Sex on th I-net is not too prevalent, if you want to you can avoid it, Only if you want can you actually find it without tripping over it, only the truly curious find truly what they are look ing for. sex is a fact of human existence. why censor nature? In order to receive some pornography, one must have a subscribtion. What hopefully two or more consenting adults do with there lives is there business. I am surprised at the people I know who have accessed pornography on the Internet. killer Sex in my view is a very good boon of god to humans. sex on the internet is just for fun but not for real. Pornographic material is information...just like any other. The thing that firghtens the goverment more is free information. Theyd rather keep you ignorant. A lot of hoo-ha about a very small aspect of the net. Sex is a part of human life, it's natural it should be a part of life on the net, but it's only an obsession for a small percentage, just as it is in mundane life. What we need to do is encourage a responsible, consensual, non-coercive attitude towards sexual behavior in general. As the parent of a teenager, I can tell you - kids will have sex if and when they're ready. The best thing we can do is provide them information, health care and the riht to say yea or nay according to their own sense of self-esteem (we need to make sure that our kids HAVE self-esteem - not just rules and regulations) good and not a big deal. what we need is more and better parents not big brother Right now I am just curious. i believe that sex on yhe internet should be shared between two computers. I love being able to talk freely about sexual experiences and having computer sex. It is much more honest & open i like it...l love it...i want more of it cool. Who is to decide what is "moral" and "indecent"? A bunch of old rich white men sitting on capitol hill? No, it is up to the individual. My standards are considered horrendous to some, normal to others, and possibly soft to a few. The net is one of the only "pure" things left in this dogma-dominated world. i'm looking for it dammit!!!!!!! I think it is great and think we should keep it. We are a couple looking for a bi-female to live in with us, and the 'net' is a great way to find such a person. We placed an ad and have had several responses. We have only been on the 'net' for 3 weeks. I came across a survery last night, and some of the comments were really gross, but I believe, if you don't want to read things like that, then don't go to that site. I don't think anyone, government or otherwise, as a right to censor the 'net'. I hate having my freedom controlled by some narrow mided body or religeous group. Good stuff, nothing rash I've heard a great deal about the huge amounts of sexual material on the Net, but I find it difficult to actually access this data. its free speach. parents beware should be avilable to adults only, but I want it now!!! (I�m 33 y o) It's oke It's a fact of life, w/o it we wouldn't be here, why do people have a problem with it? no opinion It is very cool. The power to turn it on and off should be in the home not the congress. super I wish there was more Very useful and entertaining as long as it is not abused. I'm personally all for it. I don't think there is anything wrong with sexual content on the Net. It is our right to say and to post what we want. Besides, everyone has to learn about sex sometime, so why is it such a big deal?? it sucks I feel that it is a great thing, however realize that some people are against it. I say let them keep crying and let us keep our freedom of speach. there needs to be more pictures sex on the net is not a problem. Parental control is I've just begun to investigate Sex and the Internet. sex is fun, but i am not familiar with sex on the net i thiml it is very cool I think it is a little too easy to find. Easy to get a lot, and quickly Those who would take away our First Ammendment rights are using scare tactics to gain with their own agendas. Almost all service providers I have encountered, provide options for parents to exclude different areas or content types. Better education in that direction is the only thing that will work. where is it? guess I should try it guess I should try it It's a wild time!!! I do not know how to accessit, so I can't tell you. I think the internet is the greatest collection of sex related information... so far in our history. first time on net i don't know much yet. SEX ON THE INTERNET ROCKS The Internet just makes everything happen faster. I think it has helped me open up more to my husband, sexually, and it is a pleasant pastime. sexual monitoring is the job of the parent,not the internet or goverment it's a great sucess. I enjoy it, but kids have easy access and that's wrong. Okay for adults, but not okay for kids under 17 Sex is never dirty when it`s ment real. Perverts have gone hi-tech and we are the ones paying the price, because the net is generally a powerful mechanism as part of the information superhighway. powerful nice It can be a lot of fun and provide a boost to a flagging sex life It is very good! I think the moral police of the US (christian representatives etc) will eventually stop the evolution of the net if they continue promoting censorship. Great! i met my lover on the net...i visited him..we call write...it keeps our love alive since texas and michigan are miles apart:) Since I have just begun to peruse the net, I think it is very interesting how this topic is handled blows Lovely pictures, I'm only human. new on the net, i'll keep you posted its allrite! its 4 fun so there is no harm! it's cool huhuhuhuh I lost my virginity on the Mexican side of Laredo one year before I got married. I was at bat 6 times and batted 500. I don't consider prostitutes sexual partners. "To each his own." If one wants to see hardcore pornography on the internet, then they should be able to; if someone doesn't want to see sexual content on the internet, then they shouldn't hook into those areas of the net. I'm new to the net, but I would like to find out what more it has to offer. Including finding out more about sex sites, since I don't know where they are at. I cant find enough sites with pictures to view for free. So far it has been interesting, however I am not sure exactly what resources are available or how to access them. I am also not sure about the censoring of my server, I wish I could speak with someone who could give me better and more information. I THINK THAT IF YOU WANT TO SEE IT,THEN LOOK INTO IT, AND IF YOU DON'T WANT TO SEE IT, DON'T LOOK INTO IT. PLAIN AND SIMPLE!!! At the current level I find no problems. But when and if the art is thrown out for blantent porno, I will probably change my mind. It is more of a fad thing when you first start but I think if it does not occupy all of your net time you get bored of it. need more pictures of graphic sex scenes. I think pornography on the Internet has ruined the value of the Internet in the minds of most people (thanks to the media). Unfortunately, the availability of the Internet has made it much easier for people (who would otherwise not) to access pornography--which is dangerous to us all. I personally don't want more people perverting their minds and then trying to rape my daughter for some cheap thrill. It's dangerous. It needs to be recognized and addressed, but by REAL PEOPLE, not the government. easier for males to get access. Females want hard core too! Exciting "sex and the internet" is the same as "news and the internet" or "information and the internet". it's the good, the bad, and the ugly. Very Fun, Very Easy! To much attention in focused on it. Not only parents have certain responsibilities, but access providers to minimize to some degree. It's not doing any harm. it should be there for those who want it. Sort of like religion. The Net should remain an open coummication system, without regard (or better yet, despite) governmental regulation and surveilance. It is an open world communication system that is unique and governments and religionists should keep their noses out of (which). The Net should be free and open. If parents have a problen with children and the Net, then the paraents should do some parenting and supersize what their kid do their computer(s).After all, who buys the comupter? and who pays for the Net connection?. Heathy if you're ready for it. Anything else and it's wrong. Definitely SAFE sex! It is cool!!!!!!! it's G-R-E-A-T!!! Not much to say,everybody needs sex. I think it is great! Opened many windows in my mind. I think that it would be a good way to express safe and harmless sex. People should do this more often. i don't now I Think it is very hot. I get an erection with I see gay sex pictures its too much fun Human beings are very sexually driven creatures with an equally strong desire to communicate. This being the case, any uncensored communications media is going to have sexual content. I'm far more concerned about the very real danger of censorship than I am about the alledged dangers of prnography. More nudity!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!! No answer I like looking at the pictures of men and women. I would like to see more men having sex with other men. Government should not regulate the Net. Don't they have more important problems, i.e., trade issues with china, etc.. It is the parents responsibility to teach morals to their children, not the government. The internet should be an open place. Sexual areas should be flagged that only adults are to enter and that anyone who does does so on there own and consents to such material and states that they are of age. This would then protect the internet provider in a similiar way that it is easy to mail order items from adult magazines without the age of the person ordering the item to be verified. you really didn't need to put the pix of that woman at the bottom of this survey IT IS FINE FOR ADULTS I think The Internet is leading a sex revolution that will change sex forever. It allows people to learn assorted sex techniques and to meet new partners. I have 2 words...."FREE SPEECH" Screw censorship!!!! it should be more accessible because not all of us are prude I feel its wonderful :) Discussion and exhange of sexual material is inevitable when humans get together to interact. It happens whenever people get together. The government's only role should be to advise parents of the possibility that children can access explicit material on the Internet. It's fascinating! Yeah! Yeah! I love it!!!!!!!!1 ok it's o.k. To many restrictions,not open enough. Cool ! :) enjoying irc for safe sex and increasing my libido I WOULDN'T LOOK IF IT WAS NOT THERE! Someday it�s normal, like reading Playboy! I REALLY HATE WHEN I GOT TO A GOOD SEX LINK TO FIND SCRAP! No practical relations, just pictures & stories. Sex is just a little part of the Internet. Exon can kiss my ass It's fine for adults and adults who monitor their children's internet access, but they should redo netscape to add an access code feature for adult access on the net. I think that the government stepping in to controll the internet using sexually orientated material is a ploy to controll the net using sex because it is a sensitive subject. No one really wants to see children hurt and the government knows this. What they really want is to monitor all the mail and conversations on the net since they can't do this now (unlike the regular phone system). nothing Sex on the internet is fine...if you don't like..turn it off! more more more!!! Wonderful it should be only forbidden for children The internet is excellent for those whose bizzare sexual desires have made them feel isolated and alone in their life so far. It provides a basically anonymous way of learning more about your own desires. great There must be more not the real thing (yet) not enough pictures or i cant find them nothing major unless you know enough about computers and have someone show you how to get around the net The intermet is an information provider, and information about sex is still information after all. I'm for sex if it's on the net or anywhere else!! Should be left to the pesons own likes or dislike only.. I think sex is somewhat of a problem on the Internet. Its harmless and fun! I LIKE IT I really so not think it is neccesary to be on the net. It is already everywhere else. poor not enough free sites with good graphics i really haven't seen much of anything cool way to share erotic experiences with my partner that we would not usually have access to. There should be more of it Too few raunchy pictures The Net has opened new areas of sexual exploration for me. I like to fuck~!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!! It allows a person to explore without fear of consequences I don't mind it. It keeps me going!!! Turn on What a big deal about such a little thing! Sex on the 'net should not be that significant to people with balanced lives Kinda fun It's a great place to find pornos to masturbate to. I love it...I met my future husband on the internet :> I think it is a great outlet for for voyeuristic urges. Also, I can safely look at various aspects of sexuality and appreciate the anonymous nature of the Internet I don't have a problem with it. I very open when it comes to sex, nothing has ever shocked me when it comes to sex, sexual act.. whatever. If someone doesn't like it, they don't have to look at it or discuss it. I like it, and like to talk about it and do it!!! The media is hyping only the tawdry, much like they would talk about a red light district affecting a sprawling metropolis. The public needs to be educated as to what the *real* issues are. EDUCATION! cool i want to find sex on the net live between people I think it's the first time ordinary, sexually restless people might find a really anonymous solution to their situation. I think it should be available. After all, computers are an adult toy with more adults, than kids, using them. i think it's a great way for sexual frustration and it's safe because nobody can get pregnant or anything I THINK IT IS GREAT THAT PEOPLE GO TO THE NET TO BE FREE! I think that openness is important and provides an evironment that encourages experimentation and freedom Saw this at a site: "I'd much rather my kids see a sexual act than a murdering slaughter! It is alright, it is safe and erotic at times FREE I think there is nothing more wrong with sex on the internet than there is with the magazines that have been around, and very sucessful, for years. If parents don't want there children to use the internet then they need to monitor what their child is doing. Censorship on the INet is wrong! I love to masturbate while on the Net. It gets me real horny. shows potential to be entertaining, enlightening, and an outlet for good natured sex. I love it and I think there should be more hot sexy sites It's pretty interesting, but not as good as the real thing It's just delightful. Varied, pleasant... If it's concentual I think it's ok. If someone isn't willing, they can just leave the area, or stop talking to the other person. It is a good thing - freedom of speech go for it! I think it's rampant, however the choice of either having it or attempting to censor I would choose to have it, since the censorship would spread like wildfire and cause a global scene. I think that the Internet degrades the sanctity of sex...The Internet makes pornography and adult entertainment too easily accessible. Not as bad as the news depicts. Like real life, there are some real dangerous people out there and you just can't jump into a strangers web .. this is true though out the world. Obviously there is a problem with kids accessing pornographic gifs and such, but there has to be another to solve this problem without abolishing pornography completely from the net. I think of it in terms of adult bookstores in most cities in the u.s., near the entrance there is always somebody there to check Ids to make sure no one under 21 gets in. Likewise there should be some mechanism that filters out those people who don't want those sites to be accessible from those who do want those sites to e accessible. Could you imagine if all adult bookstores in a particular city were to be closed down because some minors managed to get hold of some pornographic material? There would be an up-rise 10 times worse than the prohibition days in our nation's history. Also, pornography isn't seen as such a big deal in Europe (trust me I know) people will just access sites in Europe where the topic of pornography on the net really isn't an issue. In fact many german programs have rediculed the fact that such a issue has to have a congressional hearing to be resolved. I know there are different levels of morals in different countries but the fact of the matter is that people are going to find sex on the net whether it is regulated or not simply because the demand is there. I probably shouldn't say this but there are plenty of hackers out there who have established secret sites that are known only by a select few and can never be traced. (I know because I'm one of them) So regulate all you want with the exxon ill or whatever, there will always be the UNDERGROUND--------- no idels it is for a bunch of faggots suckas Provided it in properly policed so minors have no access, I feel it is healthy and opens ones eyes to what is happening in real life. It's all new to me!!! Good source of information, but frightening potential for misuse (I am not so open-minded as to tolerate pederastry or rape against either gender) Good for our love-life I am new to the Net so I haven't seen too much yet. I think the Internet is a marvelous resource for expressing one's own sexuality and learning about the sexuality of others. Having all this information--technical, practical, prurient, and commercial--in *one* fairly private place is a tremendous and valuable achievement. The wide-scale *positive* effects of that achievement on people's emotional and spiritual lives will only become apparent in the 21st century ... in the mean time, we must NOT let local standards--even our own--dictate what is allowble or available on the Internet. Just happened to come accross it and was curious. should be open to everyone Sex is something that shouldn't be prohibited by law - it should just me monitored (re: paedophilia, etc.) Only the correct people should have access - difficult, I know, but... Good Idea, but I am not sure everyone would answer honestly. Invalidates it maybe? just fun It is kind of hype. There is not that much pornographic available kool, kewt and kinky - also harmless and good fun. Idon't think it should be banned. Ithink that parents should be responsible for their children, that is where the kids would gain access. want to find special intrest sex and comunicate with others No free access comunication system should be be involved in sex. I have been on bulletin boards for years, don't see any problems there but I am new to the net. In general I am opposed to censorship in any form. like everywhere ! Excellent stuff it is very cool......... Exon can go eat a dick! Keep the Net free! Its a good thing...people can come to terms with unusual desires, by seeing others being open about it. I think (and hope) this will lead to more than just openness regarding sexual issues. I think we're on the road to truly beginning to understand each other on levels that we have NEVER in history explored. People will be all the healthier for it, and much happier. Its arousing..but see as dangerous in the wrong hands... Internet is sexy. It's fine for those who are of legal age. where is it muy bien i wish i had access to more picyures want more The net has been a helpful place to zoosexuals like me. We have been able to find others of our kind and find belonging for once in our lives. Something straight people take for granted is special to us. It has saved the lives of some too. Kept them from hurting themselves. I love finding new stuff to jerk off with everynight! The parents should be the one to keep it from their children. I like it. It is easy to find. Just how I like it. should be easier to locate No different than sex elsewhere in the "real" world. Sex is gift that is share between someone that you love. Internet is sometimes misused by many pepole. This promotes negative things about sex. Where is it? I've been looking for over an hour! dull An interesting distraction for adults, if you want to look it up, it's your choice to do that. I love sex and am glad that I have the opportunity to express it. I love it!! I am into sex on many levels, both intellectually and physically and love having instant access at my finger-tips. I wish I had/could find more access to interesting sites, including hardcore porn and interactive video. In question 10 you didn't offer "read instructional/informational material" as a choice. I've learned a lot that has braodend my and my wifes sex lives. Enjoy it while you still can! It should be easier to access for those that want it. ok good for a brouse good for a brouse With a few exceptions, there should be no restrictions on the net's sexual material. The exceptions should be child pornography or any pornography advocating harm or violence to people. It is a bit prolific, but should not be regulated It is good for imagination and fantasies. I can talk about what I want to and not worry about repecutions. I would never find it anywhere else(in some cases). It's great!!!!!! I REALLY DONT KNOW MUCH ABOUT IT . THIS IS MY FIRST TIME USING IT. keep up the good work It's safe! I think it provides a great open minded forum for adults to share true life desires and feeling we weree always afraid od It's better to do it in the net than doing it with hooker an injoyable experience but should be confined to your own four walls Seems safe but it can really harm us. It's a great place for fantasy! I've just always thought that folks find what they look for on the Internet. Some choose to be offended, some do not. But whether a person is a proponent or in opposition to something they find, or simply of no particular opinion, sex on the 'net is not something people just bump into, anymore than they would in real life...And they always have the option to simply turn it off. More, More, More A real non-issue. Reflects role of sex generally, which is compelling topic for us all. I have no problem with it at all. It's a normal extension of healthy human sexuality. I am a zoophile with intrests in people primarily and various species lower on my scale. All things should be available to anyone over 18. I believe that the Internet, like any other media, is used for communication. Naturally, people want to talk about sex - it is an important part of life. The possibility of anonymous posting may encourage sex discussions, but thats it. Of course, the uncensored Internet promotes open minded thinking - this is a Good Thing(tm). Anybody afraid of the Net probably also opposed the invention of the radio, the telephone, book printing, television and language. A media does not imply judgement. Every medium roadens the range of personal experiences and therefore is a Very Good Thing(tm). Wannabe-Censors should be dealed with. Sure Sex is a very special thing between two people who love each other! i think there should be more I think its exiting. I love women and their bodies. needed Its a great way to gain information about sex and vrious practices without buying alot of books, or feeling embarassed by the curiousity. I am totally for the use of the internet as an open forum for sexual discussions and sexual ideas as well as all other topics of human interest. I love it. I'd like to find some real chat sex area. I think the openess is a good thing, if they want to close down sexual places because of children, then keep them off the net. Its the parents place not the goverment to control what is done on the computer. I think it is a form of free speech and should be left alone for the most part. Very hard-core or illegal stuff should have no place on the Internet I think the openess is a good thing, if they want to close down sexual places because of children, then keep them off the net. Its the parents place not the goverment to control what is done on the computer. It rarely occurs except for reference & product ordering provides new ways to stimulate sexualty I feel that sex in the internet should be there but anybody who wants to access it should be given some sort of an ID like social security no so that people who are above 21 can access it. The alt. newsgroups should be esier to access. There should be an online forum for spanking besides just the newsgroups! Absolutely love it! I find out alot about things that I've been curious about for a long time. Also it's giving me the courage to act on my desires. Thankyou and keep it up :-) if you see a newsgroup called alt.sex.fetish you should be not so utterly stupid that you think it's about baking cookies or something!!!! I love it! It has given alot of contacts that I wouldn't otherwise have. ok This is a well constructed survey. I hope you gather some useful information that informs a rational approach to sex on the internet. Congratulations! its kind of funny!! People have the right to view or read whatever they desire ! It's great fun... Sex is good, hopefully the internet will contribute to future sexual experiences. overated I think it is a person's right to view or not. You don't have to view it if you don't want. So let alone the people that it entertians. Parents should be able to keep their children away from the heavy porno stuff good Fast and easy way to get pornographic material crude and a bit impersonal It`s good i like it alot censure is too much (look like angie everhart) I like it Unless you are looking for it, it won't show up for the most part, and if it does, you can always not look at it. That is why the government has no business censoring. I love sex and the net is cool but not tigether it is degrading and desparate Too little! a bit too open... Don't like child pornography. It has been a very educational database. I would rather that it wasn't on the net. I would rather have the net be a place for reasearch and learning things of value, and exchanging information to uplift and be productive. I would rather that the sex / porno, if it must be anywhere, would be in one area, easier to avoid or block. Easy to get! It's better than rape on the street not really a problem.people who don't like it,don't have to see it. There should be a central site that alows access to all facates of sex and sexuality It has been given too much focus by the media. It's not really that big of a deal. ok if its limited with suprmodels and nude celebrity,nothing hard core Just 3 words...FREEDOM OF SPEECH I think sex is something that everyone should learn and talk about freely. The internet is a great place for people to learn and get more information on the subject! I have had some of my best orgasims through it good if controlled by parents good if controlled by parents boring It's healthy! hmmmm....i like sex and i like the internet...however, i prefer sex! Sex and the internet is no differentthat sex and a magazine duh The news like taking things and blowing them out of proportion. Yeah, the few children who have been abducted by pedophiles are a few too many, but you don't hear of malls being closed because of kids getting abducted there. 1 abduction is 1 too many, but don't blame it on the net. It's the person that kills, not the gun. it's great and I wish there was more. i want to find more of it I am curious to know what all the contriversy is all about. If it is monitored by parents/guardians I see no problem -- as long as there is a special mail-in that the parents fill in to make a password that kids don't see. A varifacation should be sent in as well AFTER the password has been sent in in something that looks like ordinary mail so no suspcion is arroused. My e-mail is tarbox50@potsdam.edu. Feel free to e-mail me to let me know how things are going. :-) Its freedom of speach , those who dont like it can ignore the pictrues easy enough it's there, it's just difficult to find. It's Cool Man���� Nothing next to local BBS's I think it should be available to all that want it but not imposed on any that don't. It should be capable of private regulation. good SHOULD BE OPEN for all adults leave one outlet that is not restriced Fun! I want some!!! People who want it, get it! Parents, regulate! It's kind of funny, but useless Its a discrace that the most powerful nation in the world is also the most conservative when it comes to sex! more power to you!!!!!!! Its a fun forum to explore what is only human and natural! It more soft than hard core There should be more of it ITS COOL AND SHOULD BE PEMITTED. HAVEN'T SEEN ENOUGH TO COMMENT It's a good thing...no point in censoring...Keep up w/the good work...Parents should take care of their kids if they don't want the kids exposed to certain material sex is cool and the internet is too What I think is that it lets us know that we are not the only ones "getting it on" out there on the "SuperHighway". they go well together I would like to, find more,but its not that easy it's fun My gender is private and no one should be allowed to ask for it. This subject should never never come up. hard to find i'm still looking Sex on the net is here to stay. Just like rock and roll. It's great!! I love it !! STILL CHECKING IT OUT. I think its great More please the only sex i;ve seen is in the newsgroups (just pictures) I love it! If one is very computer literate, s/he can find what ever they want on the net. Where as childeren are concerned... parents should make it a point to be just as litterate to protect their kids. It isn't that difficult to install blockers. I think it's an excellent way of exploring one's sexual identity, and to possibly explore new avenues of fulfillment. As to children vs. access, the term "child" be clearly defined; does it mean under 18? under 13? who knows.... I believe if you're old enough to engage in sex, you're old enough to be fully informed as to the potential consequences of you're actions, and then you may make an informed choice as to how you proceed. First step: stop equating religion and general morality with sexual procliities. It's out there, it's uncontrollable, and with the exception of the illegal stuff (Child, etc.) leave it alone It can't encourage perversion because if someone wants the material, they will get it somewhere no matter what. I just started using the net, but So afr I like what I see and I see alot of stuff I don't mind. Pretty strange considering I am a pretty cnservative guy. Although I am a college student!! it is a free world, let's keep it open to everyone I think there is nothing wrong with it. This country needs to be more open about sex. Without it none of us would be here. Too many Americans freak out if they see a females breast. Who cares. It is the human body...It is the most well constructed ma Though the internet is not regulated, I can understand all the sex on the net. Its a freedom as American citizens we chooses to have, but we must not forget that our children are online too. Sad to say but this controversy will continue to grow with no satisfactory end. Interesting when you first start surfing thereafter pretty boring I think parents should take more active control of their children in all matters. We should not have to suffer for their lack of control. Don't need it, but being a sex freak, I don't mind it :) more articles on incest Its a great opportunity to expand one's sexual/sensual horizons. It is not the place for censorship and must remain open and unsullied by any single point view. If one doesn't like the material available---don't log on. Do some gardening or fishing, etc. I want more stuff ... I'm so excited I can not stop touching myself and I'm in a computer lab with 40 other people. I enjoy that, and I hope to get more information. All the media hype would be nothing if parents would take responsibility for their childrens actions. SHUOULD BE WATCHED MORE CAREFULLY I'd like to experience more. happy good Sex between couples, esspecially parents with small children, need a place to solve their problems, and learn from others expiriences to avoid divorce MILD Until I tried "surfing the net" I was set on being a virgin until marriage...it opened me up alot! no comment It is a very easy thing to fing in the net and I think steps should be taken to avoid children seeing this material. should be easier to find---lighten up north america======== It may be better than real sex because no one gets pregnant. I had never seen a real penis and was preaparing to see my boyfriends so I would know what it looked like. Sex is fairly self regulated, not as bad as the media hype !!! As an adult, I would like to think that I could find any and all sex,erotica,pics,stories, and subjects...as long as I conform to local laws. The more the better....I'd have cyber sex with all that I can. Sex is each individuls right to choose if it doesnt harm others The internet serves the people who enter it, they will decide the eventual outcome Sex on the net should not be regulated. I feel that as responsible adults we should have enough discipline to police ourselves. This is supposed to still be a free country isn't it? I'm glad it's here. I've met some interesting people... It's ok. but , it could be possible to lock the browsers access to sexual address It is intriging! although I do prefer it in the flesh! It's good for entertainment... Nothing more should be more diverse to cater to all Just a part of the whole. not enough All this histeria about children accessing porn is bullshit. You need to be a member of a porn provider anyway. Where is all the Mpeg's on sex? personally, I want to see more of it, at a cheaper price... Strongly believe in freedom of speech (communications). Sex on the internet, like many other things in our society, doesn't need government control or regulation. People need to be responsible for themselves and leave the rest of us alone. If they don't want to see something don't look, as for their children, Sex on the net is a big $cam for the almighty $ no good I've heard there is some really raunchy stuff on the net. Neither that nor sex education in schools nor most parental instruction is very helpful in this area. Maybe people should only view it with the consent of their sexual partners (so, most kids wouldn't have any). killer! GREAT HAVING COMMON INTERFACE WITH LIKEMINDED PEOPLE IN PRIVATE SETTING The internet is a way to express your opion on any subject, although sex is everywhere parents must still regulate what their children should see. This day and age parents should be open-minded, but still instruct their children what sex is all about at the proper age. The age for children to know about the birds and the bees, should be around nine to ten years of age even a bit earlier. For more information i think people should listen to a few radio talk shows, one in particular Dr. Laura. I think there should be easier access to porrnogrophy most hard core things come from pay services...the way it should be SHOULD BE AT RATED SITES AND FREELY AVAILABLE If I want to look for it, I will. If not, I won't! Sex has been around alot longer than the net (and Congress) It is mildly stimulating. I see nothing wrong with adults having free access to materials of a sexual nature. If you don't want to see it don't look! Our society is decaying. Everyone will feel the effect of moral decay. great more sex I do not have a problem with sex on the internet as long as it does not involve children. You can't eliminate the sexual desires of people, but maybe divert or channel these desires away from innocent victims of rape I dont have anytihing against sex on the net dynamic I don't reaaly know because I haven't been working on the internet long. It's better than a BBS. The basic principle of our nation is freedom. That is why so many people have flocked to our nation. Therefore the less government intervention the better. Internet does well on it's own. Let society not government be the judge and use the net in their own choice method. Freedom of Choice is the answer. pk I see no problem with it if parents monitor their children's behavior Ive seen some pretty sick individuals as well as some very good educational tools. The stuff that is easy to find appears more on the onjective informational side of things. To get access to the hard-core pronography you have to pay anyway which would turn most people/children off on the idea. All in all it doesn't appear to be offensive or "bad". sex on net is thrilling and easy to find. I like it. I've met a lot of people who share my sexual interests GREAT !!!!! These guys need to get out more... I find it fascinating, and I think it will be a real shame if it becomes restricted. I, at least, will fight this. It allow one to experience different lifestyles in a safe enviroment. It also allow people to express their feeling honestly. I think it is okay, and that it should continue as is, with no outside intereince. I think that im spending to much time for searching Sex. You can buy it in the stores. You can find it your parents bedroom. what the hell is wrong with it on the net? Nothing! Control your kids.. GREAT-BUT DIFICULT TO ACCESS. Like anything, it has its good points and its bad points It's fun I think that each person should be able to decide for themselves whether or not they want to view or read anything of a sexual nature. I Like It I Love It I Want More Of It Much Ado about Nothing I like it, I love it, I want more of it humiliate me, make me dress up in your panties!! It's a fun and safe outlet for sexual frustration I think there are enough regulations period. What happened to freedom of speech? I love them both You already need an account and ID to gain access to most sexually explicit material so it would be difficult for a child or anyone without a password to access. It is already self regulating. I'm horny It keeps me at home and out of trouble. I'm alone and want to keep it that way now. OK...People need to make their own "online" judgements it is informative. I have no problems except kids should be limited by parents It is vastly overated. its much more important to watch about drugs, violance financial and political corrution and POLUTION! How would you deal with the issue of regulating sexual/offensive content? Parental lock on home systems use browsers that block children Let gov't enforce morality standards and have rating system if people can find it they deserve to see it get them to masterbate while downloading pictures Keep 'hard' sites away from young eyes - password. parent-locks The net is a world within a world with no borders and no laws it's the last and youngest outpost of the "other side" Sexual material could be made available for purchase only. That way children wouldn't have a chance don't look at it if you don't like it blocking programs PARENTAL CONTROL OF CHILDREN EXPOSED TO MATERIAL i think that there should be alot moor of it. establish self-reg body, no hardcore porn, rating system people should have to enter S.S. number to prove they are over 21. The tools are in place to limit access thru AOL i.e., so parents haves that option in place if they are concerned about it, as they should be. But the Internet Should be completely open. create a key security system like the cable companies have for not allowing children to view adult movies after hours?! I think parents can control it adequatly let the parents do the policing of their own children do adult-only passwords Let Rome burn, for Christ's sake Make tools available to control it at the user end. Parents should supervise their children Better education to the public about the restrictions providers may offer to protect their children from unwanted areas. If a kid is old enough to look for it, they are old enough to see it.---Sex is not bad or ugly! Makers of such filth and flarn should have their sexual organs gouged out of their bodies and set aflame. Perverts should once again relegate themselves to "flashing" old women in the park. parent guidance is best, nothing else Provide a means for self-censorship(from children) shut down access by influential groups net should be open and adults should have a special pass word PUT UP A SIGN: IF YOU DON'T LIKE IT DON'T BE A PART OF IT personal software which will filter out certain sites based on keywords Software development of restricted access programs let parents do it Let parents guide children twoards healthy chanels Part 'rating system' and mandatory for ISP's to provide limits of the ratings to users as part of their subscription. Parents should be solely responsible for their children! let families and host intstitutions prevent children from accessing pornography Let me decide for myself what I want to read and see let it all go on....it is enjoyable let people take the blame for their actions for once. Another words, the parents should have control of their kids in such a way that the kids would not get access. The government doesn't need to keep on telling the people what is good and bad. People some kind of way where it can be controlled differently from every computer Ther should be more of it Kill all non-believers This planet needs a single bill of human rights, a governing body to administer the definition of rights, a judicial system to enterpret them and an enforcement agency to act on them. Once this is in place then all conduct online or off should be regulated by this. Educate the ignorant NetWatcher systems integrated into net products that require changing settings (that can be password protected) in order to view porn (in cojunction with an online rating system). Allow third parties to provide ratings Each individual household should determine via a contract with the internet service provider whether or not they have access to the x-rated sites. Then if a minor were to access these sites the internet service provider could not be held accountable due to the fact that whoever took up the responsibility of the household decided that these x-rated sites would be accessible. This reminds me of the age old idea of parents being responsible for their children. WOW!! What a thought! Now, a another group o society, namely the group of adult single guys who like to access adult material, should not be short changed by the mere fact that a lot of parents out there just don't give a damn about what their children are getting into. LONG LIVE ANALINGUS!!!! Personal Control through software. (Like blocking cable channels) Work at promoting understanding and acceptence. parents should supervise and be held responsible It can't be regulated, give it up... Give parents tools to protect children give codes to certain sexual contents develop software for use by parents/site admins to limit access Net sh be open, but req a Server-assigned password to access sexually explicit material. Allow only 18+ or 21+ into the systems through user checks on their systems. it will regulate itself the parents should be responsible enough to place blocks on such sites they deem unsuitable for their children combine open sites with moderated sites; all rated with filter programs available Parents should censor the kids themselves, since that is their job as a parent. establish ethic code, no rules Individuals and parents control usage and access. Keep the governments out of it! take all the Christian Coalition Nazis, put them in a room, and force them to watch "Anal Intruders" for eight hours Parent should be responsible enough to look after their children. Teach the kids what to look and not look at. control access through lockouts If they don't like it, then don't access it! parental control The people using the internet should have to enter their age truthfully. parental control If certain people don't like it, don't watch! parents must regulate THEIR kids, not expect US to do it screw 'em Lock the geezers away, sans computers, in the old folks' home should be a combination of self regulating about rating system sites Secured access for explicit sights, with admittance granted only after Proving age. Unfortunately, some Americans believe that sex and nudity are evil dirty. However this is another discussion in itself. My suggestion is to require Parental Control options for all Internet providers. People should pull their heads out of their asses and open up their minds. Parents should be responsible for information children have access to. special blocker system Establish passwords to allow proven individuals into the areas. parents should teach their children how to responsibly handle sex. parents are responsible for their children's access I think it should be up to the parents to censor their childerens viewing No child porn promote freak bashing Make user type in driver's licence or identification--this can be checked against an on-line record with birthdays. Yes, people could copy other people's driver's licenses. Big whoop. If they have a problem with it they should be using it. There should a code or a password of some kind that keeps young people away from it, but I don't see how sex on the net could cause a problem if people are doing this in their own homes, where it is not hurting anyone else. parents should supervise what their youngsters do. check ages of recipients through social security number People should be responsible for their own actions. Parents should monitor and educate their own children. Let's keep this society free and let people choose for themselves. blocking software parents should be responsible for what their children access a rating system for sites with tight regulation on access availability. Everything but child pornography should be permitted if you don't like it don't read it we have the right to communication. If they don't like it they need to stay away, or keep the ones they don't want to see that stuff off the net.. Questions, comments, suggestions? Contact us. Return to theHome Page. Copyright ©1996, /InterCommerceCorporation, All rights reserved worldwide Send comments to Webmaster@Survey.net WT02-B22-35IA060-000333-B027-88http://www.survey.net:80/pol2c1.html 204.107.221.240 19970115060537 text/html 61542HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 15 Jan 1997 05:59:03 GMTServer: Apache-SSL-US/1.0.3+1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 61359Last-modified: Mon, 25 Nov 1996 20:26:44 GMT SURVEY.NET - 1996 Presidential Poll #2 - User comments (ARCHIVE I) Your source for information, opinions & demographics from the NetCommunity! ANNOUNCING: The Internet's finest interactive, totally-automated,immediate survey system. We can take any form and instantly create adynamic demographic database and show you the results as soon as youcomplete the survey! Political Survey #2 User comments [ARCHIVE I] Who will be president in 1996 and why? Harry Browne, because he is the ONLY candidate with a consistent philosophy concerning the true nature of government. There really isn't that big of a difference between ANY of the other candidates, who are merely seeking to scale back or "reform" the mixed economy, welfare-state machine, as opposed to ELIMINATING it and returning to our constitutional roots. Phil Gramm: Of the 14 Representatives and Senators who have represented me in my life, he is the only one who has represented my views. Bill Clinton because he is willing to compromise rather than take an extreme position on an issue colin powell, we need a change I want to see Harry Browne as President, because Government doesn't work. keyes-most correctly defined the problem........ Phil Gramm; he'll balance the budget Collin Powell becauxe he seem honest and in touch with moderate, majority of America. Rick Tompkins 'cause, like me, he believes in minimal govmint Harry Browne, he is for much less government. We need to eliminate as much government as possible. Bill Clinton - he's done a good job with the economy, now if he can just get the deficit in check... HARRY BROWNE We need solid philosophical principles that won't be undermined or compromised on in our leaders. Well, I had hoped to vote for Gen. Colin Powell, but unfortunately he has decided against a presidential run. Therefore, I will more than likely vote for President Clinton, if I decide that voting is the proper action to take. I do not believe that Bill Clinton has been an effective president. And there are many reasons -- vascilating -- being one of his most annoying qualities. But, because the Republican field of candidates appears and truly is lame (and I am being kind) then I will either not voe or pull the donkey lever. Although I must add that if Lamar Alexander somehow received the GOP nomination, then I might actually decided not to vote for Clinton. Phil Gramm because he really does want to cut goverment spending a whole lot. I don't know yet Harry Browne is the only canidate actually wanting to reduce the role of govt in our lives Alan Keyes -- because America has almost lost the vision that once made Her great, and Ambassador Keyes as our leader can help us regain it. Harry Browne, because he promises cutting government and the national debt Harry Browne. Because he has pleged to abolish the IRS. Without the power to tax the government would be very limited. Anyone but a liberal democrat harry browne Harry Browne. He supports the Constitution. He is honest. A Godly person. Harry Browne because the Constitution is being ignored! Harry Browne. He'll help restore our freedom. Bill, I hate the Newt 'n' Bob club Harry Browne, I am a Libertarian and believe government is the source of most problems rather than the solution. Harry Browne- He's the only candidate really serious about reducing the size and intrusiveness of the federal government Steve Forbes FLAT TAX Harry Browne. I agree with his limited gov't policies. Colin Powell. Moderate conservative. The best candidate for the job Harry Browne because the government is WAY TOO LARGE!! Any Republican or other candidate who understands the effect of big government on personal freedom Phill Gramm, He knows how to make the big change, and will! Bill Clintono Rick Thomkins. I believe he is the only candidate dedicated to dismantling unconstituional goverment agencies and returning the federal goverment back to ONLY it's constitutional powers. I'd like to see just about anyone but Bill Clinton. I'll vote for Bob Dole, Phil Gramm, Colin Powell, Steve Forbes--almost anyone the Republicans nominate is preferable to Bill Clinton, who is arguably the worst president we have ever had. Let's send Bill and Hillary back to Arkansas, and let them practice their politics on the unfortunate residents of that state. Alan Keyes because he calls for America to get back to a moral base! Lamar Alexander, He is the candidate that most reflects my own views An honest person - and only dishonest crooks are running! Anyone who will reduce government and not restrict personal freedoms. Harry Browne - In the last 40 years I have watched the Freedoms our Constitution is supposed to guarantee be eroded. We must get government under control. Dole- He best suits my personal beliefs on government Harry Browne. The only candidate that has a plan to significantly reduce the size of government. Harry Browne -- he will work to REDUCE the size and cost of the federal government Harry Browne, because he will reduce the size of gov't mickey mouse, he has a good heart, and a wife to do the real work Harry Browne(L): Even the republicans admit that they're increasing the budget. Someone who will think before doing anything! Patrick Buchanan Harry Browne: Government doesn't work, he understands this HARRY BROWNE, Because I value mine and others' liberty. Clinton...He is the only one that still recognizes the poor and the middle class. All the others have been bought and paid for by the corporations and the wealthy.... Bill Clinton. His is a moderate who best reflects the wishes of the American people. Bill Bradley No one who is qualified will run. Harry Browne. He is the only candidate who will reduce the government WITHOUT compromise. Bill Clinton - Has done a good job so far. He is moderate. Bill Clinton, because he has done a good job. It doesn't matter. The presidency is relatively meaningless, and the differences between any candidates are inconsequential. Most anyone other then Bill Clinton I'd register to vote if they added a "none of the above" option to the ballot; if no vote were counted as a vote for no one, we would have been sans government long ago. Harry Brown - He's the only one who realizes that government is the problem, not the solution! Harry Browne, because government doesn't work. Harry Browne, because he represents the principles that I believe in. A Libertarian - we need to restore rights, reduce governmen Harry Browne -- He wants to reduce the fed to 1/3 its present size. Government doesn't work! If you do not believe me answer this question: Who do trust more with your parcels? UPS, FedEx or the USPS? Harry Browne, to legalize freedom. Browne for less taxes Perot he is a rich man and knows how to balance big budgets Clinton, He has done a pretty good job and the Republicans scare the hell out of me'' MArio Cuomo Bob Dole - I view him as a resonable conservative. Harry Browne to reduce government to increase the standard of living Harry Browne, Libertarian. A Libertarian candidate would at least attempt to get our budget under control. He would also attempt to give the government back to the people. How? I'm not certain. But I think it should be given a chance. Harry Browne -- He's the only candidate who: a) wants to dramatically decrease the size and influence of the federal government, and b) has a specific plan to do so. Harry Browne - He has a platform of solid solutions Harry Browne, as he promises to vastly reduce the scope of the government. Steve Forbes I feel overtaxation is his main concern. Harry Browne-Rep's & Dem's are equally intrusive these days. ross perot.... he is not a polititian either Jesse Jackson or Jerry Brown--only two public figures who are seriously addressing serious issues and are closest to my own opinions Clinton: The economy has rebounded. a fresh, critical voice - perhaps forbes/clinton Dole -- because Clinton is too liberal Harry Browne, the government spends,regulates,and intrudes too much Harry Browne, because he wants to turn back the tide of government Harry Browne - The only PRO-FREEDOM candidate Newt Gingrich because he keeps his promises Bob Dole - Extremely realistic, fair minded and experienced. Alan Keyes: The man with the most comprehensive vision Clinton, He stands for the middle class, and has not sold out to the wealthy like Newt and the boys. Harry Browne, because he's the only one who will fix our problems NOW, as opposed to some undetermined time. Harry Browne - He seems to be the candidate. who most closely reflects my own political beliefs Bill Clinton - with a chance to actually make changes Harry Browne because he will do what he says he will do. He is a man of principle and compassion. Harry Browne--he'll return this government to the constitutional guarantees of individual liberty that made America the envy of the downtrodden everywhere. H Browne. We need some sort of change to get us out of the mess that we currently are in. So far we have given each of the two major parties a chance, and all that has happened is getting us in worse troubble. Let someone, anyone, that believes that the indivigual is responsible for their actions. The government DOES NOT have to take us by the hand every day of our lives. In times of great need, such as disasters, government should take charge as a central agent to clean up the mess. NOT make it orse with all the delays and red tape. I tried to be brief, honest. Harry Browne - the government which governs best is that which governs least Harry Browne, because we need to massively reduce the size of government. The Democrats like big government and the Republicans like it only slightly less. Harry Browne, or Steve Forbes-- we need someone who understands that reducing government is an *affirmative* program, not a way to punish some group of people we don't like/ Harry Browne, for real change. Harry Browne will cut taxes and reduce government intrusion in the lives of US citizens. Harry Browne, so my kids can keep keep their money instead of pay an 84% tax rate ME bob Dole, deserves the job. Harry Browne, because he is the only one that understands that governemnt doesn't work. Pete Wilson cost cutting and less untrustworthy than Dole colin powell...a man of integrity who could unite the country from the two idiotic bickering democrats and republicans..too bad he said no Anyone with an ounce if honesty and integrity. Unfortunately, no one with these qualifications would submit to the indignities of running for public office. Buchanan put America First and respect for union workers Browne: Because government doesn't work and he's the only candidate who promises to REALLY reduce the size/scope/power/intrusion of government. Harry Browne. Reduction in the size and scope of goverment is critically important. Bill Clinton, Bob Dole & Newt Gingrich scare me!!!!! Lamar Alexander, he is honest!!! Alan Keyes, family values, black Any Republican - Government harmony is needed Harry Browne, because he's the only candidate who is serious about reducing the power of government. Clinton; he's the least of all evils Phil Gramm or Alan Keyes - they are honest, and a breath of fresh air; Harry Browne - He is the only candidate who wants to REDUCE the size of government. Everyone else is arguing over reducing the rate of growth of government. Harry Browne is the only person with the guts to cut the government. Everyone else is basicaly the same I want to see Harry Browne as President, because he will give me my money back, and keep the government off my back... Clinton. He's not the greatest, but the others all suck! Harry Browne, because he knows government does not work! Harry Browne, because he will reduce the size of government, not merely slow its rate of growth. Harry Browne, Libertarian, to drastically reduce fed. govt. Anyone who'll say, "Balance the budget THIS YEAR!" pat buchan Harry Browne: He will respect the Constitution. Alan Keyes. He boldly attacks the REAL problem with our society. Whoever the Libertarian candidate is, because that is the only chance there is fo having someone principled in the race. Bill Clinton, he has the best (of possible candidates) understanding f economics and he is also compasionate, something rarely found in Democrats or Republicans 1. Dan Quayle I don't like anybody that's running yet. It's just a matter of who I dislike less. Harry Browne--only candidate proposing radical reductions in the federal government Clinton. Bill Clinton- because I feel he has done a good job. I'd like to see a "new guard" Republican, i.e. under 50, though I don't know who that might be (Caroll Campbell, SC?) if possible someone honest & trustworthy.to remember the people elected that person to work for us and our country's productivity, safety, and pride. Not to bend to political pressures or promises. Clinton. He is concerned with the pulic NOT the private (big business) sector. Newt Gingrich - He is a leader with balls. If I had my druthers it'd be Phil Gramm; unfortunately it looks like we're going to be stuck with Dole. Clinton is a lying, philandering, cowardly poltroon who would know morality if it came up and bit him on the ass. colin powell but it is a moot point Gen. Colin Powell, because, I feel, he is the best qualified person for the job. He is the only one of the three who doesn't have a hidden reward by winning I like Jack Kemp. As long as Hillary goes back to the kitchen. Her panties must be too tight! Colin Powell, but it's too late for that William Bennet, National Empowerment, effective and knowledgeable politician skilled in the art of compromise while retaining a core set of values. Dole, because he has the experience and skills of a commander-in-chief. Mr. Jello Biafra would make a great president. He can balance the budget by doing the one thing that Clinton or Newt would never do, Tax Religion. He would also leagalize drugs and end the drug war, get America off NAFTA, and use NASA to send the FBI, CIA Clinton--everyone else is quite frightening! STEVE FORBES,HE IS A BUSINESSMAN, NOT A Anybody BUT Bill Clinton Bill Clinton for balance of power. Bob dole democrats did bad Bob Dole with Colin Powell as VP Clinon because he is a reasonable man Walter Williams Colin Powell or Pete Wilson - they both have the integrity and are not too partisan to hinder negotiations with Congress Dole - Clinton was never & never will be truthful & good for our country! The DLC version of Bill Clinton Wanted Colin Powell but he is out - so I have no clue at this time....... I would like to see Ross Perot as President. It is unlikely he will run again however. Get Clinton out Bob Dole, Pres. Clinton had his 4 years and did nothing and is still doing nothing. He has not carried through on any of his promises. The Republicans deserve a chance at turning it around. Bob Dole, I agree with him more than disagreeing compared to the other candidates. I want to see someone with high moral character. I would like to see a candidate who will do what is right and best for the country, regardless of the popularity of the measure or it's ramifications towards reelection. (I would like to add the worst problem in our society is the destruction of the family, this should be added to the choices above). A candidate that will cut medicare waste and not give the rich tax breaks Bob Dole - he's the only one running who can lead us out of this mess Well qualified,serious change,no B.S.,no party wars, please! Colin Powell - Liberal Republican best of both worlds Miracle politician (Does s/he exist?): someone who'll address seriously issues of social justice, stand up to corporate bullying, refrain from sending the army in to massacre third world countries, provide intellectual, imaginative and honest leadership, powell or someone entirly new.....the repulicana and democrates just are not doing a very good job (and that is a total understatment) Gen. Powell His Character and Morals Bill Clinton, because he's both got a chance and isn't entirely evil It doesn't make any difference, unless we reduce government perot, he is about in the middle and wants to get this nation going strong again. Phil Ghram Bill Clinton-He is honest and in-touch with what the country needs Bill Clinton. Even though he has been a little "unorganized", I feel that he is the best person for the job and one who can lead this country into the 21st century. Keyes because he is right Clinton--just look at who the republicans offer Pat Buchanan. No GATT, No NAFT, No Mexican/Wallstreet bailout, No more gun control laws. No more errosion of American sovereignty. No socialist new world order and No more sell-out of the Amercan worker Ross Perot - he's cool Jack Kemp, because he proposes conservative solutions (which allow freedom and can work) to the problems of the poor, rather than middle-class only Bob Dole. Leadership. Experience. Moral Values/e.g., family values. clinton -- he is doing a great job Anyone reasonable who won't either mess up the economy or turn the US into some form of religious autocracy. Iwould like to see a republican because of the outfall in todays freelance society. Republicans are attempting to start a class war by taxing the under $30,000 wage earner, cutting social programs for the poor and elderly, while bailing out rich friends and corporations. They want to see a pre-1900 political landscape complete with robber-barons and destruction of the environment. Their ideology is to deny ethnic heritage, and ram an extreme political ideology down the throats of Americans. Newt Gingrich seems to be the Joe McCarthy of the '90ss. Steve Forbes-- Reduce taxes and unleash the economic sleeping giant that can benefit all Americans! David Letterman - because the last several presidents have made the office such a joke... Whoever will cut the crap and get the job done Phil Gramm, since Colin Powell won't run. Phil has an colin powell, because he fits into my political beliefs. Any woman at all! Powell, though he failed to enter, because i agree with his more libertarian than strict republican stance & he understands foriegn policy yet has good ideas for domestic policy. Carl Sagan, because he's the dude Buchanan, Re-establish a family, church and goverment Pat Buchannan, He is a true conservative The only two serious contenders seem to be Grahm and Forbes. They are the only ones who say it like it is, and will DO anything about it. I'd only vote for Clinton as the least of evils. I am hoping for a more middle of the road republican Colin Powell. He represents the views of mainstream Americans and he seems to be a leader. Charles Collins. He is running so why is he not on your list. He is the only Republican candidate worth a nickel. Alan Keyes, He doesn't beat around the issues and he is inspirational Bill Clinton-Let the president finish the job we hired him to do; he needs all of our support in helping him reach our goals. Give the congress back to the president in 1996. Bob Dole Bill Clinton General Colin Powell -- he has the ethics, values and leadership ability that our country so desperately needs at this time in history..... Phil Gramm, because he is for less government and more freedom. Bill Clinton, because he is more in touch with the general will. He seems dedicated to the Middle Class (by far the nation's largest group), yet does not ignore the poor or rich. He has done well with the economy, and he has overall been a successful lead Colin Powell--he knows what going on, and seems more honest than the others Powell - he's an efficient worker that gets the job done. Clinton, will provide good balance to the republican congress. Pat Buchanan, I'm no American citizen but i feel that this is a man who can lead you're country, anything better than that that rednosed billy pete wilson Alan Keyes, because he is 100% Pro-Life, Christian, and Morally upright. Clinton, because he, unfortunately, is the only possible person running who will prevent the far right crazies from gaining any more power in Congress than they already have. Henry Gonzalez - one of the very few American politicians who believes in social justice and equality Bill Clinton- He has done his job well depite the oposition of the Republican congress. None of the other candidates have convinced me that they could do any better. Bill Clinton; he's the best thing running at this point Bob Dornan- I strongly agree with his conservative values. Colin Powell, but he's not running, so Bill Clinton, he's not insane, most of the others might as well be. Colin Powell. Bring nation together. Accountability. Honesty. Clinton is the only Dem who can win and winning is what counts. Most important reason is that a Clinton victory helps take back the house - our only real goal! A conservative. Given those likely to run, Bill Clinton. bill clinton Alan Keyes firstly, but in realistic terms Pat B. for his stand on values/abortion A simple, honest person. Bill Clinton - best of the worst Jack Kemp A member of a third party, simply to see the reaction of our current over-influential partisan system. Colin Powell but I have been a proponent of flat-rate taxes for many years because it effectively controls lobbyist and is fair for all. A more principled libenral than Clinton, but I don't think that is a possibility this time Powell, I find his views cental, like mine I would sincerely like to vote for "None of the above" no matter who was running. Remember, elections do NOT solve anything unless there is a way to express your displeasure with the whole idea of voting. Bill Clinton Clinton. He's a competent politician being hampered by rightist idiots. Harry Browne. He will do what the Republicans said they were going to do and more.By the way, I turned down my Federal Grant (student) this year! A Libertarian. To focus attention on the Federal government's dramatic transgressions beyond its Constitutional bounds. Not that most people care, though. Bob Dole He seems to know what he is talking about president clinton for job he done for the present administration and situations. We need a President who understands the fight for Gay Rights, and one who will legalize same sex marriages. Colin Powell new leadership Colin Powell because he is the most trustworthy. Dukakis Bob Dole - About the only front runner that has a chance against Clinton. Pat Buchannan/country is too far left and in Debt.Government too big, People are taxed overall at 50 percent of income. Also entitlements will bankrupt country eventualy. Colin powell-it is about time that we give an african-american a chance in the white house Powell- he is available and I am alive. Harry Browne because no one else has the balls to cut the federal government Clinton...we could do worse...and with some of the candidates running we would! Al Gore - he sticks to what he believes in. It would be scary for Tipper to have that position, though. Any honest, intelligent, capabable, results-oriented person - the leader in these areas for me is Colin Powell. Alan Keyes! He alone among the candidates is solid on the issues, doesn't waffle in his beliefs based on polling data, and can remind the public of what made this country great in the first place. Lowell Weicker--honesty, good fiscsal management, old-style liberalism Any presidential candidate who is against affirmative action because I am sick of going to school and paying in full when there are minorities who may or may not be as intelligent going to school for free or getting a job that they do not deserve just because of their race. It disgusts me. A person that is up on "the" issues, proves so by hisher platforms, then actually does something about it. "Is accountable." Bob Dole, becuase he isn't a far left liberal and others moderate liberals might be more willing to vote for him then a far right conservative. Clinton...has both heart and mind. Americans sadly need both Alan Keyes for a return to morality Somebody who carries through with what they believe and espouse. Bill Clinton...I'm satisfied with his job thus far. Colin Powell if he runs as an independent or Ross Perot in order to break the stranglehold the two parties have on American politics and to get them to listen to new ideas. any libertarian candidate , or especially any objectivist. Colin Powell - a proven leader, motivator, and statesman Colin Powell - No strong political ties. Someone who cares more about the country than their reelection. There are half a dozen Republicans who seem to fit this requirement. A *consistently* pro-life candidate dole looks and thinks like a leader: he may even keep his word. Harry Browne, we need an ax-weilding libertarian to kill Big Brother. Bob Dole, Leadership you can count on! Senator Sam Nunn Clinton; I detest Republicans (and Perot) Alan Keyes; He is very conservative, against abortion. He takes stands and does not waiver from them. Even though he is black, he will be impartial. Race isn't that important to him. He appeals to all people. Anybody but Clinton, he is a disaster for this country. I'd like a president who will work aggressively to reduce the deficit without pushing a 'moral' agenda Powell - Doesn't seem to be stuck on one political platform Keyes, because he not only knows the causes of societal problems, but he knows their roots and how to destroy them. Alan Keyes, because he articulates, closer than any other, what I believe. Someone more liberal than Clinton. He is on the right wing of the Democratic Party. Bill Clinton because the Republican party represents everything that I don't beleive in Bill Clinton...he's a better choice than any of the others... DOLE Bill Clinton - To save this country from the conservative rightt and the rich. Bob Dole- Experienced, Not a draft dodger like Clinton Alan Keyes: principled leader with strong moral convictions Alan Keyes, because he has a clear understanding of America's real problems. Colin Powell as an independant to see a dramatic difference in politics without party affiliation I would like to See Dick Cheney run for President. Thomas Jefferson -- but he's not available. At this point, Colin Powell -- he's not the empty suit many people claim. Bob Dole I support Clinton because he is the closest to my liberal/left political perspective of the viable candidates. He may be vacilating, but he does enough good things to keep me from getting totally disgusted. Colin Powell because he seems to have solutions to many of our problems. Colin Powell, Seems like a man who has character and wont blow with the wind Alan Keyes - He is the only one address the root causes of our problems Johney Cochren, He has worked his magic before and anyway Bill Clinton made it so anythings possiable Steve Forbes, because he is pro-growth Anybody except Clinton. He has proven incapable. Brandy Phillips Clinton - to maintain balance of power with Republicans Bill Clinton, give hima chance to get real Healthcare reform through. Anyone but a democrat or rebulican, we've given them a chance and they CAN NOT handle it. Bill Clinton---while he has been somewhat wishy-washy on gay & lesbian issues, he's better than the intolerant rightwingers in the race Clinton - best man for the job Someone willing to cut federal spending significantly. Arlen Spector - fiscal conservative and social liberal someone with ethics and without any big money behind them Alan Keyes he has the solution to all of America's woes. Really and Rep. because the congress is in Rep. control. Mabye something will get done if they DEM & Rep wern't fighting tombeat each other so much!!! Alan Keyes is addressing the core problem in our society and it is spiritual. We no longer have commonly shared values, no shared perception of right and wrong. Alan addresses the "values issue" forthrightly. He will be a fine example and a strong leader. Barney Frank; He would be very influential in establishing a hate crime bill. solidity and backbone Actually I believe the President to be a figurehead/mouthpiece. You could put the donkey or elephant up there and mean the same thing. It is Congress who has the power and the strife. Colin Powell because he told Clinton to Fuck Off What's with Alan Keyes? A black conservative? This is the guy who's claiming allegience to a party that endorses publications like "The Bell Curve" which purpport to claim blacks are intellectually genetically-inferior to whites - well in his case, considering his party, maybe he's more evidence of this? i'd like to see the entire political structure of the US collapse and some less oppressive form of government rise to power. Steve Forbes-becaues he is the most technically quallified, and he is successful in business. Bill Clinton, because I feel he has done a good job so far and needs 4 more years to complete is goals. Alan Keyes -- Recognizes the source of America's problems and posits the only solution Forbes, we need a strong economic leader who is not bogged down in the set political parties. However without strong political ties (i.e. not in a major party) he may become a lame duck president. Phil Gramm, because, so far, he seems to take positions that I agree with on most positions of importance. Bill Bradley still shows some interest average americans and Harry Browne -- we need to try principled, libertarian govt. Dole in '96 because his agenda is to decrease federal spending and to place more athority in the hands of the states. Gramm. Good balance w/social & economic beliefs. It has to be Alan Keyes Colin Powel because he is a brother man I don't know about you but I'm for Alan Keyes-- my second choice would be Phil Graham and then Pat B. but I'll vote for Alan over any other Alan Keyes because he wants to fix the problem instead of addressing the symptons that ail us. Colin Powell, He would unite our country, and his views are not too extreme We need Bill Clinton to hold Congress in line. This Congress is in the lap of big business, the religious right and the NRA. And without Clinton, students, sick and elderly people, our nation's environment, and religious freedom would all suffer greatly. Bill Clinton, I believe that he has done a great job as president and is the best choice for 1996 Hillary Clinton, a strong candidate, sexy to boot! Alan Keyes (who did better on Survey 1 than most of the 7 you list above) works from principles to goals, not vice versa. Alan Keyes - He focuses on the real problem in America: the breakdown of the family unit. colin powell Richard Lugar. Lugar is intelligent, honest, dignified, and honorable Alan Keyes--He is truly the most inspiring (black) person that attracts me because of his staunch moral convictions!! bob dole seems to be closest to my views Jackson Anyone who respects civil liberties and is willing to stand up to Congress to make the government justify every dollar it spends. No more pork-barrel politics, no more corporate tax breaks, no more failed drug-war spending. Colin Powell the Ultimate third candidate if he can run the defense of this nation he can have my vote. He's not to liberal but also not to conservative. Just be like IKE. Alan Keyes. He is the ONLY candidate I totally agree with. Alan Keyes. Most of our current problems can be traced to a lack of ethical standards. Alan Keyes - he is the only one courageous enough to adress the core of our problems - the moral decay that has resulted in the problems we see. Whether we care to face it or not, there are moral absolutes, the sooner we wake up to that fact, the better. We are doomed if we fail to do so. Simple as that. God bless. WHOEVER WILL BE THE BEST FOR THE NATION!! ALAN KEYES IS MY ONLY VOTE EVEN IF IT'S BY WRITE IN!!!!!!! Alan Keyes--His talk never waffles and he speaks for me and what I believe Alan Keyes: He's addressing the core problems of this country, he's principled and honest, and his views are extremely coherent, consistent, and well-thought out. Keyes, He is the ONLY canidate who has the Family as the source of the American Greatness, and he is RIGHT!!!!!!!!! Dr. Alan Keyes - he is the only candidate with a clear, incisive vision of both our wounds as a people and the structure of the answer we need so desperately. As he has said, we do not have money problems, we have moral problems. As long as a people we turn away from God and despise His will, we will reap devastation until we change our minds and decide to do things His way. We have many different problems today, but they all have one root cause: SIN. Alan Keyes, I believe, can lead us to a nationa repentance and a moral awakening, so we do not destroy ourselves. Alan Keyes, because he is a moral libertarian, republican. Jello Biafra. He cares about people and he understands what goes on in society. Alan Keyes - clarity of thought and position; insight into real problems of the US. Colin Powell -- the Republicans need a MODERATE candidate for a change. Alan Keyes. His eloquent argument that the country will never fix its money problems unless we first reverse its moral decay, strikes a chord deep within my soul. KEYES in '96! Alan Keyes--he is the only candidate who has correctly identified the root cause of ALL the problems we face as being the decline of our moral values and lack of respect for God's authority. Alan Keyes - because he stands for righteousness and doiesn't seem to compromise I'd like to see Paul Tsongas, though the chances are slim; he seems to have the most concern of all the potential candidates (or has in the past, anyways) Alan Keyes - He is not a typical politician, he does have a backbone. He is not one of the good old boys, but a man of action and character. Bob Dornan, because although he isn't a DC outsider, he still is far enough out of the belt to be able to do negative things someone who is not beholden to corporate America Alan Keyes - He is the only one that knows hwy he stands for what he does. I am sick of Ronald Mc Reagan, George "benedict arnold" Bush, and Uncle Newt! We Need Jello! There is always room for Jello! VOTE FOR JELLO BIAFRA!!!!!!! Perot has the best ideas to reduce the national debt Phil Grahm, the ONLY candidate who's mentioned LIBERTY! Alan Keyes, because he has correctly identified moral/family breakdown as the ROOT of America's problems. The issue of money (MORE vs. LESS government spending) is only tangential. Alan Keyes, He has pin-pointed the nations problem None of the above Alan Keyes - He is the only candidate willing to address the underlying issues of our time; the complete disregard for morals. Ross Perot or Steve Forbes. They are the only ones who can run this country like a business, and thats what this country needs. If we can get our finances in line, everything else will follow. powell...i think he'd be a good president Alen Keyes-He is pointing out the real cause of America's Problems somebody truly different outside the dominant poloitcal sphere entirly Keyes is the only 'clean' candidate who has the courage of his convictions. Keyes...Integrity, leadership, honesty, motivation! Alan Keyes. Honesty, integrity and a grip on what issues really matter to the future of this country. I'd like to see Newt run because almost everything I hear from him echo's the kind of changes the county needs to get back on track. Realistically though, I believe the hippy generation succeded in destroying the "establishment" that made this country great, and my generation (20 something) will only see further decline in our lifetime. Colin Powell because of his leadership skills and not being a political insider steve forbes Phill Gramm. He is one of the few candidates that has stated his position and not deviated from it often. He does not make a habit of compromising what he believes in. Alan Keyes - He's the only candidate who has identified the real problem in this country. Graham - Like his views (most) Alan Keyes: He is the only candidate who knows that America has moral problems not money problems. Alan Keyes; The basic problems this nation faces can only be solved by a moral revolution. Morality must come from inside. Government should not promote immorality, as I believe it is doing. Lack morality is not just negative, the presence of morality is very positive. Think about it. How many problems would go away if people were just honest, didn't lie, and did not wrongly desire what others have. I believe Alan Keyes holds and promotes articulatly these views. Bill Clinton Here's on he's way colin powell because he is a military man who will rule from principle not from politics Alan Keyes, he would *move* this country in the *right* direction by establishing moral values and republican policies. Ross is the only person that can restore sanity to this country. The liberials have forced a welfare state that has been suched dry by the ones that least deserve it. The honor system days are over in this country, illegals, blacks and the like have spit on the foundations of this our country. Gramm because he's got experience, he's conservative, and I believe he's honest. Clinton He is a least drawbacks of those running Colin Powel has displayed the courage to resist the political games of Washington insiders. Someone who will give minorities a better chance Although the economy is becoming stronger, there is no confidence in our current leader. Clinton must go. Phill Gramm or Colin Powell could restore the confidence we need. Newt Gingrich! He is the only person in Washington who seems to have a grasp of most of what is going on. Unlike what the media would want you to believe, this is a person who cares about this county. VOTE GINGRICH! VOTE GINGRICH! bob dornan because he stands on his princples,which is alot more than i can say about our current pres.,he is for strong defense and a flat tax and limeted fedral gov. and the flat tax, which in itself would curtale governments power. Colin Powell - he's not a "career" politician Dole Pres Powell vp Expr.& values are my concerns Bill Clinton, he at least initiates change and puts the issues on the "floor" Adolf Hitler. We need National Socialism to solve immigration problem Alan Keyes, only honest person in the race. His problem is that he tells the truth which hurts his coverage. Bill Clinton. He's human, realistic, sympathetic, passionate, not sleazy, smart, and isn't an extremist. powell,we need a leader not another politician. Alan Keyes, for his belief that moral problems are number 1. Bill Clinton - If you really look at his record, it's an entirely different story than what is portrayed on television and by the GOP; 99% of Clinton's opponents cite what I consider to be irrelevent issues such as sexual liasons (something that probably every president in the history of our nation has engaged in, and it never seemed to have much of an affect on their ability to lead), and other trivial, stupid rhetorical arguments that have to base of rationality. The election in 1996 will be about whther or not the public can be manipulated by partisian rhetoric; whether the American people will fall for the idea that jobs, "morality", concern for fellow man and environmental awareness are mutually exclusive ideals - I don't think so, and if anyone is really a moderate on these important issues - it's Clinton. The far right wants to make such concern a 4-letter word; the very idea that the US shouldn't participate in the UN is also absurd. There are too many extremist views out there. The bottom lin is that Clinton's agenda is more in line with what's best for America - the Motor Voter bill (the fraud claims are NOT valid - investigate yourself and you'll see), the Brady Bill (originally GOP based) is simply legislation to FINALLY enforce existing laws, the Assault Weapon Ban - much needed and much supported despite what the PACs are saying, and much of the banned rifles are manufacturerd in Communist China - why doesn't the NRA tell you this?? Clinton's policies are sound. There's no telling what Dle or Keys or Buchanan would do in office, but I'd bet my life that it would be the worst thing to happen to this country in a century - religion should not dictate public and foreign policy. How would Buchanan or Keys handle an Athiest leader of a major country or the Arabs? What's he going to do? Try to convert them? The 21st century will be about becoming a WORLD COMMUNITY - to have some religious wacko representing our government would be a step back 50-200 years! Alan Keyes. The basis for most of the country's problems is the decay of our moral foundation. Only Keyes, among the presidential candidates, has the moral convictions and message to shore up that foundation and give us a base from which to repair the rest of our structure. Although I like Dole, he just doesn,t have the spark. Powell will win if he runs, but I would perfer him to be Doel's VP, then in 2000 run for president. Ann Landers Alan Keyes - He's a great "statesman" (not just a politician), he understands the moral issues and how they tie in with everything else Alan Keyes. Family is problem & he has nailed it on the head! Phil Gramm. Because he is a strong conservative. His past record backs this. Keyes, the moral crisis must be adresses first!!! Alan Keyes, he's the next Reagan/Lincoln Someone honest and practical who will work to keep government out of peoples lives. Alan Keyes - because he stands behind his principles. Bill Bradley - an honest politician who's as fed up with the 'system' as the rest of us. He's also brilliant mind who knows how the system works and will get the right people into the right jobs. Bill Clinton Phill Gramm - A man of character, integrity, and principle Colin Powell - We need a new type of leadership that I believe he can provide Alan Keyes - He recognizes the real problems with the country Alan Keyes - We need a totally different power structure and we must address the race issue before it is to late. Alan Keyes....he is the only one who knows the problems Buchanan: pro-life w/no exceptions, opposed to GATT & NAFTA No Inspirating Individual has surfaced so far. Powell - A fresh figure in politics; seems to have integrity Alan Keyes because I believe he is the best spiritually, morally and intellectually qualified individual for the job. Anyone other than Bill Clinton,lier,warmonger,draftdoger Alan Keyes. Not only does he understand that our problems are moral and not just economic, but he understands the danger of giving away American sovereignty to international organizations. Alan Keyes or Phil Gramm because they are crusading conservatives; or Colin Powell because he is up to the job. Alan Keyes - this country is in serious need of an enema, and he's the only candidate with enough strength, conviction, and heart to give it to us. Colin Powell because he seems to be less politically oreintated. Alan Keyes. He alone of the crop of candidates articulates a moral vision based on the principles of the Declaration of Independence, that "all mena are created equal, that they are endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable rights, that among these are life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness." This will bring all Americans together and hopefully return our nation to its bearings laid down in the beginning. Alan Keyes, since he is the only Statesman who really faces the cause of our problems instead of trying to put a band-aid on them Alan Keyes; Dr Keyes shows leadership and conviction that no other candidate shows. He is the statesman we need to move into the 21st Century! Alan Keyes - He is the only one looking at root causes of our problems Alan Keyes because he seems to have beliefs and hopes which are closest to my own ane articulates them extremely well! Alan Keyes is my choice among those running. I thought for quite awhile about who I thought would make the best president of the current candidates, and I decided Keyes for these reasons. Most of the others are polticians. Alan Keyes is a statesman. What's the difference? A statesman puts principle over pragmatism. In public policy, you have to make concessions and compromises to get anything done, but you go in with your principles held high and you make the neccessary practical concessions, not the oher way around. Clinton has no backbone. He is blown around by the political winds. Dole is not much better, and Colin Powell (who I believe in the end will decide not to run) has been way too vague but when actually stating his opinion sounds like he's just reading poll numbers. Alan Keyes will make history as our first black President and our most principled, effective leader since Abraham Lincoln. Don't say he can't win! Anyone can win if enough people decide to challenge the status quo and actually be eard Colin Powell Alan Keyes -- he is the most morally and fiscally conservative. Our country needs a higher level of morality. Bill Clinton because other people suck. Alan Keyes. Principle. Intelligent. Dynamic. Identifies the moral problems and how to sove them. A great leader for out times. Alan Keyes - insight and courage in his convictions! keyes - a man of real moral conviction and character Alan Keyes - because he has best identified the sources of our problems and has the ability and willingness to take the needed action. Alan Keyes is the only man with uncompromising principles Alan Keyes!! He clearly articulated what most Republicans leave unsaid: Crime, unemployment, and lack of opportunity are all related to the breakdown of the traditional family. Alan Keyes, Honest, great speaker, has a vision, doesn't blame racism for all of the worlds problems. Powell - appears honest; has integrity Alan Keyes. No one else comes close in character, dignity, and solutions to out country's problems. No one. Not Newt, Dole, Kemp, Powell, Perot, Gramm, Alexander, no one, no one, no one. Alan Keyes - "We don't have money problems, we have moral problems!". Dr. Alan Keyes because the country is dying of immorality. Clinton, because he seems that he is trying to clean up the mess that Nixon, Regan & Ford left. Alan Keyes: he's the only one addressing the real issues Alan Keyes because he wants to correct the cause of the U.S. problems not treat the symptoms BILL BENNETT, Good common sense, virtuous, can be trusted Someone with some backbone; who'll do what they promise and standup for something!!! INTEGRITY! Statesmanship not politics! Alan Keyes - He is the only candidate with any answers Allen Keyes has the integrity, courage, vision and world view to do the job right Alan Keyes, He understands the issues and has real solutions not political BS. Keyes-"We don't have money problems, we have moral problems!" Alan Keyes Because he's the most pro-life pro-family candidate Alan Keyes. He stands for the moral issues our country needs. Alan keyes - He is the only candidate addressing the root cause of our problems which I believe to be the breakdown of the family/family_values. Alan Keyes - Christian and conservative. Clinton, like Bush, has failed to deal with the most pressing problems facing our country: the national debt, and a campaign finance system that allows special interest groups and lobbyists to thwart all serious efforts to balance the budget and reform government spending and procedures. However, the leading GOP candidates (those with a chance of winning the nomination) are too closely aligned with the Christian Coalition and/or have shown little interest in serious campaign finance and lobbyist refom. While Powell has yet to spell out his ideology in detail, he is my choice already for four important reasons: he is fiscally consdervative but not beholden to the Christian Coalition on social issues, he would broaden the base of the Republican Party by attracting non-Christian Coalition types to vote in Republican primaries, he is an inspirational leader who would restore some faith in government, and he is uniquely positioned to at least partially soothe race relations. Alan Keyes: He understands the original meaning of the Constitution! Alan Keyes because he understands that most of the country's problems stem from underlying moral vacuum. He has the intelligence and eloquence to persuade & truly lead. Alan Keyes - he's the clear leader in the morality category! Alan Keyes - because he is calling America back to its heritage and promise. Keyes. Our money problems are caused by our moral problems. Alan Keyes...he's the only one articulating the fact that almost every problem facing America is a result of the moral crisis. Alan keyes - he is the only candidate that understands the root of our problems in the US and has a plan to correct this problem Alan Keyes - He is the most articulate spearker I have yet to hear. His strength of character goes beyond all others. Alan Keyes: he's the only candidate who understands the root problems and knows what to do about them Phil Gramm, because he WILL balance the budget, reform welfare, and return power to the states. Alan Keyes tells the truth that people need to hear Alan Keyes, for his moral and political positions Alan Keyes because he is the only candidate talking about the root causes of the problems in society. Alan Keyes is a visionary statesman who has a solid grasp of understanding related to the root problems of our society. He also is a passionate and courageous leader who has a plan, not just to restore America, but to propel her to undreamed of success i I believe that Alan Keyes is the ONLY candidate who is really addressing the actual problems this country is facing as we prepare to move into the next century, and consequently is the ONLY candidate who, by way of his proposals and principles, can pull this country together. We cannot stand another "stick-the-finger-in-the-wind" politician, like Bill Clinton, as the head of the greatest nation in the world! Alan Keyes -- He understands the real problems in the country. Alan Keyes. He is the only candidate who understands the moral underpinnings of all of our problems and what needs to be done (and not done) about it. Alan Keyes-only candidate who address true problems of our nation, it's moral bankruptcy. Alan Keyes, Recognition of moral basis of problems in US Alan Keyes because we have moral problems, not money problems! Alan Keyes - only honest man in the race - moral issues Alan Keyes - Only candidate addressing foundations of freedom Alan Keyes Allan Keys, because he the best man for the job. Someone??? who has the ability to unify the country Spock and Data in '96! The logical choice. Alan Keyes, because this country NEEDS a leader who knows the source of our problems, and will be able to help us fix them. All of the programs in the world will not help our economic situation if we are only treating the symptoms of the problem and not the problem itself. We all know that the real cause of our problems is the breakdown of the moral fiber of the nation (whether we are willing to admit it or not). Phil Gramm because he is the most conservative candidate. Conservative defined as against large government, social welfare and entitlements I don't care, really. I would prefer to see a benevolent dictator take charge for a few years in order to get things back in order. I realize that that statement is vague, but I dont have the time to write a ANOTHER dissertation. Noboby - This country has turned into the same old/same old. The same jerks with new ways of listing the same old ideas that don't work. HENRY ROLLINS I want to see Bill Clinton President, or any other Democrat candidate. Not because I particularly like him or what he does but becuase the Republicans have moved way to far right in the past year, taking on an almost dangerous nature. Colin Powell -- this country needs a leader Alan Keyes because he best expresses the fact that the underlying problem of American society is a corrupt definition of freedom. A freedom that does not respect law and personal responsibility. The best example of which is abortion, which is tearing apar I will vote for the most intelligent and humanitarian candidate. Bill Clinton, he's been fair so far Doesn't make a lot of difference. No one in the political arena has the guts to *ELIMINATE ALL* entitlement programs. They all say "you can't throw the baby out with the bath water". I say you can if it's a welfare baby! Then slamm the door behind it! If they can't make it on their own, let them find another way besides stealing from working Americans, or let them die. a liberal to counteract the radical right! I wish Colin Powell would run as a 3rd party candidate; since that's not likely, I'll vote for Clinton before I'll vote for ANY Republican Pat Buchanan because he is a *principled* conservative who understands that the Constitution prescribes a *limited role* for the federal government. colin powell, he seems very up front and honest, doesn't candy coat his viewpoint, knows a little bit about international situations Bill Clinton because he supports gays. Ross Perot or Colin Powell. I think they have the guts to do what it takes to get this country back on it's feet. Newt Gingrich--he cant articulate why government needs to be downsized. Barbara Jordan - she has been the most intelligent and inspiring person in public office of her generation bill clinton. given the shape of the country when elected he is doing a fine job. bill clinton-i feel that he's on the right path. Bill Clinton - He at least has had the guts to try and address some of the major problems facing this country. We need to help each other and not shirk our responsibilities but simply saying each man/woman for themself. Alan Keyes, because he is the only one in the race with intelligent ideas about American values Return to old standards Ross Perot/salary and perks are not the draw for him I'd like to see someone like Jerry Brown as president, as we need someone who is willing to stand up to the world domination exercised by major multinational corporations, as they rape and plunder from the poorest 95% of the population. Brown may at least be able to do something about corporations stealing most of the value produced by our labor, and then leaving the country to find a cheaper labor market to exploit. Also, I believe that he would probably help in attempts to establish media outlets nt controlled by the 5 or 6 media companies which own about 90% of it. Clinton - better the devil you know... Fidel Castro for the Communist Party, and Cuban cigars. Colin Powell, since he is not a "professional" politician Gen. Colin Powell I'm amazed at how popular Colin Powell is, even though we don't know SQUAT about what he really stands for; the republicans jockying for nomination remind me of a bunch of hungry dogs getting at a single food dish. The time is over for us to consider a military man to be an appropriate leader - the idea of the military is highly contrary to our Constitutional and democratic values - the military is a very strict caste system where individuality and democracy is taboo, where one is trained to accomplishan objective and NEVER question the morality of such an objective. Are these really the kind of characteristics the American people want in a leader? Harry Brown. Read his book. Pat Buchanan:A leader with great integrity and strength. A true "common man"independant Newt or Colin Powell, though I fear that certain groups would suffer (gays) Richard Lugar: Supports tax reform (national sales tax) and has deep insight on foreign policy. Pat Buchanan HE IS A REAL AMERICAN strong leadership & party identification, because I do not believe that this tendency toward third parties will work for the US. We are a two-party country. Colin Powell..He is a moderate republican that can appeal to members of all parties without the radicalism of Gingrich or Perot,. Alan Keyes. He addressed the problems of morals, he is against abortion, he *appears* to be a moral person. However, he doesn't go far enough in supporting the constitution. Colin Powell, because he appears to be tuned in with the majority of Americans. Alan Keyes - His has the moral character to lead. Collin Powell - healing of race relations, his recognition off need for greater sense of community Alan Keyes, His positions are absolutely clear and he does not alter them for the current audience. Jessie Jackson - He WILL adress the bigotry in America! Colin Powell - He seems to be a man of conviction. Alan Keyes-- Understands the core problem with our Country. If Dole becomes president, we're all in trouble! Questions, comments, suggestions? Contact us. Return to theHome Page. Copyright ©1996, /InterCommerceCorporation, All rights reserved worldwide Send comments to Webmaster@Survey.net WT02-B22-36IA060-000333-B027-236http://www.survey.net:80/pol3c0.html 204.107.221.240 19970115060655 text/html 105777HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 15 Jan 1997 06:00:37 GMTServer: Apache-SSL-US/1.0.3+1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 105593Last-modified: Mon, 25 Nov 1996 20:26:45 GMT SURVEY.NET - 1996 Presidential Poll #3 - User comments (ARCHIVE I) Your source for information, opinions & demographics from the NetCommunity! ANNOUNCING: The Internet's finest interactive, totally-automated,immediate survey system. We can take any form and instantly create adynamic demographic database and show you the results as soon as youcomplete the survey! Political Survey #3 User comments [ARCHIVE I] Who will be president in 1996 and why? Pat Buchanan...I could have written his platform!!! Bob Dole: Most committed to balence budget; Great Record; Hero Bob Dole just vomits integriy it oozes out of his pores. Alan Keyes. He is the most consistent and true conservative. He speaks to americas problems at the root cause and not simple bandaids. Buchanan - Only candidate who I'm confident will reduce the influence of government and return the US to a constitutional republic as it was intended. Someone notably more liberal than any person currently named in any party! Pat Buchanan. I believe Christian morals are the only thing that can turn this country around. NAFTA, and GAT are hurting many American workers'95 was largest deficit ever. We need a social and economic conservative as president. Harry Browne: stimulates ecconomy by paying off national debt (reduces interest rates), eliminate/greatly reduce taxes, same for government regulations/involvment in individuals' lives Alan Keyes Bob Dole; I feel that he has the leadership qualities that the President should have. He also has the morality and the integrity to become the President. Pat Buchanan - for the Constitution & the Bible, against New World Order Gen. Colin Powell seems to be the most practical and moderate. Too bad he's not running. If Clinton had been able to keep from caving in, I would have chosen him again. I may disagree with Dole on a lot of things, but at least he probably won't flipflop like Clinton has. Bill Clinton because he is pro-choice. Harry Truman Rush because he's smarter than anyone running Patrick J. Buchanan: Unlike Clinton&Clinton, he means, believes in and will do what he says. Pat Buchanan; strong conservative record. Either Bill Clinton or Bob Dole. Buchanan is nothing more than an asshole who is very clost to naziism. Clinton has done a lot of beneficial things for our country, including reducing the national debt and helping with education in America. Not to mention that the crime rate has decreased substancially in many major cities. Pat Buchanan. He doesn't waffle on issues. More conservative Bill Clinton because he supports most of the things that I believe are important to me and the country. Pat Buchanan with Al Keyes (V.P), more than econ and to fairer trade Colin Powell - because he could crack Forbes: business experience, integrity, vision, solid ideas for economic opportunity, not a Wash. pol who's been bought no one that is running, Bill Clinton is the most qualified I want to see the president AND congress put aside party politics and put the country first. I'm tired of party politics. They ALL disregard the counties needs for selfish and egotistical resaons. Harry Browne is the canidate closest to Neo-tech standerds Dan Quayle - He's honest and has a wife who would help, not hurt like our current queen. Pat Buchanan It's time to restore dignity to the office. Pat Buchanan - I agree with many of his positions and I feel that he is a leader with conviction. If some are concerned about extreme positions, I imagine Congress will force him to temper any which are too extreme for the public to accept. Clinton has done a good job. Pat Buchanan Someone who is pro-white male Bob Dole! He is a leader, Veteran, and a man of principle Clinton, or someone who can remember that nothing but self-interest is nothing but selfishness and greed. No one's interests are served. Buchanan is a cultural and moral conservative Quayle, becuase he's intelligent, Christian, moral, family-oriented man. Alan Keyes - He represents the answers to the root causes of the problems that we as a nation have experienced over the past 30 odd years, the dissolution of the family, the intrusion of federal government into private lives and the turning away of our country from the fact that our nation was established from Christian values Allen Keyes - Because he obviously knows & is not afraid to verbalize the deep, root causes of our countries problems. Pat Buchanan Bill Bradly because he is a very intelligent, rational, and thoughtfull man. Pat Buchanan Alan Keyes, he identifies the real problem with America, the loss of a "moral center" Steve Forbes Pat, because he has morals and at least a position on issues (versus changing positions with polls or the wind) Pat Buchanan, I know where he stands on the isues. I can trust him to do what he says he will do. Bill Clinton, Freshman Republicans are far too zealous to be allowed a free reign and no-one who wants to put religion into places it doesn't belong should run the country Pat Buchanan - conservative Clinton, because he is still the best of a pathetic bunch, most likely to protect social interests rather than pocketbooks Pat Buchanan because you know where he stands on the issues, you dont get some big drawn out answer to your questions. He speaks his mind. Anyone but Bill. (And why isn't honesty included in question # 13?) Harry Browne, because he is the only candidate who has published a concrete plan. The other candidates have only sound bites and vague promises; Harry Browne has put his plan in the public's hands for the voters to evaluate freely. Harry Browne: less restrictions on emigration/immigraration; freer trade; end of the "War On Drugs"; more reasonable tax structure; medical savings accounts; limiting the US international political involvment in order to expand the voice of other nations; opposition to censorship Pat Buchanan because he will get Americans working like never before and he is the most honest man ever to run for the office Pat Buchanan - He want's to return prayer to the schools. Steve Forbes - Primarily because he has met a payroll, Intellegent, and is not a politician Kemp, but since he's not an option, Forbes, because the flat tax would work Alan Keyes because he has not waffled in his views Harry Browne or Steve Forbes Harry Browne, Because his goals are the best ones. Steve Forbes, because he is not a politician. Steve Forbes because I want my taxes lowered, and his system will do it. Also, I want to see him abolish all non-essential gov't offices such as IRS, Welfare, DOT, DOE, HUD, etc... Pat Buchanan Pat Buchanan-He seems to be the voice for middle America. We need fair trade agreements that don't tie our hands behind our back. We absolutely must close our borders to all illegal aliens; and only allow legal aliens if they work and support themselves. Illegals are bleeding our entitlement programs dry. They are getting benefits our own citizens can't get. And even legal aliens are coming here and collecting Social Security. It has to stop. Its not and issue of race; its economics. The well i dry...there is no more money to support everyone who wants to come here for a free ride. Lamar Alexander; He is actually the most qualified for the position Steve Forbes because he is not beholdened to interests other than those that affect the country in general. President Clinton. Senator Dole is too tired, Steve Forbes hasn't a clue on how to govern, Lamar Alexander?--has he ever said anything that you can remember? Robert Dornan? He makes Pat Buchanan look like a liberal. Pat Buchanan needs to re-read the Constitution. His ideas of holding national referendums on unpopular Supreme Court decisions is not an option, nor is the manditory confirmation of the Supreme Court justices every eight years. He would have to change the Constitution to do that and somhow I don't think it would fly. bill clinton Bill Clinton. He has done well this past year in spite of a congress that seems hell-bent on destruction. Bill Clinton, because more than any other candidate, he's sensitive to the concerns of all Americans, not just the wealthy, white, religiouss segment of the population. Steve Forbes - probably can't be bought. Stop all the hate, fear mongering and scapegoating, sure we have our problems but so has every society that has ever existed. This is a great country with a great future. I would like to see a leader with vision that will make this country that takes car Clinton is the best of those who have any chance. Bill Clinton. I feel he has done a good job so far, and I strongly dislike all of the Republican "hopefuls." Steve Forbes because he is the man. Pat Buchanan - Maybe the Liberals can meet in the middle with a conservative president. Bill Clinton,because he's had more experience than the others. Forbes, he's a self made man, who can control a buck. Anyone more honest & better leader than President Clinton. Steve Forbes - The ideas he presents are workable solutions to the problems facing America today: Welfare State, Obtrusive Federal Government, National Debt, Protection of Inalienable Rights, National Sovreinity Pat Buchanan - He is a leader with a vision and strong beliefs which will not be compromised. Harry Browne, his budget cuts would actually make the budget smaller instead of making it larger at a slower rate Harry Browne due to the fact that he wishes to decrease govenment intrusion, and is concentrating on that goal. Harry Browne because he knows we need to reduce govt. Harry Browne... less government now! harry browne..repubs and dems both committed to big govt Harry Browne - I believe that only the Libertarian party truly has a vision for bettering our country. Harry Browne, I can handle my own life witout huge govt. Harry Browne for a return to libertarian values Harry Browne, Libertarian, so he can reduce the size of government Harry Browne: smart man Ross Perot - taxes Lugar, I trust him Pat Buchanan...He believes what he stands for and has the guts to take on controversial issues. I, too, believe the U.S. needs to get out of the U.N. and quit playing big brother/cop to the world. Buchanan - we need U.S. jobs - fair trade agreements Harry Browne - We nee less government intrusion & more self responsibility Harry Browne, unlike the Republicans, proposes to reduce the size of the federal government significantly, not just slow its rate of growth. He proposes the best possible "flat tax" -- 0%, no income tax at all! Clinton.Buchanan will turn us into a 3rd world country Steve Forbes, because he is now the only electable alternative to Dole and Clinton. Both Dole and Clinton are deal makers while Forbes comes accross as uncomprising in principle. Clinton; because he is the only candidate willing to work to both reduce the size of government and the budget deficit, but keep a sense of compassion for the less fortunate members of our society. Bob Dole because he is the best of the choices. I would actually prefer another choice. Pat Buchanan - I like his foreign policy and his straight forwardness Steve Forbes! We need change in Washington! forbes...becouse hes the best man running. Dole, expericnce a, integrity, war hero and great morals President Bill Clinton. He understands the problems of middle class citizens and taxpayers. The performance of the Republican candidates does not demonstrate this awareness. Bill Clinton, who else is there? Dole's got the experience & organization and will go for the conservative agenda proposed by Congress. That's all we need right now: both branches of gov't. Jesse Jackson Jack Kemp, because he is a proven successful leader, has vision and conviction, and he is a family man (which is probably why he is not running at this time) Anyone but Clinton! Pat Buchanan, This candidate is uncomprising and knows the issues affecting the United States, Browne. To return power to the local level, esp. the people. Gen Powell Harry Browne, because enough is enough Harry Browne - He will help to decrease the Governments role in our lives and hopefully religious influence will decrease at the same time. Alan Keyes because of his integrity It dosen't seem possible now but I would like to see Richard Lugar as president. I like what he stands for and he sticks to what he says, he dosen't change his stand to accomodate others. Forbes or Buchanan because they have good issues Clinton-better than all the rest I am Canadian I would like to see the US have a president that is fair to the people. Like Rosvelte was, you guys need someone like him. Gen Colin Powell, He has integrity and exudes leadership qualities Bob Dole Harry Browne because his platform will bring US citizens their constitutional rights back. Alan Keyes - He is focused on the real problem in America. Not money but the moral climate Steve Forbes -- I will vote for Browne but he has no chance. New Party because the Demopublicans have no solutions, just more debt. Bob Dole - Good platform Harry Browne! Nat'l Retail Sales Tax (not a flat tax), Cut Government Dramatically! Browne; Less govenment I strongly want to see Pat Buchanan as President because he is very family,moral man who doesn't waiver under pressure. Steve Forbes - based on economic growth from flat taxex Harry Browne ! Billie, because he`s the only Democrat. Harry Browne ,cut government ,more freedom Bill Clinton, because he is not afraid of congress Harry Browne - He understands why the gov doesn't work and understands the debt problem and the need to solve it. Harry Browne can end reckless over-taxation. integrity Bill Bradley. Progressive with intelligence and dignity HARRY BROWNE-We need to stop the government machine, not just change the people that are being paid for preying on the rest of us. Believe it or not, we were not created to be the slaves of the power brokers in government, although it always turns out that way, doesn't it. POWER CORRUPTS, so eliminate the power. Seems simple but We don't have the power. THEY DO!!!! Harry Browne because he is the only one that is dedicated to dramatically reducing it. Harry Browne, I believe he is the only candidate with a clear plan. I also believe that he is the only candidate who honestly wants to shrink governemnt. Browne is the only candidate that will actually reduce gov. Clinton- Has made good headway with many issues Forbes or Browne/ less regulation and taxes so as to empower the private sector, both family and business Harry Browne. He seems to be the frontrunner Libertarian candidate, and this is a real third party, one which will reduce government rather than give us more of the same. Harry Browne, only one I can stomach voting for. Keyes: He has the right ideals, ideas and energy Harry Browne, only candidate who wants to REDUCE gov't Harry Browne, so we can get the government out of our lives Harry Browne - to drastically reduce goverment and make our country prosperous again Harry Browne. Freedom. Harry Browne for REAL government change and REAL vision Harry Browne.... read his book :) Harry Browne; he reflects my beliefs in laissez-faire government and personal freedoms. Harry Browne--he'll get govt. out of our lives. Harry Browne because he is the only candidate that truly supports less government and personal freedom. Harry Browne because he will restore the Constitutional Republic of The United States of America Pat Buchanan, because he tells it straight. Harry Browne He is presenting real change, change of a free market based society which the hard working will prosper. Clinton's the best option. harry browne anti tax views Harry Brown Harry Browne. Need a change from rep/dems. Anybody else Pat Buchanan, because I believe he will look out for America First. Buchanan and Keyes are the only candidates with any conviction. Of the two, Buchanan has a better chance. P.S. "independEnt"; "prOportion" Clinton. He most closely approximates my beliefs, plus he's pro-choice. Harry Browne, because the libertarian party is the only one making sense anymore. Harry Browne; he is the only one who will reduce taxes, cut govt Phil Gramm - Honest representation UNKNOWN Keyes - he will uphold the constitution, not corrupt it I want the ABC candidate to be president...Anybody But Clinton Harry Browne - Because Government Doesn't Work! Harry Browne Bill Clinton-the economy and quality of life has flourished with him at the helm. Bill Clinton. He has had quite a few unrecognized achievements that I believe will help to make America a better place. I want to see him complete as much of his agenda as possible. He has always acted in the best interests of the U.S. and has reinforced the role of the U.S. in international affairs. Harry Browne; he really WANTS a smaller government Harry Browne, because government doesn't work and he's the only one seriously proposing to SHRINK government rather than limit its rate of increase. And Browne would end the War On Some Drugs, which would definitely reduce crime and make our justice syste someone who is not 72 years old Steve Forbes I like the flat tax Forbes who cares, whoever wins will ruin us anyway a republican because we need someone to support the Congress in positive change Pat Buchanan. He is honest and straight forward. He believes in less federal governmant Harry Browne because he will stand firm to his commitments A upfront and honest president Despite my wishes I see Bill Clinton winning. Bill Clinton, He is the only one that cares what happens to Middle Class America. Alan Keyes Bill Clinton He's the only candidate who can bring people together. Buchanan Agree with his issues Bill Clinton. He is the best choice among all candidates. Bill Clinton. Will provide a check on the Republican congress. Harry Browne - his ideas to reduce the scope of the federal government appeal to me. Bill Clinton because he is the best candidate and has done a good job as president Me. I trust myself. Bill Clinton None of the current canidates. PAT BUCHANAN bill clinton he is openminded and will do whats good for all of us. Clinton; he's been a good president,deserves another term Bill Clinton. He is strong enough to stand on principle, but flexible enough to compromise when compromise is needed. After all, as someone once said "Politics is the art of the possible." You give a little, you take a little. Even Thomas Jefferson and John Adams had to compromise in order to see the Declaration of Independence accepted by the Continental Congress. jack kemp -to get america moving again. Harry Browne because government doesn't work! William Bennett best conservative to run the country Alan Keyes [http://sandh.com/keyes/index.html] Someone with more integrity then Clinton, wether it be Republican or Democrat. It depresses me that we have a president with such low moral values. still undecided, need to see what the GOP ends up with Harry Browne, because he is the only candidate with the courage of his convictions and with the courage of _my_ convictions. Ideally I'd like to see Mary Ruwart as President. She has the ability to communicate the idea of less government in a warm, compassionate, and crystal-clear manner. Moreover, she's a genuinely sweet, loving individual, which is why she is unfortunately not likely to get the job. The best man for the job Forbes. He's the closest candidate to my philosophy of a minimal government - one that protects individual rights, instead of committing theft and creating slave classes in the name of altruism. I want to see harry browne, cause I feel that he's one of the few candidates who's truely going to make changes for the public. Buchanan, bring manufacturing back to the USA Steve Forbes - has a vision of where he wants to take the country Pat Buchanan because he wants to keep all of the dirty, dirty spics out of this country I want to see a person truly concerned with the direction of not only americans, but with the direction of all people bill clinton, lesser of multiple evils Harry Browne. He's the only viable candidate who is willing to state the fact that the Emperor has no clothes! Pat Buchanan - I see him as honest and having character. We're not in agreement on all issues, but Mr Buchanan, I feel, is honest and above board, unlike this last group I gave my vote to. Pat Buchcanan,he will stop the new world order & save our country & our industrial base. Bucanan - He is stll saying the same things he did 4 yrs ago Harry Browne because he is soley focused on reducing government. Harry Browne, He rules! Pat Buchanan! He's a bit harsh on his pro-life stance (I'd like to see his list of acceptable reasons for abortion to include freedom of choice during the 1st trimester, then not allowed except for incest, rape, & endangerment of the life of the mother), but I totally agree with all of his beliefs on the issues of 2nd Amendment Rights, withdrawal from the World Trade Organization, & NOT subjugating our position as THE worlds defender of freedom to such entities as the UN. Harry Browne or Steve Forbes: becaue I agree with them, and they are for liberty. Alan Keyes: He speaks to the issues that matter. bernie sanders of vermont because he has not been totally bought off by monied interests. Harry Browne- values rights of the individual Harry Browne would put the Federal Government back within the framework established by the Constitution. Pat Buchanan. Simply his stands on immigration policy, getting the U.S. out of the UN, etc. Bill Clinton -- he has had a good presidency and stands up for our rights better than the other candidates would, I believe Clinton - less scary than others Alan Keyes. Morality is the problem, not money. Alan Keyes he supports a consumption tax, pro life, very conservative Colin Powell would heal a lot of wounds, bring honor to Office of President Steve Forbes, we need a change for america Harry Browne, he's got the best plan to strip government. Buchanan seems to excite both fervent opposition and devoted followings. Such a strong personality would be good to have for a while in the White House. I don't think any President has enough power by himself to "ruin" the country in four years so I do not fear for the republic like some seem to. Clinton PAT BUCHANAN, HE IS THE PERSON THAT WOULD CHANGE THE SYSTEM! Patrick Buchanan because he's the only nominee with any integrity. He speeks from the heart. He always maintains his stance,year after year. All of the others will tell you want you want to hear. Any outsider Paul Tsongas, because he actually had vision, and less importantly, was publicly more of gentlman than any of the candidates now running, which is important for a man who would seek to be not only head of government, but also head of State, & therefore th Bill Clinton because he ain't doing much, but he ain't rockin the boat. He's a good man for all the people-not just rich white people like the republican canidates. Bill Clinton; he's doing as well as anyone can. Steve Forbes. Smaller government, sensible tax system, economic growth, outsider none of the candidates are really that much better than the other, but I would either vote Bob Dole, or perot Bob Dole He has the moxie Keyes - murder (abortion) must stop. Harry Browne so we might see some real change! Alan Keyes: The only candidate with a real pro-life message, and no anti-foreigner bigotry Pat Buchanan, he has conviction, I don't belive in everything he is for, however a President does not get everything he wants, I never feel like Clinton can be trusted. Pat Buchanan - What you see is what you get. I like that. Alan Keyes. He is the only electable candidate. Dole doesn't excite enough people. Pat is to radical. Nobody knows what Lamarr stands for. Reagan Demococrats LOVE Keyes message of moral renewal in America. Anyone that hears his message loves the guy. He can unite the party if people will vote their concience. harry Browne, for a real change in government Harry Browne: The only way to save the country is to end Government intrusion into our lives. Pat B. I know exactly where he stands on the issues and those positions agree with my own. Alan Keyes - He recognizes the damage done to families by all the "help" from the Federal Government. Lamar Alexander... He wants to turn government back to the states as originally set up by the constitution. Lamar Alexander. I don't like the way that the country is going with Clinton. I don't agree with Pat Buchanon and I don't like Bob Dole at all. buchanan, stands for middle class Bill Clinton, experience, has been in office already Return the Federal Government to its Constutional Limits Pat Buchanan, beacause he can be trusted to do what he says and his policies are based on sound moral principles and ideas upon which our country was founded ie: respect for life, the sovereignity of GOD, and moral responsibility at home first and then abroad. Keyes because he is articulate, compassionate, intelligent, non-beligerent, moral, somewhat experienced, unifying rather than divisive, has integrity Harry Browne, no other candidate is philosophically acceptable. Harry Browne,He says it best,vote for lest! Buchanan, for his unwavering character! PAT BUCHANAN HE IS THE LAST BEST HOPE TO AVOID AN ARMED REVOLUTION TO RETURN THIS NATION TO CONSTITUTIONAL GOVERNMENT Steve Forbes, Flat Tax Buchanan because if the MEDIA hates him, then he must be good for America. Alan Keyes: brave(takes on media(abd suffers for it)and moral issues) and would seriously influence political "arena" ABC - Anybody BUT Clinton Less government Someone who will continue the space program. :) Harry Browne is the most intelligent person in the race, and is dedicated to freedom Bill Clinton - the best of REA Lamar Alexander is the only candidate with sane ideas AND the right kind of experience to lead the nation into the next century. Pat Buchanan, Honest,Firm,Good morals- Everything Clinton lacks!!! Buchanan:Because he has the gutts to address the tough stuff Anyone but Clinton! Pat Buchannon: character, fair trade, illegal immigration, welfare reform, abortion, stop stealing from hard-working americans to give it away in foreign aid I don't think we have many good choices, leaning to Buchanan as he is not the standard politician. the Libertarian nominee. To increase my own freedom. Lamar Alexander, he's down to earth and has been involved in politics before. Alexander...I just feel that he has the right ideas to lead the nation Clinton, with a dem house and senate, moderate approach, knows need to cap mecdical exspneses Pat Buchanan - He means what he says and has backbone. Bill Clinton: He is leading in approximately the direction I believe we need to go! NA Ralph Nader (he makes sense, is not owned by anyone) Bob Dole: He should surely understand the requirements of the position, his experience should serve him well. I feel he, of all candidates, is best equiped to deal with heads of other countries. He will return dignity and respect to the Presidency. Most importantly, he should have the full backing of a Republican Congress, and finally some changes will be made that should benefit the coutry. Buchanan, he is willing to express his conservitive beliefs honestly. Pat Buchanan because I know what he stands for and I agree with almost all of his ideas. I'm hoping someone else enters the race who actually has convictions. Buchanan because he is uncompromising and believes in the same things most Americans do. Harry Browne - Minimize gov't, maximize individual Lamar Alexander. A wide breadth of experience, has vision, firm believer in less gov't. If he hadn't retired, I'd vote for Bill Bradley. Clinton re-election will have to suffice. Harry Browne, because he is the most Libertarian of them all ABC= Anyone But Clinton because Liberalism is a hideous ideology! pat buchanan. he is a patriotic leader with character. Bill Clinton. By in large has does a satisfactory job. The republican party wants to replace someone with no one. Pat Buchanan. He cares about the working class. Harry Browne - honest, good ideas, much less government Buchanan. He puts America and Americans FIRST. leadership, vision Harry Browne--The only sincere candidate that will cut government, not simply slow its growth. Alexander - moderate Republican ideas Harry Browne, for real political change. Colin Powell, He owes no political favors, has leadership ability, and would be a refreshing change to the polhacks now running. Harry Browne: uncompromising, consistent, moral, fair In my view, the number one function of the presidential office is as a bully pulpit, both nationally and internationally. Thus, the country needs a president of firm convictions. That is why I support Pat Buchanan. Harry Browne, but since I know he won't win. Pat Buchanan becuase he talks about things he believes in and sticks to his convictions. Browne or Forbes to return power to the people and take it away from the fed Harry Browne is serious about getting govt out of the way and will not compromise. His book, "Why Government Doesn't Work" is very clear on how he plans to do it. Either we get libertarians in office or I eventually leave the country. I refuse to live under a third world dictatorship and that is exactly where we're headed under establishment rule. Restore the Constitution and Bill of Rights! Clinton Harry Browne; he promises to take steps that would cause a reconsideration of (1) the role of and (2) many citizens' dependence upon government Pat Buchanan - he is the most conservatice canadiate in the race Harry Browne is the ONLY candidate with a consistent set of principles. Harry Browne - I want less gov't, but I don't hate anyone. just cause you've got the power, that don't mean you've got the right Preferably a woman, but most importantly, Pat Buchanan - best ideas for returning america to americans! Clinton � although not entirely effective, by far the least scary candidate; if his second term finally focuses on the issues of the 1992 campaign, then he will be excellent. Bill Clinton - He's the best man for the job. Harry Browne - he'll be a counter to the usual political, bureaucratic way of lawmaking. Pat Buchanan: He will restore our constitution & sovereignty BOB DORNAN - SLIGHLY TOO THE RIGHT OF BUCHANON Moderate Republican - Democratic way has failed us. Pat Buchanan: He is one of us! Pat Buchanan- He hates beltway bullshit as much as I do. Clinton - best president we've had in two decades Clinton because he has become a statesman and national leader Harry Browne for an end to government intrusion Bill Clinton--he has done a good job with the economy Harry Browne - the Libertarian platform is the only sensible one Harry Browne anybody but clinton; he is the worst criminal in the history of American government!!! buchanon,,forthright and honest and strong leader Patrick Buchanan. First, Clinton needs not to be re-elected and Buchanan is the only Republican who has a viable chance of beating him. Steve Forbes. Because he is the only candidate that realizes that the easiest thing a gov't official can do to raise income is to cut taxes. Also, he has a plan that can save Social Security. My wife and I have worked out the numbers on his flat tax and we save over $2,000 on tax on a combined income of less than $35,000! any moderate viable 3rd party candidate that cares about people more than the lobbyists Steve Forbes because I (as a "lower class" citizen) am tired of subsidizing a life style (house, children, retirement account) I cannot afford myself! Harry Browne is only one that could lead both parties in correct direction. BOB DOLE, BECAUSE I BELIEVE THAT HE SHOULD GET THE CHANCE. PLUS HE IS THE ONLY LEADER THAT WE HAVE. Alan Keyes, He is the only one who is saying all the right things for all the right reasons. Snowy the Budgie, because he is a hard-core Constitutionalist. And I want him to pick the "clothespin" as his running mate. Bill Clinton, because he is loyal to the U.S. steve forbes the flat tax Buchanan--stands behind moral principles Buchanan because he is a very morale person. Current President Clinton is the lesser of all evils. Bill Clinton:pro-choice, keep the government out of people's lives, recognize that social programs (soc. sec/welfare) do need reform not ended, reality that not everyone s taxes are equitable. Has made mistakes but doesn't go out of his way to deny it, willing to learn lugar Steve Forbes, as the only credible reformer Harry Browne, the most respectable libertarian candidate. Bill Clinton. He has done a great job against stiff Republican opposition. Honestly, I'd rather see Paul Tsongas than anyone else in the race... at least he sounds intelligent. Pat Buchanan-he would restore our Constitutional liberties Bill Clinton because he seems to care for underprivileged Browne because our country has become far too conservative and our government has gotten far too big. We need more individual freedom. Dole or Buchanan - Will keep America strong and make the government smaller. Bill Bradley cause he can play ball. Buchanan - Need to put government under contorl of the people - need a leader with storn morals and Christian beliefs. Browne, as most "mainstream" libertarian Pat Buchanan because I think he is believable. Harry Browne, because he would dramatically cut the size of the federal government, and also our tax load. Bill Clinton because he has made some great choices and I want that to continue. Alan Keyes: He has moral convictions and I can trust what he says. He knows that fixing the problems in todays families is the most important problem to solve. Pat Buchanan, I believe that he represents the voice of American citizens vs. "World citizans" Steve Forbes has the best ideas to preserve the American dream for future generations Buchanan. Return to "old values" and moving away from increased liberalism and political correctness! Bob Dole (although Alexander would be fine too), because he is a strong and electable leader who knows what it takes to get things done in Washington. Bucanan's extremism and isolationist rhetoric frighten me. Pat Buchanan loves and believes in Godly principles. I want to see someone who is a leader first; someone who will have the guts to stand up to special interests and do what is right for the country. I believe Steve Forbes and Colin Powell are the only potential candidates that fall into this category. Bill Bradley Hillary Clinton I don't really like any of the candidates. I tend to vote Republican ... but of the Republicans who have a prayer of winning, only Alexander interests me at all. If he does not make it to the nomination, I will probably (ulp) vote for Clinton. Alan Keyes: He's about what's right for America! We need less govenment and more people taking responibility for themselves. People of faith should be applauded and looked up to as leaders, not mocked by those of little or no faith. Men and women of faith founded this great nation, and now it the time for people of faith to save it!!! Buchanan:he's strong, dedicated, has character, is not wishy-washy. He seems to know what America needs and wants. Unlike Clinton, he's loyal and somewhat honest. He may be a bit extreme, but anything is better than Bill Clinton! nobody that is out there right now. hopefully someone will pop up out of nowhere and i will like 'em Harry Browne, because the intrusion of government inot our lives is accelerating, and I do not want to live in a fascistic socialist society. An informed electorate that clearly understands the issues and what the Federal Government can do as outlined in the Constitution. Harry Browne. He is the only hope for this country. We are sinking, and we need help Clinton, because he is the best person for the job Pat Buchanan , he makes good sense Pat Buchanan;can an arguement be given that is not partisoned? Dole - Best man for the job. Pat Buchanan means what he says, and says what he means. Harry Browne - the only candidate for drasticly and immediatly reducing federal government and intrusion Buchanan, has a clear vision of future direction, is passionate about beliefs, evolved from a grass-roots effort Buchanan, because he's the only one who truly cares about young people and their economy. Harry Browne, the only candidate with real planned solutions bill clinton.he's done a lot for the economy Harry Browne (L) - Libertarian candidates are the only candidates who are serious about reducing the size, scope, cost, and intrusiveness of government. Harry Browne to shrink government significantly and quickly. Colin Powel or Bill Clinton, balance, intelligence, reasonableness & ideology Pat Buchanan. He is the only candidate who CAN beat Bill Clinton. Buchanan will get the endorsement of United We Stand, the Perotista Reform Party, thereby eliminating the three-man race. In a three-man presidential election, Bill Clinton will win, to the detriment of all America. Pat Buchanan is also the most honest and forthright of all the candidates. You don't have to wonder where he stands, if he's waffling or if he'd change his message or demeanor to get votes. Bob Dole has and does. LamarAlexander has and does. We need honesty in today's government, someone who will stand up to the Establishment and win America back for the people. It's not a Revolution, my friends, it's a Resotration of the American Republic and ending the Government Empire. Buchanan. With his trade policy, well see more of "Made in U.S.A." goods again. All these guys are too concerned with reelection, not the task at hand. I used to enjoy politics, but with the Washington insider DOLE,and criminal Clinton--I have no choice but to dismiss this election as another mistake for the USA. Harry Browne, because (a) his platform is sound and (b) none of the other candidates are worthwhile, in my opinion. Steve Forbes - Flat Tax idea is great. Moderate Not into religious fanatacism or fanatic influence Harry Browne becuase of his libertarian principles Clinton D. Patrick Moynihan, due to his experience and opinions, but he's not running. Failing a good candidate, Bill Clinton The more I see of the Republican candidates - Clinton looks best. I have voted for both Republicans and Democrats in the past am disappointed in the lack of true statesmen in our society. Harry Browne-most closely embodies my ideas on the role of national government pat buchanan, because he simply has the best ideas on how to lead the country forbes flat tax less goverment no morals harry browne Clinton.....he can continue down a fair and open minded path, that the Rep. are unable to ever hope to achieve. Bill Clinton, he has successfully lead this country the last 3.5 years and I see no need to change Pat Buchanan--He has character. He says what he means and he means what he says Colin Powell, would be a very good president Hillary Rodham Pat Buchanan, his positions on virtually all of the issues most closely resembles my own. Harry Browne because many of his views are what I consider to be in the best interest of my church colin powell seems straightforward someone who can unite diverse groups, who is in touch with the possibilities and the dangers of globilization of the economy Richard Lugar Lamar Alexander because he presents the best well-rounded platform of all the candidates, Republican or Democrat. Harry Browne. Americans need more opportunity to solve their problems thru voluntary means, without government coercion or pre-emption. Pat Buchanan, because he is only man who does not seem to be , other than by God, guided by outside forces (other nations, big business, special interest, etc.). He stands tall and firm whether I agree with every last detail of his positions or not. Lamar Alexander: He's not a radical and he's enough of an outsider to give Washingtonians a kick in the pants. Pat Buchanan-because he is against gun control and he will get Harry Browne - His positions will not change when elected. Pat Buchanan...Although I am still in the process of studying his stand on everything, what I have heard and seen so far are closer to what I beleive than the other candidates. Further, Pat Buchanan appears to me to be a very genuine man...this is something that I don't beleive can be said for the other Republican candidates or Bill Clinton. I am tired of lying politicians that are more concerned with their power base than the state of America. Lamar Alexander is better than Pat Buchanan, but both are better than Dole - enough with Big Government, enough with over-extending tomorrow for today, we need a return to rugged individualism! Clinton, because he (mostly) supports social programs such as welfare, medicare, and social security, and because he is pro-choice and for gun control, to name just a few reasons out of many. Forbes Want Clinton out Want non-insider for a change Pat Buchanan because he makes me feel good about being an American. He stands up for the working class. graham - open minded, non extremist Bill Bennett because of his moral character Harry Browne because he shares my convictions. Steve Forbes is second for the same reason, albeit with more exeptions. Bill Clinton; best of a bad bunch. Clinton. He has attempted to live up to his campaign promises, despite opposition. Clinton is far better than choosing between lesser evils. Harry Browne. He will not violate his oath of office. Clinton-last time the Republicans were in they raped the country -- Savings & Loan, Stick Market, Junk Bonds, Insurance, screwed up best phone system in the world, etc. A person who will honestly work toward the betterment of All Americans! Buchanan-He's for America and he tells it like it is! Harry Browne because he is the ONLY candidate talking about reducing government at ALL levels... in both economic and social issues! Buchanan or Dole, Because they stand for something and seem not to make decisions bases on poles! Buchanan-because he is the only man with strong morals in the race (except for Alan Keyes, who has less support). Pat Buchanan is a man of principles and conviction; I know where he stands even if I don't agree with everything. Pat Buchanan - We need a good fire-breather for a change Steve Forbes because I am tired of the IRS fiasco. none of the above Bill Clinton. Cares about society. Not a judgemental, moral dictator, like most of the Republicans. Cares about education (college loans), youth, (i.e. National Service Corps), environment, diversity, equality, among other issues important to me. Bill Clinton because he did nothing wrong the first time. Bob Dole. Most experience and honor I like F0rbes/but will vote for Clinton if Forbes don't win republican bid which he probably won't. I like the flat tax idea.But i won,t vote for Buchanon or Dole because i don't need them deciding for me what i can or cannot watch on tv.We should of got Jerry Brown back for another shot>We need jobs in the USA and we must close the boarders.The immigrants are killing the country. I need more Info. Dole honest Harry Browne. Any fool that will enable me to take home more money and cut welfare to lazy minority bums Harry Browne because government doesn't work! Harry Browne- No income tax! Internet free speech! Forbes Pat Buchannan because He stands for the things I feel are important in returning America back to her glorious roots. HILLARY Harry Browne, because I agree with most of his ideas Lamar Alexander Pat Buchanan because he believes what he says and would never compromise his beliefs. He would be able to lead this country into the 21st century. Clinton - Doing a good job now and be free to do a better job in the future Pat Buchanan because he is the only candidate that speaks about the evils of mult-culturalism and open immigration. undecided still Alan Keyes - The Best Inspired Vision of what America is or can be again. Pat Buchanan Lamar Alexander - Smart and Straight Alan Keyes - Great Minority Canidate, conservative, educated, could help with race relations Anyone but Bill Clinton. Really. Dole because I like what he says Clinton, I don't like the all the ideas of all the other candidates Dole-best available choice out there right now Pat Buchanan because he stands for what America needs!!! Bill Clinton simply because I am a GAY REGISTERED VOTER and although his track record isn't perfect with the gay community, he has done more than any other President in history to help. He is not funded by the Christian Right and makes his own decisions. Clinton, rather reluctantly; the Republican candidates are disasters! Even though he is not running, Speaker of the House Newt Gingrich is the person I would have liked to have seen run for and be elected as president in 1996. He has the leadership skills needed to run this country in the way it will need to be run going into the next century. Despite his perceived tendency to be outspoken and uncompromising, those are strong qualities our country's leader needs to possess to be an example for all Americans. Bob Dole; I believe that he can bring the experience and somewhat political objectiveness to the Presidency to reduce taxes, budget deficiet and compromise with Demos. Pat Buchanon. He is the better of the Republicans. Bill's gotta go. Bill Clinton because he is better than the other canidates Steve Forbes. He has ideas that come from the people rather than made over ideas that come from government insiders browne because his view of government as it is is right on and his ideas to make meaningful changes are right on too!! Harry Browne: I believe he will reduce corruption by reducing governmental power. Pat Buchanan. He represents a stance toward maintaining a strong American system. bill clinton for lack of a better candidate Bill Clinton. No other candidates have proven they're capable of better leadership than Clinton. J.Kemp or C. Powell Bill Clinton, give his programs a chance to work bill bradley he has a brain and experience Lammar Alexander, because he wants to give the power back to the states. Dole Pat Buchanan Pat Buchana because he tells like it is and he is the most sincere and the least political. Lamar Alexander because he talks common sense on the issues. ALAN KEYES. He knows what is wrong in America and he knows how to unite the people to create a stronger, freer, and more compassionate country. Bob Dole; he has the necessary political experience and the maturity to know when to compromise for the gain of the entire country. He is honest and deserving. GO BOB!!! I would like to see Jesse Jackson because he advocates equal rights for all. Alan Keys makes more sense than anybody else. I just wish we knew more about him and he got more media coverage. Colin Powell - integrity!!! Harry Browne, cause it's about time. Harry Browne. Our political system needs shaken up, and Harry will bring some badly needed changes while doing it. Lamar Alexander, he is a moderate Steve Forbes - he makes sense Harry Browne: cut the federal government Pat Buchanan because he is the only candidate that supports the middle class in America and that can return us to the status of the best nation in the world in every respect!! I would like to see Bill Clinton win the election mostly to help Al Gore become our next President. I believe the issues of education and environment are going to be key issues in the future as does Al Gore. Bob Dole, he knows his way around government Harry Brown, so that government can be reduced. buchanon, moral reform Harry Browne - less government Clinton--because the Republican alternatives are so bad Buchanan because he wants to correct some serious problems that exist "in THIS country". Harry Brown Because he is the only candidate reconomending that the US government go back to being what it intended to be. A SMALL political body working for its people Harry Browne:freedom of the peaceful person to be left alone Harry Browne -- The Republican party has lost its identity; I want radical reduction in federal spending, and federal intrusion NOW. Any person who tells the truth, and sticks to it! I don't have enough Buchanan - Government reduction, fair trade, Government reduction. Bob Dole; He is more of a centrist than anyone else. Retired representative Bob Smith of Oregon Sen. Lugar, he is the best man. Pat Buchanan, most conservative buchanan Someone who is completely oppose Clinton on almost everything. Alan Keyes - He most accurately reflects my views. Bill Clinton (he is concerned about all Americans) DOLE, WONDERFUL MORAL LEADERSHIP ALAN KEYES, HE WILL RESTORE MORAL VALUES IN AMERICA. (HE HAS ALSO BEEN IGNORED BY THE MAIN STREAM MEDIA.I wonder why?) Pat Buchanan, he seems to be the candidate with the least qualties that I don't like. alan keye,because he's talking about the issues Lamar Alexandar, a moderate and can beat Clinton Lamar Alexander. He is a leader. I like his stand on the issues. He won't turn 80 before his term is up. bob dole Any republican,the democratsfor the past 20 years have given us the greatest wellfare country on the face of the earth. Yo' Momma Undecided Karl Marx. Clinton. He will provide at least a patial check on the republican party. Otherwise, business & the rich will have an advantage over the rest of us. I want a Clinton who is now independent of election concerns and can do the things he said he would in the 1992 campaign. Pat Buchanan( Powell Alan Keyes (He's the best choice for President) Harry Browne - All individuals win, instrusive government loses Harry Browne, his views on liberties and less government are consistant with mine Forbes, Need someone who is not a career politician Forbes: Most complete analysis of the 6 main issues (economics/flat tax, domestic policy/deregulation, foreign policy/world trade, healthcare, social security, & government must be run like a business) Bob Dole because it has the most integrity Keyes - abortion, tax policy, ability to use the "bully pulpit" Bill Clinton because he is more concered about the issues affecting the working middle class. Paul Krassner MC Ocampo she is the only person for the Job Jello Biafra Pat Buchannon because he ahs integrity and is for progress. Pat Buchanan - consistent convictions Harry Browne. He supports the reduction of government to a level mandated by the constitution. Hel also favors the elimination of income taxes. Bill Clinton.He is the best of the candidates so far. Harry Browne, because he is full of fresh ideas and truly believes in liberty for all Buchanan because he is is th Browne because he is the only candidate committed to individual liberty Bob Dornan - Someone the nation could easily rally around Bill Clinton, because he has the more views in commen with me than any other candidate. Harry Browne to shut it down! Pat Buchanan, has the right ideals for America dole-family values, & better economic solution Pat Buchanan. He's speaking sense while others are not. HARRY BROWNE - GOVERNMENT DOESN'T WORK ! I really don't know. I would vote for Clinton, but how can I vote for anyone who just threw away the First Amendment? Pat Buchanon..fearless, free thinking, sticks to principles Newt Gingrich-He'll stand firm for what he believes the people want. Rick Tompkins Bill Clinton -- he's the only candidate who seems to care about *people* as well as government. Alexander, because he is not too conservative Pat Buchanan, we need somebody who will revive the AMERICAN economy Clinton, pro-choice and we now have the US with low unemployment and a growing economy. Clinton - The economy is in good shape, the budget is closer to being balanced. Steve Forbes Clinton, no real Republican candidate Bill Clinton, because he has done well, and so have I. Clinton or Gramm because they are the only -safe- candidates. Clinton Man of vision...can lead us into the 20th Century a Jack Kemp/Bill Bennett combination, but neither will run this campaign. We need real LEADERS who have a clear vision and direction for this country, not politicians. Pat Buchanan, because he is closest to the traditional ideas that made America the ideal for the world. Pat Buchanan : We need to give control of the government back to the people and I Think Pat Buchanan will do his best to achieve that goal I will vote for Harry Browne. Get government out of our lives! Reduce taxes! More freedom! ross perot Alan Keyes Any Libertarian--because s/he would do a better job than any statist/collectivist Browne - to reduce the size and scope of government. Harry Browne- Less government=Less government ineptitude ALAN KEYES Steve Forbes or Colin Powell--both have a lot to offer the country. Harry Browne, He's the best choice!! Someone who is willing to dismantle the federal government and restore it to its constitutional size Alan Keys because he is black HARRY BROWNE! Get gov't out of my wallet, out of my body! Gen. Powell but that wont happen so Forbes lets fix finances bill clinton Harry Browne! Only Libertarians will reduce the size of government. Bill Clinton, he's the best candidate out there! Harry Browne, Libertarian, socially liberal, economically conservative, less Federal government buchanan Lamar Alexander He is not a radical Richard Lugar. Sonny Bono most represents the typical American. ALEXANDER-I JUST AGREE WITH THE MAJORITY OF HIS VIEWS buchanan ALEXANDER-I JUST AGREE WITH THE MAJORITY OF HIS VIEWS Buchanan - He's the best candidate to protect & preserve jobs for this country Harry Browne. He is the only candidate with whom I agree on philosophy, public policy and economics. Alan Keyes- he stands for what's right GO PAT GO Harry Browne - Most importanly, he's Libertarian, and besides that, holds many of the same beliefs I do. An honest, open-minded, non-biased, non-extremist, and normal human being. One with desire to do something about the country in the RIGHT way without imposing bullshit on everyone else. It's not that hard; they only have to be human. Alan Keys has the right answers to America's problems, the others are giving the same answers we've heard for years, there solution is more money, Alan's is more individual responsibility Clinton. Who else? Pat Buchanan - his social program ideas would be good for the country. His principles are the principles this country was founded and built upon Al Unser Jr. because I bet he could drive this country like a racecar. Come visit my Presidential Election homepage! Clinton - he's the most liberal of all the candidates Harry Browne, because he shares by libertarian ideals. Bill Clinton; the GOP isn't offering anything moderate enough for me this year Alan Keyes because he has his finger on the problem with our country, the family breakdown. He will do all he can to help this from continuing to deteriorate! Gen. Colin Powell or Gen. Shwartzkolf - Good leaders! Lamar Alexander-Honest, competent, common-sense person Clinton because he is the best on the issues that I care about Alan Keyes is the best candidate who will beat Clinton. He is an honest upright man. He puts the family as number one which is where it needs to be if our society is to last. bill clinton best man, good record Harry Browne - he is the best candidate that promotes a pro-freedom agenda. Harry Brown - freedom from oppression Alan Keyes - proper focus on core issues: breakdown of families, personal responsibility, character & initiative -- our visible problems are only symptoms of a weakened moral character. Lamar Alexander, because he has a positive vision for the future of America & he is tolerant/open-minded and the best ability to unify the American people (not alienate & polarize) Bob Dole because of his experience and he is a true statesman unlike so many in politics. I would like to see Lamar Alexander as Pres. because, I agree with the majority of his stands on the issues, and I think he can get the job done. GO PAT GO ,uncompromised belief in the american way Pat Buchanan I've meet him, trust him and he is America first. Pat will not bow to the Establishment. Harry Browne, HUGE federal government reduction... Harry Browne, to REALLY MAKE A DIFFERENCE! and not just blow hot air at the American People! Al Gore harry browne Bob Dole, because of his experience and character Harry Browne. Only the Libertarians are serious about cutting both spending and taxes. Anyone who has a grain of sense and doesn't bow to the right wing! Clinton - brains and flexibility Harry Browne. He's not Republican. He's not a Democrat. He makes sense. Honesty Steve Forbes, the man has the right ideas. Anyone BUT a businessman, commentator, or Life long politician - oops!! I guess that leaves them all out - I guess the best choice would be me - fair - non-judgemental, non-prejudgical, and not rich!! Lamar Alexander Pat Buchanan - Has strong family values anyone opposed to abortion keys-I think he knows what is wrong with society today dole Harry Browe, The size and control of the federal government is destroying America, while bankrupting to boot. Definately somedody that will reduce crime, drug use, poverty and unnecessary military involvement and will increase educational standards to an acceptable level. lamar! he wears flannel Steve Forbes / The Flat Tax Harry Browne his ideas are closest to my beliefs Pat Buchanan. A man of conviction. Not afraid to say what he thinks. Harry Browne - the time has come for a Libertarian President Bob Dole. I think he's serious about deficit reduction and can get it done General Colin Powell. Buchanan will bring the corporations back to American soil. harry browne; for Liberty An intelligent, principled person. I think Alan Keyes most closely meets these criteria. Ross Perot-excellent leader with good vision Colin Powell because he's the right man for the job Buchanan because he sticks to guns and we get what we vote for for once! Would be happy with a Rockefeller Republican - that is a fiscal conservative and a social liberal - but they have all been banned by buchanan and his ilk Lamar Alexander. Where he stands on issues. Leadership qualities. Dole - He'll get the expensive Liberal Programs out! Harry Browne-Because government doesn't work. Bill Clinton: he's a known quantity and doing o.k. Harry Browne -less government Harry Browne. We need to cut back on Fed Govt Clinton Pat Buchanan, Understands what it takes to lead America back to what the founding fathers had in mind (and what made America Great) Harry Browne - of all the candidates, he is the only one that I agree 100% with Ralph Nader because he is a liberal who actually does activist things and isn't a slave to big business. Harry Browne He stands for freedom Forbes Alan Keyes : His position on the real issues, most matches mine. H. Browne, He will drastically cut govt. not full of hot air. Return us to our constitutional mandates. Anyone but Clinton! Bill Clinton is a disgrace to the greatest country in the world! Buchanan best person for job Anyone but Bill Clinton. I don't have any confidence in him. not Clinton -- I don't like him. I will not vote for someone if they're not Pro-Life. harry brown,libertarian party is the only sane choice GOVERNMENT IS A CRIMINAL ORGANIZATION. HARRY BROWNE WILL DO THE MOST TO DISSOLVE IT. clinton. great guy Harry Browne because he is the ONLY candidate completely committed to a reduction in the influence of the Federal Government over our lives Either Perot, Forbes, or Dole in that order. The Democrates want the "have nots" to have it all.. The Republicans want the "have nots" to remain that way but only if they don't want to work their way up. Rich business men that have made it think that anyone that wants to can also make it. But Dole will probably win over them all, which wouldn't be too bad in the long run. Harry Browne because he's the best of the lot! Harry Browne. His views most accurately represent my own. Bill Clinton: He has experience, economic knowledge, good judgement Harry Browne. He's the most reasonable, rational candidate, and he is the strongest proponent of freedom. Pat Buchanan - Consistent and Credible Patrick Leahy, Deadhead and generally intelligent person. Bill Clinton because I really do not see anybody better not that he is so good I would have liked to see either Colin Powell, Jack Kemp, or Dan Quale (yes, Dan Quayle) for president because all three impressed me as fairly honest, intelligent candidates who knew a thing or two about using common sense in making decisions. I was comfortable with their moderately conservative social and fiscal ideals. However, those candadates have since dropped out of the race. I am not very impressed or comfortable with any of the current candidates. pat buchanan Harry Browne- less government- more individual liberty steve forbes. i like his flat tax and is a wash. outsider Harry Browne-Because he is a capitalist Steve Forbes-I am tired of politics as usual Gen. Colin Powell, because I approve of his positions (mostly) and he has the least controversy associated with his name. Also white males have run this country for over 200 years and I think it's time a qualified candidate from a different perspective is given the opportunity to straighten up this mess of a country. Either Harry Browne or Charles Collins. Most likely Bob Dole. I don't think that Clinton has done a good job. He keeps changing his position on everything. I want a president who will stick to his word and Dole might be that person. BOB DOLE is the best candidate for the United States presidency in 1996. Clinton cried for change and men followed him. Clinton has had his four years and things have certainly changed--unfortunately for the worse. Dole mixes open-mindedness(NOT libera Harry Browne is the only canidate who is willing to stand up for his uncompromising principles and he he represents the only effective means to reduce federal government intrusion into the life of every American Lamar Alexander because we need fresh realisic ideas Steve Forbes. Need someone who knows how to run a multi-million dollar institution and who can treat his people/workers fairly. Pres. Clinton because I truly believe he honestly wants to help everyone in the U.S. Harry Browne - He will honestly do everything in his power to get the federal government out of our pockets and out of our bedrooms. Captain Kirk - If he can save the planet he can save the country! Browne. The only one with a credible cut-government message. Dick Buchanan/Keyes -- return of integrity in the Whitehouse! Lamar Alexander - He can beat Clinton Harry Browne -LP Candidate "He is the only candidate that will truly reduce the size and scope of Government. Steve Forbe, because he has good ideas, and isn't involved in all that partisanship like the other candidates bob dole clinton because the republicans are only for the rich Bill Clinton, he has not been allowed to do his job, the Republicans have blocked him at every door Bill Clinton--the only candidate who doesn't espouse the hate typifying the Religious Right If I had my wish, I'd like to see a Mario Cuomo/Bill Bradley ticket in 1996. They're the most intelligent politicians in the US. I'd almost say they're statesmen, in fact. Cuomo's the most intelligent political mind in the country, Bradley champions acceptance and tolerance. Both are for rational thought in a secular government. Bill Clinton A pro-life democrat challenging Bill Clinton Harry Browne is the only candidate whose professes to have a consistant philosophy that favors individual liberty. Harry Browne - Libertarian Policies Bill Clinton because he is flexible. Listened to what the american people have to say... Colin Powell Harry Browne: Liberty and F Bob Dole. He has the most experience for the job. Bill Clinton, he's done a good job so far BILL CLINTON,HE'S A GOOD PRESIDENT Harry Browne, due to his commitment to return control of our personal lives to us, the people of the U.S., and not the Government. Harry Browne, We need a third party Less Government and more common sense Lower Taxes across the Board Harry Browne Harry Browne-He is our last best hope for proper government. Harry Browne - restore freedom,shrink government Bill Clinton's next four years should be ones in which he cares less about consensus and more about doing what he said he would. Don't know Forbes Steve Forbes- Successful bussiness leader already and a strong understanding of the economy with no "visible" ties that would influence decissions he must make. His ideas on the tax system and health care carry a great deal of the weight in my decision. Buchanan. The only candidate for working Americans. Bill Clinton: because it looks like he is the most viable candidate currently. Sen. Paul Wellstone Browne, as a start to reducing big govt. and taxes. Alan Keyes-I agree with his veiws on religion and the break down of families. ( I really want to see Powell, but that is not going to happen, and my second choice just dropped out of the race, Phil Gramm). Harry Browne because I want peace, prosperity and freedom. clinton Harry Browne - Liberty, Justice, and Abundance for ALL !! Onlt the Libertarians would restore both economic and personal freedoms, including the right to bear arms and an end to the drug war. Rick Tompkins sounds most hard-core and sincere. Bill Clinton--Overall, without regard to anything other than his performance as President, he has done a pretty good job. I think the country is better off today than before he was elected in as much as the issues over which he has some control. All candidates tend to promise everything to everybody which the smart voter should know is not truly possible. President Clinton has done a fine job and arguments against ham being re-elected never seem to have any substantive reasons why he shouldn't--onlyrhetoric. Buchanan - very strong moral leader Any republican, Because, Clinton has done nothing for this country, Goofy, from Disney, could do better than the Clinton's. Plus, I do not trust Al Gore. Harry Browne, because he is a Libertarian Bill Clinton - deserves to be reeelected Steve Forbes, Get the flat tax harry browne...we need to get this country back to its roots Pat Buchanan, No wishy washy political B.S. Harry Browne. Huge tax cuts now. Huge spending cuts now. A balanced budget now! Steve forbes, he's running on economic interests rather than social issues. Bill Clinton, because he is the only Democratic candidate. Harry Browne for a change. Forbes: Finacialy aware, PRO CHOICE and 17% tax will cut my takes almost in half. Someone who can bring this country back to basics, inspire a sound economy, and etc. Steve Forbes. This is based on his lack of experience in politics and his success in the business world. bill clinton, He's doing the best job any one could do. He's also the only individual running(with the possible exception of Allan Keyes with whom I don't agree) who has true leadership quality. Harry Browne - Putting a Libertarian in the Whitehouse would blow the "business as usual" polititians in congress out of the water. Clinton; least of all evils; Alexander, Powell, and the non-election year Dole are good alternatives Bill Clinton because he seems the best of a corrupt lot Forbes, Forbes, Forbes. Economic Optimism Harry Browne -- more freedom, less government Harry Browne, He's the best one. bill because dole will be the rep. candidate and he can't win lemar Alexander underdog Clinton. He's consistently improving his job performance. All of the Republican candidates with the exception of Alexander are frightening. Harry Browne. He has a plan on paper for everyone to see. No empty promises. He's stated what he wants to do and how he is going to do it. I would like to see Lamar Alexander, because he is a moderate conservative. Too many of the social programs that are bogging down the government are caused by liberal programs structured to help anyone that is less fortunate regardless of economic drive to better themselves. Bottom line is we need some more conservative spending practices than there have been in the past liberal administration. Now that the conservatives are in Congress, I see this change coming into focus finally. Now all we need s some one that is conservative in the White House. Only then will ther be any sweeping changes in balancing a budget, reforming welfare, reducing the federal governemnt and increaing the state government. One final note I would like to add, the overuse of social programs in society, and over reliance on such programs were one of the main reasons for the decline and fall of the roman empire. I don't want our great country to keep spiraling into economic and social decline. Lamar alexander for his sensible values and he has a good track record as governor of Tennessee Harry Browne, because only a Libertarian can begin to change things. Rick Tompkins is unquestionably the most capable of cutting back government. Harry Browne Bradley Harry Browne is MY man, because he understands the basic fact about our government-that is just isn't working! The Libertarian platform answers all of my needs as a freedom-loving, peace-loving American. Bradley Lamar Alexander He has done a great job in Tennessee, I agree with his moral standpoint, I think he would handle the presidency well. Colin Powell I have no clue. Either Rick Tompkins or Harry Browne: We MUST have leadership whose principal priority is protecting and restoring the individual liberty of ALL Americans. Pat Buchanan. Understands the problems that face the nation today. Pat Buchanon because he is clear and non wavering on the direction he wants to lead the country. ALAN KEYES- 5th in Iowa(amongst candidates still running), and full speed ahead to San Diego!!! Harry Browne or Rick Tompkins Pat Buchanan for his consistent stance on conservative social issues Bill Clinton. I admire him. Republicans are the whores. Bill Clinton. I admire him. Republicans are the whores. Bill Clinton, because he's the best chance this country has to move forward together pat buchanan because he is the only one with any convictions Libertarian - or anyone financed with real working peoples monies. Lamar Alexander-He has the record to prove he can stimulate the economy, and believes in the power of the individual. Clinton, he's got the right answers GO PAT GO!! consistant, honest, pro-life, christian conservative Harry Browne -- the perfect Libertarian candidate! Harry Browne, he's a laisse-faire capitalist & for reduced government. Bill Clinton. He's done an excellent job despite the obstruction of BOTH the Democratic (93-94) and Republican (95-96) Congresses. harry browne give someone with a brain a chance Harry Browne because he stands for the freedoms granted by the US Constitution. Phil Gramm Believes in hardworking values and a balanced budget Buchannan-solid conservative-Gramm's OK too Alan Keyes because he represents everything that is good about America and he wants us to return to running our government in the fashion established by our founding fathers. He also has the intelligence and wisdom to accomplish this vision. ALAN KEYES, HE STANDS UP FOR HIS BELIEFS AND IS A CONSTITUTIONALIST I honestly don't know. Even Clinton is too much of a "Republican" for me. PAT BUCHANAN - ONLY HONEST MAN RUNNING Bill Clinton Anyone other than Clinton. Too many lies. Enough of the Arkansas way. I don't really like any republican candidate though. Lamar Alexander comes closes to being acceptable. There is just no appeal in anyone running other than maybe Keyes, but he's a long shot. forbes...as a successful businessman he may just be able to turn the economics and debt of this country around Someone other than the current or commonly mentioned candidates. Existing Political parties, including the Libertarians, have become overly committed to the process of government and to business interests. clinton because he is for "all" americans. Buchanan because he is a man of strong convictions that understands the importance of family life and values Bill Clinton Bob Dole, CHARACTER & ability to work with present system as it does go through NECESSARY changes. ABC...Anybody But Clinton pat buchanan. won't compromise issues that got him in office Harry Browne - to significantly reduce the size of government Harry Browne - He is the only candidate whose rhetoric matches the party philosophy, i.e., its the individual who has competence in making decisions about his/her life. Bill Clinton, he has lowered Debt, unemployment down, inflation down. No real major screw ups Steve Forbes or Harry Browne I would like to see Bob Dole or Pat Buchanan for President because of their conservative ideals. A balanced budget, less welfare, lower taxes, lower interest rates Harry Browne, Freedom not Security a conservative republican, to return family values and lower taxes Harry Browne. I am a rational anarchist and prefer a candidate who will work to return the federal government to what it was orininally intended in the constitution. Harry Browne, we need a real change. BUCHANAN; America needs a "NEW" leader with an honest backbone and sound moral charchter. Lamar Alexander Harry Browne (L) would be a good start toward putting this great country back on track by drastically reducing taxes and other means of government intrusion into the lives of decent, honest, hardworking citizens. A person who understands that he answerable to a Power greater than the media & opinion polls. Harry Browne (L) would be a good start toward putting this great country back on track by drastically reducing taxes and other means of government intrusion into the lives of decent, honest, hardworking citizens. Lamar Alexander, has the vision to lead the country into the next century. A conservative repubublican with the experience that is neccesary to lead the Republican revolution. Jackson - we need a liberal who's willing to bully BUCHANAN: CONVICTIONS, CONVICTIONS, CONVICTIONS! I see little to choose from among those currently active Browne, because he knows why "Government Doesn't Work" Fobes, he know what says, and has no motive, except for the U.S. , he doensn't need to be president, He just wants to make a difference. I think this is evident through his fund rasing and self sufficiency. No Comment Any Republican or Libertarian with the hopes of reduced government, taxes and intrusion Anyone willing to defend constitutional freedoms, bar none. Lamar Alexander--Seems more down to earth and people oriented. any candidate but clinton---we need somone with business experience that is not afraid to shut down illegal immigration and welfare for able bodied persons Anyone but Bill, We must control spending!!!!! I fear continued Republican rule Pat Buchanan. He scientifically and religiously understands the right to life of the unborn. Bill Clinton - Forbes is simply trying to help rich, wanting to return to supply-side economics. Buchanan is the most dangerous man in America. Dole's longevity is attributable to his amorphous politic views. He is the consummate "party man", changing his views to be mainstream Republican. This is why he is still in politics and finally at the top of the list of Republican candidates. He simply outlived the rest. He's a follower, not a leader. If he was a leader, the Republican party would have an him a long time ago. Bill Clinton ... because he's done a good job so far and none of his opponents are nearly as good. A person like Ronald Regan. He was fairly consistent in his views and he gave direction to the country. Bill Clinton. He is the only candidate responsive to the problems of the poor and disenfranchised. Alan Keyes - to persuade the nation on moral restoration Steve Forbes. The only one who will slash government. CLINTON--HE'S DOING A PRETTY GOOD JOB! preferably any Libertarian would be better than the usual choices Harry Browne (any libertarian) - Adults need to start behaving like "big boys and girls" and take responsiblity for their own lives and choice. I am torn between Steve Forbes and Harry Browne. Gramm -- We need a man of integrity in the White House, NOT A LIAR like BILLY CLINTON! Harold Brown because America is too close to totalitarian governmment. I am a moderate but I think we need a Libertarian President to take us back from our dubious compromise between FFascism and Socialism. Pat Buchanan, I support Buchanan for a number of reasons. The fact that he does not support NAFTA, which has caused American jobs to be lost to other countries is a factor. Pat Buchanan, he's the only choice! Alan Keyes, because he is the only candidate that understands that the REAL issue is our neglect of the civic values this nation was founded upon, and is the only candidate with the conviction to bring those values once again to the forefront of the national conscience. Dick Lugar, Social Security Reform, Harry Browne: He is truly for small government Alan Keyes is Pro-Life, Pro-Immigration, and has a mature perspective. Buchanon: We need a leader of high moral character to give this nation a sense of direction and allow our country to once again be considered GREAT!! Harry Browne will reduce the size of government. Keyes-Pro-Life and Moral Issues Emphasis Harry Browne: his ideas can fix what's wrong with the U.S. and secure our future HARRY BROWNE, TIME FOR A BIG CHANGE. Clinton: Pro-choice is still the veiw by the majority,,,,thankfully! Harry Browne Harry Browne-Libertarian, smaller gov't-less taxation. Harry Browne Rick Tompkins. He doesn't compromise. Rick Tompkins, because we need a man of integrity for a change. Alan Keyes Bill Clinton will be reelected unless something goes terribly wrong. But, had Jack Kemp, William Weld, Christine Todd-Whitman or Bill Bennett run, the story might be different. Anybody that supports Free Speech on the Internet! Pat Schroeder - she knows whats happening in Washington but she won't forget the common people. Clinton - because the Contract with America is voidable at will Harry Browne because he favors less government Harry Browne, because he is the only candidate who will significantly reduce the size of the federal government. Dole, everyone hates Clinton Mr. Forbes will be a refreshing change. He's got integrity. He's not a Washington insider. He approaches our problems from a standpoint which focuses on change which can make a difference, not what a particular policy will bring in contributions. Harry Browne, because gov't doesn't work. Alan Keyes, for all the reasons above. A Clinton-Forbes race in order to provide Americans with two distinctly different choices! Jack Snow, guest host of Rush Limbaugh, McClauglin Group, et al. Harry Browne, because we desperately need a vastly smaller Federal government NOW. Harry Browne - real ideas, real ideology, proven solutions I would prefer to see the Libertarian Harry Browne as president this coming year. The only real problem I have with him, as with all libertarians, is that he comes off too extreme. Most libertarians understand that we need to reduce government, but any president who did it in the first 100 days would send this nation into turmoil. If he starts stressing that the solution will not happen overnight, I think he might come off as a more viable candidate for the rest of the population. Pat Buchannan Of the candidates who have a chance of winning, Steve Forbes is the best. Harry Browne is even better, but he can't win. Steve Forbes- Flat tax is something that this country has needed for a long time Browne; we need a principled President to reduce govt. Steve Forbes- Flat tax is something that this country has needed for a long time Alan Keyes-So Republicans will not be labeled racists PHil Gramm because of his basic principles and longtime fight to curb federal spending and balance the budget. Alan Keyes: Is the only candidate who has had the courage to address the primary problem in America today - Moral bankruptcy; The dissolution of the Family; Fatherlessness. The primary source of child abuse in America today is Divorce. Forbes, he's for the common man(oops, must stay politically correct, person)!! HARRY BROWNE -- IT'S TIME WE BROKE THE CHOKEHOLD THE REPUBLICRATS HAVE ON WASHINGTON Alan Keyes: Sound moral and spiritual values, and he's a Christian with uncompromising stance on his beliefs. Alan Keyes. He seeks to change the moral problems in this country, not just the money problems! Someone who respects the Constitution A liberal Republican or Conservative Democrat... Harry Browne, because he wants to cut the goverment much more than any other candidate. Harry Browne Harry Browne--Less government. Forbes: he is not a professional politician!! Bob Dole - understands importance of foreign policy Alan Keyes, an elctrifying candidate -- why is he being ignored by the "mainstream media" Harry Browne- sensible goverment reduction Irwin Schiff-only one telling the WHOLE truth Alan Keyes, I like his stand on gov't, taxes, & family Steve Forbes, because he's rational enough not to be the lackey of the religious right. Keyes -- political outsider with family values adn economic experience and focus to correct government direction Phil Gramm; i trust in him that he would do what he says - - and i like what he says Harry Browne--because he wants to get government out of things that are simply not it's function. Harry Browne...because I believe in limited government and for all their rhetoric, the Republicans don't. They want government out of the boardroom and into the bedroom. Buchanan, a man of conviction, values, and vision, for all seasons. Harry Browne, to reverse the growth of gov. & loss of freed. Pat Buchanan.Stands up for what he believes & hasn't waffled Harry Browne - a libertarian government will increase personal and economic freedom for everyone, in the long run Browne, because he will follow the Constitution Harry Browne -- he's the only candidate who would cut the federal government back to only those functions specified in the Constitution. Harry Browne - From a party that WILL cut government, not just talk about it every 4 years. Bob Dole- C-Span coverage of the senate reveals him to be a charismatic leader with a practical nature and the moral bearing that would serve the bully pulpit well. Long term balance (fiscal and social) could be achieved with a conservative government. h. browne because he will reduce the size of government and reduce taxes An honest man - Eisenhower warned about the 'military industrial complex' he didn't see the social welfare state coming!! Colin Powell, new and not tainted by government involvement Harry Browne, if I thought he'd win I'd vote for him - for GOP I like Forbes - Pat Buchanan - Passionate, moral, outsider, honest. blunt. Browne is the only sane choice. Ross Perot, or Steve Forbes. Somebody needs to try something different with money! I would like to see Harry Browne or Rick Tompkins for president. This country was the most prosperous nation on the planet. Our standard of living doubled ever 20 years. That meant that my father could expect to live as well at the age of twenty as my grandfather lived at fourty. I on the other hand can only expect to live 2.5% better than my father at any particular age. This drop in the standard of living increase can only be attributed to the increase of the welfare state in the 50s and 60s. Unfortuately, it is too late for my generation because I will probably spend the rest of my live paying off the debt accrued by the previous two generations. It is still in my interest to see this socialist regime end. H. Browne; big governments bog things down Harry Browne: lower taxes, less government Harry Browne, because he is a Libertarian Harry Browne...I believe in libertarian principles Forbes. Because he is not a politian, and runs a large empire. Harry Browne for principled real change. I see Bob Dole, because everyone is sick of Clinton, and I am not sure that Forbes will actually pull in all the votes he needs. How is one to know if he will stand with the republicans in the white house. he may as well independently run. Bob Dole is a safer canidate to vote for. Harry Browne He respects people and the choices they make for themselves. Harry Browne - He will reinstitute strict Constitutional Government Eugene Debbs - RED is a nice colour Harry Browne: It is time to have a president that believes in unobstructed small business in America. We all know that the small business is the backbon of America and is what makes this country run. We need less government interference so commerce can operate as intended. The republicans are on the right track, but they just want sau it. We need a complete Laizzere Faire Capitalist society and that's what tehy want but they think it scares people. This country is a trade oriented society and we must hve free & open trade is we are to survive. We only need national government for the few items our great and thoughtful forefathres knew we needed. Let's get back to the basic and get the national debt down. This country should never have had and it should never have a "national debt". Independent business people can not run their businesses for very long in debt and the country should not either. The only way to eliminate the national debt is to stay withing the budget. We know how much we have coming in eery year, so spend only that. It seems pretty damn simple to me. I have to do it in my business, and I expect the government to do the same. Harry Browne, because he's the only one who will really reduce government. Harry Browne, to reduce the size and power of government John F. Kennedy Jr. Harry Browne, he knows our government sucks dick Forbes. He is not a politician. Rick Tompkins,because of his uncompromising stand on the Bill of Rights Bob Dole - Republican leader with at least some sense of morality Harry Browne- Only one for economic and social liberty Bill Clinton, because the Contract With America is voidable at will Harry Browne - drastic reduction in government and its interventions I want to see a president that has nothing to hide about their past, is honest and non-corruptible. It would be nice if they enjoy nude recreation (skinnydipping), for my trust in them would go up several notches. Harry Browne - Freedom was the whole idea. see above Harry Browne, because he has a fresh perspective, and is the only candidate who seriously wants to end the national debt. Harry Browne because he gives straight answers and not political double talk "crap". He feels government should keep their noses out of education and he protests Internet censorship. I just hope he practices what he preaches. Harry Browne -- He has promised to get government out of more aspects of our economic and personal lives. I'd like to see Harry Browne as President. He is tho only caididate who really knows how to correct the problems the country is facing and he is totally honest. Harry Browne because Government doesn't work Alan Keyes; he is the only candidate who argues from FIRST PRINCIPLES, i. e., natural law, the Declaration of Independence, and the Constitution. Harry Browne; Because Welfare sucks. Good Ideas and the will to implement them Since I am running but unelectable then Steve Forbes. He is running on his idea(s) not on being all things to all people. Harry Browne, he is the only one who has based his campaign on principles and WILL stick to them. Clinton, for all of his floundering, is the least hazardous for this country. Harry Browne--To reduce government. I support Pat B. But I am realistic in knowing that he will not be elected. I go with the person who holds most of my ideas and has the best chance of being elected. Harry Browne-very small USG, no IRS, 5% fed sales tax at worst! I'm currently supporting Harry Browne because he is committed on principal to reducing the power of the Federal Government to the levels specified in the Constitution. Harry Browne, he understands our biggest problem is too much force (government) and not enough voluntary cooperation via the marketplace Lamar Alexander because he is a states rights conservative Harry Browne Harry Browne --- We need a great leap into liberty! Harry Browne - To return the country to Constitutional Government. Harry Browne, the only candidate who advocates the large tax and spending cuts we need. Browne is the only candidate with a hint of a clue Harry Browne will limit government intrusion into our personal and financial lives Harry Browne. How the Feds take taxes from us is not the problem; how MUCH they take is. HB is the only candidate talking of REDUCING federal spending! Harry Browne. Return to Freedom for Individuals. Harry Browne, because he is the only candidate I have found who believes in the constitution. Libertarian Harry Browne, because the Libertarian party is the only choice for real change and Harry is the most reasonable and electable of the Libertarian candidates. Forbes has the best ideas for unleashing the great Americal potential HARRY BROWNE-ONLY ONE WHO WANTS TO GREATLY REDUCE GOVT Harry Browne - to seriously reduce the size of government Vote Browne to shut it down!!! Harry Browne. It's the government, stupid! The executive branch should try running the government like a business. The legislature should stop voting THEIR opinions and give us what they PROMISED when we elected them. Harry Browne, he understands the proper role of government. Try running the government like a business for once. Harry Browne or other viable Libertarian: to reduce size & scope of govt., reduce and/or eliminate income tax & spending, promote personal liberty with personal responcibility Harry Browne. He knows that government doesn't work, and that freedom does. In his book "Why Government Doesn't Work" he lays out a sound plan to balance the budget now, slash taxes now, privatize Social Security and other programs in ways that will work, etc. Anyone who will downsize Washington. Bill Clinton, would you rather have Bob Dole? liberty Steve Forbes, Would continue the revolution-New Ideas Buchanan-Solid stance on issues & honesty Harry Browne - Jeffersonian Ideals are needed badly Harry Browne, because only Libertarians believe in Limited Constitutional Government as the Founders of America intended. Harry Browne--much less government Harry Brown - non-interventionist Harry Browne because government policies have created every problem that comes to mind! Harry Browne -- Has the right answers. Harry Browne: He will reduce the size and ccost of government. Harry Browne. He is firm in his political philosophy, and that philosophy mirrors my own. Personal freedom and personal responsibility. Harry Browne Reduce government and slash taxes Harry Browne, and a return to Constitutional Principles Harry Brown - "Less Govenment, More Liberty" Harry Browne. If you seek a reason, look around you. Somebody who will balance the budget THIS year, and cut gov't in half, each year, until 2000! The Republicans and Democrats STILL want to overspend for the next 7 years!!! Federal government should be restricted to the small number of things specified in the Constitution (Read Article 8, Section 1) AND NO OTHER ACTIVITES SHOULD EVER BE FUNDED. Abolish all other departments and agencies and sell all their assets to get rid of the previous DEBT and future interest. Also, repeal the XVI amendment. (Ten, maybe privatize the Post Office, too. :-) Not sure yet Harry Browne because his beliefs and expectations most closely match mine. Harry Browne. I want the freedoms and responsibilities for my own life back. Mind my own business and do my own thing. Browne, Forbes, or anyone else who genuinely wants to reduce Harry Browne; the only one worth a damn. Steve Forbes is the only Republican (viz. candidate with a chance) who understands that economic liberty fosters morality. Harry Browne - Wants to restrict Gov power to that defined in the Constitution. Pat Buchanan - his strong stance on issues, his moral position, his honesty Harry Browne: sharply cut spending, end drug war Dan Quayle. He is an intelligent man who has been espousing the same views and ideas that Bill Clinton put forward in his last State of the Union speech. Phil Gramm I wanted to see Bill Clinton before he signed this Internet Bill. Decisions made in ignorance are unforgivable. This is the WORLD Wide Web; our restrictions mean nothing. Pat Buchanan. I think he has the conviction to turn this country around and stands for the right issues. Jake Garn Because he has an honest interest in the country. Harry Browne. We need to reduce the size of the federal government drastically, and neither the Democrats nor the Republicans want to do that. Bill Clinton, because I'd rather be taxed into poverty than live in a theocracy Harry Browne, simply, we need less gov't, less gov't spending, and more community. Harry Browne - Time for change from the old standard mess Harry Browne. Essay Questions suck! Steve Forbes is the best candidate to represent all who believe government is to big and taxes too much. He can beat Bubba. Harry Browne. He sincerely wants to see government reduced. anybody honest, educated, and moral A president who not only promises less government, but delivers Harry Browne, because he will reduce the intolerable amount of government intrusion into our lives. Phil Gramm... because he is the only candidate I've seen who is rationally trying to solve our country's problems Jerry Brown Lamar Alexander = qualified Bill Clinton - Forbes is to uni-lateral, Dole seems static Harry Browne: I favor a return to "Liberty" (that funny word on coins) Harry Browne, because he's the only one who understands that Government Doesn't Work! Harry Browne, Libertarian Party, the Party of principle--that's reason enough! harry browne because the federal govt must be stopped NOW! I would like to see Harry Browne for president in 1996, because he is truly for reducing the government Harry Browne -- a candidate with uncompromising libertarian views Someone who will eliminate all unneccesary govt functions. Colin Powell -- most experienced; contribute to reconciliation between the races Harry Browne Harry BRowne cause he is hype as hell Pat Buchanan - Family values,federal welfare system, and the federal deficit are the important issues today. We are at a turning point in U.S. history will we turn toward the values this country was founded on or toward decay and the failure of our civilization. ANY moderate not affiliated with religious fanatics. Someone who can turn this country around. Return freedom to the country of the free. my dad, i know i can trust him. honestly. i'm discouraged by all i see. A TRUE Libertarian--principles of individual freedom and less government intrusion! Steve Forbes is basing his campaign on a few principal planks, and stands steadfast by these planks. Other issues and ideas, from what I have seen, he is willing to compromise on. In this respect, he separates himself from the other contenders; he is clear, concise, and uncompromising on his main themes, but willing to give on "lesser" issues. Harry Browne is the only candidate who truly understands the probelem of government. Lamar Alexander, because he is the least offensive of the current candidates. Alan Keyes Harry Browne, because "Government Doesn't Work" Harry Browne, we need a new persepctive, philosiphers, not governors! ROBERT DOLE IS A MAN OF INTEGRITY, INTELLIGENT AND GETS THE JOB DONE. Harry Browne because he favors more personal rights for citizens Clinton -- he's the lesser of the evils Harry Browne; For liberty, freedom and smaller government! Clinton. I am glad to see a president who will defend the elderly and students. Harry Browne, to drastically cut the size and scope of government Harry Browne to save the future of America Harry Browne. He's honest, decent and will respect the U.S. Constitution. Howard Stern and Baba Booie as vice Harry Browne - The Federal government has to be radically reduced and I don't believe any other candidate has the conviction to do it. Harry Browne. The Republicans and Democrats have proven themselves incapable of governing well. A libertarian approach to government would, in the long run benefit each one of us. Harry Browne, still the only consistent pro-liberty candidate harry browne no comprise on solc, lib Bill Clinton because he has started a number of valuable programs and I feel that he should continue them to completion. Alan Keyes. I think that he alone knows what needs to be done about welfare and the people involved in welfare, (recipients). Browne the Libertarian -- there is too damn much govt interference in our lives!!! Forbes, The current tax system is unfair and way too complicated Steve Forbes- Obviously, big gov't heads haven't accomplished much, let's see what a business man can do. SF - I think the flat tax idea is a step in the right direcrtion and I don't want to see another politician elected as Presedent anyone but bill clinton who has moral fiber Harry Brown: he will introduce many people to the ideas and economics of freedom and individual responsibility, and maybe even succeed in doing what seems impossible--removing pre-existing damaging laws and government institutions which are a threat to our social and economic freedoms. Harry Browne. I'm tired of big government. Only a libertarian will consistently act to reduce the size of government. In short, "anyone" but Clinton and Clinton. Harry Browne because we need to reclaim our freedoms. Gramm because of his honesty and his position on the issues Harry Browne. Pat Buchanan Bob Dole Phill Gram a woman - better late than never A Pro-choice Republican who hasn't sold out to the Christian Coalition and the like. I would love to see harry browne since I think we need someone who will fight for our freedoms before we slide completely into oppression Harry Browne- We need to go in a different direction, towards less government! Harry Browne to reduce or eliminate the federal government anyone intelligent and honest Bill Clinton - You can never underestimate the stupidity of the American electorate. Questions, comments, suggestions? Contact us. Return to theHome Page. Copyright ©1996, /InterCommerceCorporation, All rights reserved worldwide Send comments to Webmaster@Survey.net WT02-B22-37IA060-000333-B021-136http://www.survey.net:80/drug1r.html 204.107.221.240 19970115054215 text/html 13673HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 15 Jan 1997 05:35:43 GMTServer: Apache-SSL-US/1.0.3+1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 13490Last-modified: Wed, 15 Jan 1997 02:14:59 GMT SURVEY.NET Poll Results Your source for information, opinions & demographics from the Net Community! Drug Survey Total Respondents: 2729 What substances have you tried at least once? [ 2673]  97.9% - Caffeine[ 2531]  92.7% - Alcohol[ 2069]  75.8% - Nicotine/Tobacco[ 1815]  66.5% - Marijuana[ 1288]  47.2% - Other - Prescription[ 1082]  39.6% - Other - Painkillers[  947]  34.7% - Hashish[  919]  33.7% - LSD/Acid[  778]  28.5% - Other - Allergy Medication[  775]  28.4% - Other - Non-Prescription[  768]  28.1% - Mushrooms[  753]  27.6% - Cocaine[  655]  24.0% - Nitros Oxide[  624]  22.9% - Valium[  623]  22.8% - Diet Pills[  483]  17.7% - Other - Stimulants[  478]  17.5% - Methamphetamines[  371]  13.6% - Demerol[  321]  11.8% - Other - Depressants[  319]  11.7% - Ecstasy[  286]  10.5% - Prozak[  280]  10.3% - Amyl Nitrate[  277]  10.2% - Other - Inhalants[  267]   9.8% - Crank[  240]   8.8% - Morphine[  237]   8.7% - Petroleum products/industrial chemicals[  237]   8.7% - Other - Psychoactive[  229]   8.4% - Peyote[  221]   8.1% - PCP/Angel Dust[  157]   5.8% - Crack[  150]   5.5% - Heroin[  114]   4.2% - Other - Steroids[   85]   3.1% - Soma In what form have you taken drugs? [ 2510]  92.0% - Drinking[ 2139]  78.4% - Smoking[ 1838]  67.4% - Pills[ 1393]  51.0% - Eating[  865]  31.7% - Sniffing[  819]  30.0% - Injection - by a health professional[  769]  28.2% - Inhalation[  262]   9.6% - Absorbtion - skin[  147]   5.4% - Injection - self[   94]   3.4% - Other How would you characterize your experience with alcohol? [  427]  15.6% - Have tried it but do not drink any longer[  338]  12.4% - Beer/Hard liquor (weekly)[  292]  10.7% - Beer/Hard liquor (monthly)[  210]   7.7% - Beer only (weekly)[  196]   7.2% - Mostly wine/champagne (rarely)[  147]   5.4% - Mostly hard liquor (rarely)[  145]   5.3% - Beer only (rarely)[  120]   4.4% - Never tried it[  116]   4.3% - Mostly wine/champagne (weekly)[  110]   4.0% - Reformed alcoholic/no longer drink[  102]   3.7% - Beer only (daily)[   79]   2.9% - Mostly hard liquor (weekly)[   73]   2.7% - Beer/Hard liquor (daily)[   71]   2.6% - Beer only (monthly)[   69]   2.5% - Mostly wine/champagne (monthly)[   65]   2.4% - Mostly hard liquor (monthly)[   60]   2.2% - Mostly wine/champagne (daily)[   50]   1.8% - No Answer[   39]   1.4% - Mostly hard liquor (daily) How would you characterize your experience with marijuana? [  758]  27.8% - Never tried it[  314]  11.5% - Smoked on occasion in the past but no longer[  313]  11.5% - Regularly smoked it in my youth but no longer[  253]   9.3% - Tried it a few times[  229]   8.4% - Still smoke on a daily basis[  199]   7.3% - Still smoke occasionally[  180]   6.6% - Still smoke on rare occasions[  147]   5.4% - Tried it once[  144]   5.3% - Still smoke weekly[   69]   2.5% - No Answer[   56]   2.1% - Never have but would like to try it[   49]   1.8% - Still smoke monthly What drugs do you feel should be legal? [ 2548]  93.4% - Caffeine[ 2295]  84.1% - Alcohol[ 1763]  64.6% - Nicotine/Tobacco[ 1723]  63.1% - Marijuana[  862]  31.6% - Hashish[  858]  31.4% - Mushrooms[  787]  28.8% - Prozak[  765]  28.0% - Valium[  707]  25.9% - Nitros Oxide[  703]  25.8% - Peyote[  671]  24.6% - Demerol[  666]  24.4% - LSD/Acid[  610]  22.4% - Ecstasy[  605]  22.2% - Morphine[  559]  20.5% - Cocaine[  502]  18.4% - Methamphetamines[  492]  18.0% - Heroin[  473]  17.3% - Amyl Nitrate[  465]  17.0% - Soma[  400]  14.7% - Crank[  391]  14.3% - Crack[  386]  14.1% - PCP/Angel Dust Based on your experience with marijuana, what are your thoughts on its effects? [  781]  28.6% - Never smoked[  434]  15.9% - It's very relaxing; helps me deal with stress[  223]   8.2% - It makes me paranoid/uncomfortable[  195]   7.1% - It dulls my senses[  191]   7.0% - Other[  190]   7.0% - It's good for social interaction[  182]   6.7% - It enhances my senses[  165]   6.0% - It doesn't seem to affect me[  151]   5.5% - It enhances my creativity[  136]   5.0% - No Answer[   23]   0.8% - I use it for medicinal purposes[   18]   0.7% - It makes me hallucinate[   12]   0.4% - It makes me belligerent[    9]   0.3% - I use it to stimulate my appetite when appropriate Based on your experience with cocaine, what are your thoughts on its effects? [ 1501]  55.0% - Never tried cocaine[  469]  17.2% - No Answer[  236]   8.6% - It is too addictive[  138]   5.1% - Other[  129]   4.7% - It enhances my senses[   94]   3.4% - It doesn't seem to affect me[   49]   1.8% - It enhances my productivity[   29]   1.1% - It makes me belligerent[   19]   0.7% - It dulls my senses[   19]   0.7% - It enhances my creativity[   14]   0.5% - It's very relaxing; helps me deal with stress[   10]   0.4% - It makes me hallucinate[    4]   0.1% - I use it for medicinal purposes Based on your experience with alcohol, what are your thoughts on its effects? [  968]  35.5% - It's good for social interaction[  487]  17.8% - It dulls my senses[  351]  12.9% - It's very relaxing; helps me deal with stress[  290]  10.6% - Other[  150]   5.5% - Never tried it[  127]   4.7% - It makes me belligerent[  116]   4.3% - No Answer[  108]   4.0% - It doesn't seem to affect me[   48]   1.8% - It makes me paranoid/uncomfortable[   22]   0.8% - It enhances my creativity[   20]   0.7% - It enhances my senses[   18]   0.7% - I use it for medicinal purposes[    6]   0.2% - It makes me hallucinate Has anyone in your family had a drug/alcohol problem? [ 1186]  43.5% - No[  353]  12.9% - Alcohol - one/both parents[  307]  11.2% - Alcohol - someone else in family[  229]   8.4% - Several people in my family have had alcohol & drug problems[  210]   7.7% - Several people in my family have had alcohol problems[  119]   4.4% - No Answer[   82]   3.0% - Drugs - brother/sister[   77]   2.8% - Alcohol - brother/sister[   38]   1.4% - Drugs - someone else in family[   25]   0.9% - Drugs - one/both parents[   20]   0.7% - Alcohol - spouse[   15]   0.5% - Alcohol - former spouse[   12]   0.4% - Alcohol - son/daughter[   11]   0.4% - Several people in my family have had drug problems[   10]   0.4% - Drugs - spouse[    9]   0.3% - Drugs - son/daughter[    8]   0.3% - Drugs - former spouse Have you ever been in rehabilitation for a drug/alcohol habit? [ 2451]  89.8% - No[   84]   3.1% - No Answer[   75]   2.7% - Yes - Both[   70]   2.6% - Yes - Alcohol[   31]   1.1% - Yes - Drugs Have you ever been arrested by authorities relating to drug/alcohol use? [ 2017]  73.9% - No[  323]  11.8% - No - but have had a close call[  107]   3.9% - Yes - Alcohol (driving under the influence)[   86]   3.2% - Yes - Alcohol (underage drinking)[   77]   2.8% - Yes - Marijuana (possession)[   57]   2.1% - No Answer[   15]   0.5% - Yes - Other drugs (possession)[   12]   0.4% - Yes - Marijuana (distribution/dealing)[   12]   0.4% - Yes - Other drugs (distribution/dealing)[    3]   0.1% - Yes - Marijuana (driving under the influence)[    2]   0.1% - Yes - Other drugs (driving under the influence) At what age did you first try marijuana? [  811]  29.7% - I have never tried marijuana[  547]  20.0% - 18-21[  453]  16.6% - 16-17[  388]  14.2% - 14-15[  197]   7.2% - 11-13[  129]   4.7% - 22-25[   73]   2.7% - No Answer[   44]   1.6% - 26-30[   37]   1.4% - Under 10[   24]   0.9% - 31-40[    7]   0.3% - 40+ At what age did you first consume alcohol? [  671]  24.6% - 14-15[  530]  19.4% - 16-17[  528]  19.3% - 11-13[  397]  14.5% - 18-21[  323]  11.8% - Under 10[  122]   4.5% - I have never consumed alcohol[   80]   2.9% - No Answer[   46]   1.7% - 22-25[    8]   0.3% - 26-30[    3]   0.1% - 31-40[    2]   0.1% - 40+ What are your thoughts on drug testing? [ 1639]  60.1% - Certain jobs should require mandatory drug tests[  456]  16.7% - There should be no drug testing under any circumstances[  246]   9.0% - I wouldn't fail such a test so it does not matter to me[  198]   7.3% - Everyone should be tested by their employer[  125]   4.6% - No Answer[   46]   1.7% - Everyone should be tested by the government Have you ever been tested for drugs by your employer? [ 1815]  66.5% - No[  802]  29.4% - Yes[   94]   3.4% - No Answer What are your thoughts on drugs & drug usage? [  758]  27.8% - Education is the key to dealing with drug/alcohol problems[  644]  23.6% - Certain drugs such as marijuana should be legalized[  307]  11.2% - All drugs & alcohol should be freely available[  220]   8.1% - This is a personal psychological issue more than a sociological issue[  200]   7.3% - We need more stringent penalties against dealers[  198]   7.3% - All drugs & alcohol should be more tightly regulated[  100]   3.7% - We should bomb drug developing countries back to the stone age[   78]   2.9% - We need more stringent penalties against users[   50]   1.8% - No Answer[   32]   1.2% - I have no opinion on this issue[    0]   0.0% - The government needs to crack down harder on illegal drug use There are also User Specified Comments on this survey available Questions, comments, spelling corrections? Contact webmaster@survey.net. Return to theHome Page. Copyright ©1996, /InterCommerceCorporation, All rights reserved worldwide Send comments to Webmaster@Survey.net WT02-B22-38IA060-000333-B027-340http://www.survey.net:80/pol3c2.html 204.107.221.240 19970115060800 text/html 129786HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 15 Jan 1997 06:01:16 GMTServer: Apache-SSL-US/1.0.3+1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 129602Last-modified: Mon, 25 Nov 1996 20:26:45 GMT SURVEY.NET - 1996 Presidential Poll #3 - User comments (ARCHIVE III) Your source for information, opinions & demographics from the NetCommunity! ANNOUNCING: The Internet's finest interactive, totally-automated,immediate survey system. We can take any form and instantly create adynamic demographic database and show you the results as soon as youcomplete the survey! Political Survey #3 User comments [ARCHIVE III] Who will be president in 1996 and why? Rick Tompkins. He's the only voice for true freedom. Clinton, Because for the most part, he has tried to please everyone he can, without hurting the majority at the same time Harry Browne because he is a value producer and is honest. Harry Browne - uncompromisingly pro-individualist, pro-liberty Phil Gramm, He is uncompromising on tuff issues, He's open to ideas also. He obviously has no apperent racial bias, Mary Cal Hollis; the only REAL progressive in the race Harry Browne - to get the USA back no track again Harry Browne - stop this stupid drug war! Harry Browne- I agree with with more of what he stands fro than any other candidate Anybody but a liberal Clinton. can't stand conservative right wing Republicans Harry Browne. I want the government out of my house, my pants, my wallet. Harry Browne, because libertarianism is the future. Bob Dole. Although I do not believe Dole is a perfect candidate, I feel very strongly that he is a better candidate than Clinton. Trying very hard not to make this too political or rhetorical, I see Clinton as merely and opportunist, who is not respectable at all. I am pretty conservative, but I would rather see Clinton stand for extreme liberal ideals all the time, than change is platform continuously to maintain his current high ratings. I believe Dole believes what he says. I believed Clinton blieved it in 1992 and was not extremely upset when he got elected. Now, I do not believe anything Clinton says. Harry Browne - gov. is out of control Harry Browne anybody but Clinton. He lies, cheats, belives in the use of force to stay in power. bob dole, mr clinton is a totally ineffective leader whose only goal is to foster and grow big government Bill Clinton - He's leading Where the Nation should go. Harry Browne - He is the only individual qualified for the position. a reform party candidate but not perot Harry Browne because he would reduce govt and taxes. Harry Browne Senator John McCain of Arizona. He's a genuine hero, tough but generous, and very fair-minded. He's right on the debt, on missile defense, and on the economy. I hope Dole picks him for V.P., and Powell for Secretary of State. Powell would also be a great candidate, but he'd do better to wait until 2000. Harry Browne, because I like complete freedome from other peoples oppressive leanings. Hillary Clinton: Good Hirdo Dole, because it's time somenone knocked the "fence rider" off the fence. Harry Browne, because he's the most laisse-faire candidate Bob Dole, of course. He more closely represents my ideals of less government and more respopnsibility on the individual. Clinton is my pick since the alternative is Dole. Hope to encourage a larger variety of political parties at the local levels and eventually work up to a force in national policies. Libertatrian, Green, Pacific, whatever, just more choices! Thomas Jefferson but too bad he is dead. Lamar alexander Bring God back into American politics Harry Browne, because Government Ds6. BILL CLINTON DOLE IS TOO OLD AND REPUBLICANS ARE VIEWED AS TOO EXTREME. Bill Clinton -- The masses are easily convinced. Browne. Government Doesn't Work Mr. Browne, because he proposes to reduce the size of the federal government by a factor of 15, eliminate the federal income tax, and privatize Social Security. Harry Browne, he just may save our republic. I wish Jerry Brown were running this year. All these Republican candidates are yapping about a flat tax when it is actually a very democratic idea. Jerry Brown was the one who came up with it in the first place. Bill Clinton is an idiot, but Bob Dole is an old, closed-minded preachy idiot, so Clinton wins! Harry Browne because he will reduce government Bill Clinton - he's proved he has learned a lot on the job. At this point, Bill Clinton. Dole, Buchanan and their ilk are not representative of the whole USA, their links with ultra conservatives who would move to deny due process, and equal treatment of citizens based on their gender, orientation, racial/ethnic background is "unconscionable". At least Clinton is trying to address everyones issues and their rights as citizens... where it seems the ultra conservative ilk only listen to the issues of one side.... Besides, Clintion isn't too bad.. he hasn't scrwed things up too badly..... Bill Clition because Bob Dole will croke. Bob Dole, the best of two fairly poor choices, and far more moderate than Clinton (consider the Partial-Birth Abortion Ban business...) Bill Clinton john hagelin A Third Party candidate because it would show how unbiased this country is. My mother, because she is sensable and caring. She has the sense to know that to increase revenue one must increase taxes AND lower spending....and she is caring enough that she would put the needs of PEOPLE well before the needs of CORPORATIONS Harry Browne The only candidate with consistent principles. Pat Buchanan Bob Dole-he'll do what he says and has distinguished character and service. Harry Browne because he is the ONLY candidate who will work to reduce government and he is also the ONLY candidate who has the BALLS to support ending the hopeless Drug War. Clinton because I like most of what he's done so far Bob Dole because he is superior to Clinton Gov. Brown - smart enough, and wise enough not to take the job. Browne or Forbes. Keep beltway busybodies OUT of our lives (and wallets). I think that both candidates we are stuck with don't If forced to vote, I'd vote for Dole, simply because I trust him a little more than Clinton. I would vote against Bill Clinton if my dog ran against him. Harry Browne. I believe he will bring America back to the great nation it once was through libery for all. Harry Browne Harry Browne, outsider, will dismatle bloated government. Harry Browne, because all the other candidates will simply perpetuate the status quo Harry Browne-his philosophy and common sense. Harry Browne. It's past time that the status quo political system that we have Harry Browne: He intends to reestablish the proper role of the federal government. Harry Browne, because Gov't needs to be cut way back Harry Browne, Government is the root of all the evil in this country. I would like to see Bill Clinton, I think Bob Dole is too old and has been fighting in Congress too long. I am in favor of term limits and would like to see that passed. What really turned my stomach against the Republicans is the budget blackmail last October/November. Harry Brown to reduce the size and power of government. Harry Browne. Time for a change!!! Harry Browne who can PROVE Government Doesn't Work. Harry has a plan. A real plan not some BS Bob Dole... Why not the best ? I'd like to see Gen. Powell, but will go with Dole due to his conservative beliefs and to get Clinton out of the Whitehouse. steve forbes he's already rich Dole because he would reduce taxation and the scope of government. Harry Browne Government Doesn't Work Dole - Clinton stands for most everything WRONG with this country. Harry Browne, he supports hte removal of prohibition Harry Browne, because I'm convinced that only the Libertarians have it right. Harry Browne is perhaps not the purest embodiment of this philosophically based party, but he's articulate, polished, and blows the others into the weeds in every area of intellect, deportment, and principle. Harry Browne because he is the only candidate that stands for principles. Harry Browne, because less government is better. Bob Dole, he has honor and you can believe what he says. Bill Clinton - overall he has done a good job Dole, because I feel he is the best candidate to address the fiscal problems along with social problems we face. A person who will listen to the people not the media, lower the debt balance the budget! Bill Clinton for his experience, wisdom, and leadership Harry Browne because of his whole libertarian agenda Steve Martin, because he's a wild & crazy guy!!! Bob Dole because Bill Clinton is a disgrace to the office of President of the United States. With Dole in the driver's seat, Congress could pass legislation that is disparately needed in this country. Almost anyone but Clinton and Gore...or ANY Liberal! Dole Harry Brown is calling for a change and a change in the right direction. Bob Dole, He is aligned closer to my ideaology Bill Clinton..Most Americans are poorly informed, willing to be lied to and prefer to make their children and grandchildren pay for their extravagent government benefits. Forbes for the 10% tax. Bob Dole, the only pro-life candidate with a chance to win. harry browne: i'm tired of living in russia Harry Browne, because Libertarians are the only ones who believe adult Americans can run their own lives Rick Thompkins - we badly need less government intrusion Harry Browne for his libertarian stand on issues Bob Dole, He is qualified,he is honest,he has respectability Clinton, because the other candidates suck. Compared to Clinton Dole is a man of honor. Clinton has done nothing but disgrace the Office of the President of the United States. The Democrats and Republicans are old news. For real alternatives try 3rd Party Central. harry browne-libertarian beliefs if implemented would fix our fiscal mess without compromising our personal liberttys! Bob Dole, because I firmly believe we are being hoodwinked by the media and the democrats into paying for all the programs implemented by the lunch box liberals. Those that have great giving ideas but no money to put them into effect and therefore will raise taxes. bob dole clintons are liars and are a danger tomthe security of the country Harry Browne--He stands for the principles I agree with. Bill Clinton, because I believe he is growing in the office. Bill Clinton; I think he's doing a good job. Harry Browne, because he would like to give each american the personal freedom to do whatever they want with themselves as long as it doesn't harm others. Harry Browne, support for Individual Liberties Browne, to reign in the imperial forces Harry Browne because he is open minded and seems to represent my views the most accurately Bob Dole because Clinton goes against everything I believe in morally. bill clinton because he is intelligent, caring and fair Harry Brown, because I would like to see the tenets of Libertarianism propagated and discussed at the national level for an extended length of time (say, four years or more... :-) Dole. Clinton is a liberal who failed to do what he said he would when he was running for President. jack kemp Harry Browne - The only candicate with realistic solutions Harry Browne -- because he isn't a career politician and because I believe he truly wants to be free as I do. DON CHERRY FOR PRIME MINISTER! (I'm in the wrong survey!) Harry Browne - not another useless politician interested in perpetuating the status quo. Harry Browne. He represents the principles with which I agree. Concern for the next generation, not the next election Harry Browne. The Rep. & Dem. have done a lousy job. Libertarians believe in less gov't, true freedom & personal responsibility. Harry Browne , I want the damn government out of my life. Bill Clinton He is a good president Bill Clinton, because he is already moving us in the right direction. Harry Browne,would legalize marijuana and other non addictive subtances so that a person can use them if they want Harry Browne - a man with ideas and commitment harry brown. It is the best man. Harry Browne, the only one that is even directly getting to solve the problems Harry Browne, because he is the most likely Libertarian candidate and if he can make an at least fair showing if not a win, then the Libertarian party will have the opportunity to open doors across the nation for other political positions. Obvioulsy, I think that it's time for a new major political party and the Libertarians are in demand, but people are not demanding them enough to go out and look for them. The mass media is liberal and they would as soon give 24 hours of coverage to Republicans as ive a minute spot to a Libertarian. clinton. He can do the job!!!!! Bill Clinton, for his excellenct skill of international diplomacy. The real answer is that I don't want Clinton, so I will select the Republican - wishing it could be Buchanan - realizing that choice will be not-so-ideal Dole. Harry Browne, The government is too big and Dole and Clinton aren't likely to change the direction of governmental growth. dole he is honest and capable of doing the job A Person who has convictions and does not say what everyone wants to hear. A doer, not a talker. Someone with LEADERSHIP. Al Gore. He has an awareness of environmental issues (which NO ONE is focusing on). The fact that he is not publically and "exiciting" person I find to be an asset. He seems more balanced anddisciplined than Bill Clinton, and may be less willing to compromise his personal values than either of the two candidates we are apparently already being given to choose from. Jerry Brown, but there is no chance bill clinton Pat Buchanan, he is the only one with courage to face Immigration problems along our borders. The South Americans are taking over this country like roaches. Harry Browne, Better Govt is Less Govt..... Clinton. I don't trust the Republicans. Jack Kemp would be my preference, but I'll take Bob Dole for fiscal responsibility. H. Browne (Dedicated to less government in my life) Bob Dole. He has the leadership and experience to lead us in to the next century. Dole, Clinton seems too fake Bob Dole, because he has the best Christan values and will do the most for this country. BOB DOLE BETTER THAN CLINTON BETTER THAN FORBES Harry Browne -- principled; wants to reduce gov't to bare minimum Clinton. trust him, and feel dole has lost touch. on to 2000 and some real issues and ideas i hope. The counrty has real needs and we are worried about blaim for the past. Let us move on left, right or center; but move on and solve our problems please!!!!!!!!!!!!!!! Jack Kemp - sound understanding of economics, reasonable balance on social issues A conservitive Republican who will cut Spending and regulations and taxes Bob Dole. I believe he really does have a positive vision for America. Pat Moynihan. He's the closest thing to an intellectual currently on the American political scene. He is honest, and naturally cannot possibly be elected for just that reason. Dole appears to have no chance of unseating Clinton. Harry Browne Harry Browne, because he would scale the government down to what the U.S. Constitution authorizes Colin Powell--but unfortunately he's not available. Harry Browne is the only candidate that makes any sense. we need a change and the entrenched statist parties are only collapsing our society and the things that have made this country great. Freedom is the only answer left. Harry Browne, for a truly smaller, more efficient government, and to send the main parties a wake-up call. Bob Dole. I don't want to see Clinton re-elected Bob Dole, President Clinton is too liberal Harry Browne ; He will reduce the size of gov't. Bob Dole, Clinton is an unusually good liar, he needs to go. Harry Browne. To destroy illegitimate government programs such as Social Security, Medicare, NEA, Dept. of Ed., just keep filling in this sentence with whatever you can think of. Harry Browne ross perot bob dole - honesty & integrity is needed back in white hse DOLE-A MAN OF CONVICTIONS, NOT A MAN ABOUT TO BE CONVICTED Bob Dole - Because he is a true hard-working, decent, dedicated American. He is not someone who says whatever sounds good and then does whatever he feels like (i.e. he does not lie) dole -republican Harry Browne is the only candidate who will admit to knowledge of the problems facing the country. He doesn't lie. Harry Browne (Forbes ok, too) He will reduce the size of gov't. Harry Browne. Less government, more personal responsibility! bob dole, stability Dole The country needs a stabiling influence in the white house and basically because I believe that the Clintons are thieves and involved in large amounts of corruption to get to the house!! Dole, I don't trust Clinton at all! Harry Browne - He is the only qualified candidate to ever run for the presidency Steve Bill Gates: He knows how to run things. No Answer Bob Dole he has charactor and integraty, he does not lie andstands up for what he belives in. He gave up his career to try to become presient. He will make this a better country. Harry Browne, liberty dole, i'm sick of the clintons they haven't done anything for me Clinton. Stillhoping for some kind of National Health Care. Harry Browne - Libertarian Principles Harry Browne -- of those still running, he has the most integrity. Harry Browne - He is the candidate most willing to stick to his principles, and most willing to effect change in national government. bob dole Harry Browne - We need less govt intrustion in our lives and pocketbooks Harry Browne - We'll never reduce the size and scope of government if we don't stop voting in the very clowns who keep expanding it! bill clinton- one he has done as well as anyone could do, and dole is just do darn old Harry Browne, he'll do what he says and say what he does Harry Browne is the only one committed to reducing gov't intrusion Harry Browne because drastic changes are needed in reducing government and we need to someone who "says what he means and means what he says." Harry Browne Less government and abolish the IRS Harry Browne, because he's the only one taking the debt seriously enough. Lamar Alexander, because he is the brightest of all the candidates Clint Eastwood Harry Browne, to restore Constitutional government Dole What kind of a stupid question is this? And your answer choices for #14 and #15 are very restrictive and do NOT represent my opinions on these issues. Furthermore, your software requires me to give an answer to each question, but there are questions I do not wish to answer. Harry Browne, the only candidate who understands government *is* the problem. Harry Browne->He is the ONLY candidate who would cut back taxes & govt. Bill Clinton. All taken into account, he's the best candidate this time around. Bill Clinton, because there are no currently no other good candidates out there..... Harry Browne, because he's a strong advocate (and backs it up) of responsibility to oneself and, tangentially, to the community I support Harry Browne as an intelligent, rational individual who will return responsibility to individuals in contrast to others who tend to minimize our freedom to choose. There is no candidate in particular who I find to be acceptable. However, I will probably vote for Harry Browne (Libertarian). Harry Browne- Libertarianism is the only political philosophy that is moral and pragmatic. Harry Browne-"That gov't which gov'ns best gov'ns least" TJefferson I want a president that resembles Pat B. The president must safegaurd AMERICAN interests first, no some damn country elsewhere. We are not the police of the world. AMERICA FIRST!!! Harry Browne because the others cannot be trusted. Bill Clinton. He has spent the first term putting out brush fires set by the Republican party, and I would like to see what he could accomplish with less partisan interference. Harry Browne I am so sick of politics as usual. I really believed in the Republican Revolution until it dissolved into the same old thing. Government grows and my paycheck shrinks. Harry Browne - I believe he is the only candidate who operates from the presupposition that Govt is not the source of all that is good and that every perceived problem in society can be cured by some government involvement. Dole, everyone else is a bigger loser than him H. Browne. I don't believe there is a dime's difference between the Republican and Democratic approaches. We have tried big government, its time for new ideas. I'd Like to see Harry Browne as we need a good 3rd party candidate. I honestly see one of the two cut out candidates, either the CIA candidate Billy Boy or the George Bush look-a-like Bob dole. Unfortunantly, Americans do not think, and most of all hate work and change. Harry Browne is the only candidate that can offer hope of salvation from our worsening economic, social, and moral deterioration. The national debt is a runaway, medicaid, medicare, the socialist health care system, and social security are bust. The war on drugs is a disquised war on the lower class, an the highest office in the land is a political corruption the likes of which has never before existed in this country. Harry Browne. Shrink the federal government & return to Constitutionality. bob dole- that is providing that republicans maintain majority in both the house and senate(both houses) god help us if BC gets re-elected with a democratic(barf) house and senate Harry Browne , to get government out of our lives and out of our pockets. Harry Browne, who will get the govt. out of our pockets, off our backs, and out of our bedrooms. Bob Dole because he's moral and principled and consistant. Harry Browne, because he has integrity and sound philosophy Thomas Jefferson...only one with good sense! Harry Browne. The only way to stop government waste, and to get back what is mine, is to cut government. Harry Browne. He is a libertarian through and through, believes in what he says and will follow through on what he promises. It's time we put someone in office to trim the Federal government back, way back, to what the founders intended. I agree with Harr Harry Browne, because he positively stands for less federal Government... Harry Browne-the only candidate who will reduce government in any meaningful way Harry Browne: Less government, more freedom. Don't believe those in the corridors of power; people are perfectly capable of voluntarily interacting and running their own lives. Harry Browne, the only person running who has a philosophical base. The others are populists and/or dogmatists. No other candidate really wants to limit government. They only want to force their own agendas on other people. Harry Browne, I want less government in my life. Harry Browne: "Government doesn't work." Harry Browne who will reduce the size and scope of government. How can I do this justice in a line? Harry Browne, because I believe in personal liberty and individual responsibility. Bob Dole Bill Clinton. 1. Younger than other. 2. Best of bad choices. 3. USA won't benefit from a change in office now. Let experienced office holders of past 4 yrs. keep on trying. Harry Browne- Government doesn't work!!!!!!!!!! Harry Browne, he's a Libertarian. Nuff said. Harry Browne none of the above! because although I think Clinton is the best of a bad lot, I can't forgive him for selling out the lesbian and gay community! Harry Browne. He will take us back to the founding fathers concept of government Bill Clinton Bill Clinton, more progressive views Harry Browne, because the two major parties have lied to us long enough. I would like to see Harry Browne as president. It is my impression that neither the Democrats nor the Republicans consistently stand for the principles of freedom and liberty with limited government as embodied in the US Constitution. I believe in free markets, minimal taxation, and a government limited to the protecting people and property from theft and violence. ANYBODY BUT CLINTON, NO MORE DEMOCRATS FOR AT LEAST 40 YEARS Harry Browne Harry Browne - He stands for PURE freedom and growth Any Libertarian. Government is too big and causes too many serious problems. Browne, because he follows the Constitution, unlike the others. War record and most of all his integrity Bob Dole. The man I voted for last time has proved himself to be a phoney and a liar. He fooled me once, but he'll not fool me twice. Browne: his priorities Harry Browne, to drastically reduce the scope, size and cost of government Harry Browne - Libertarian - He is the only person who has the will and guts to challenge the status quo and cut spending now, cut taxes now, and absolutely implement a balanced budget now! America must get this soon - or the entire gov't will shut down & markets will be destroyed on a scale we've never seen - even in the "Great Depression" of the 1930s. Harry Browne - the only sensible alternative Harry Browne, because He will do what he says he will do. President Clinton/people tend to vote for the person with the most personality Harry Browne -- Government doesn't work. Democrats and Republicans are two sides of the same dirty coin. It's time for someone different, different ideas. Harry Browne because I believe I should have 100% control over my body and property, and the government should control only that which I allow it to. Harry Browne, because America needs to return and is returning to its libertarian roots. Harry Browne. Huge tax cuts and balanced budget NOW Harry Browne, because government doesn't work. Harry Browne -- I pay too much taxes and there are too many governmental restrictions on my freedom. Harry Brown. He doesn't speak in empty platitudes. He has a vision. Harry Browne, to return our federal leadership to a responsible position of empowering citizens without buying their dignity. Harry Browne. Because Government Doesn't Work! republican, mostly associated to today's values and sense Bill Clinton. 'Nuf said. Harry Browne. I want government to restrict its activity to the use of retaliatory force against life/liberty/property violators and NOTHING more. Harry Browne. I want government to restrict its activity to the use of retaliatory force against a life/liberty/property violator and NOTHING more. Open debates among ALL candidates that are on the ballot in enough states to theoretically earn a majority of the electoral college. Harry Browne. End the criminal producing, law enforcement corrupting, money sucking, society degrading War on Some Drugs. Harry Browne - freedom Harry Browne means what he says about spending and govt. I want Harry Browne because I believe he'd made significant changes that need to be made. Browne, the only candidate with *real* reform ideas Pat Buchanan give america back to the working people Harry Browne -- Cut Government Waste and get off my back. Harry Browne, because he understands the fundamentals. Harry Browne since he's the only one who actually wants to reduce government to a large degree instead of just reducing the growth. Harry Browne - THE ONLY CANDIDATE WHO WILL LEAVE US ALONE. Harry Browne: his message may be annoying ("vote for me, buy my book"), but I agree with more of his opinions on the issues than any other candidate, plus he is consistant. Harry Browne. He seems very intelligent and does not appear to owe any favors to big business or special interests. He truly as the best intentions of any presidential candidate I have seen. Harry Browne: Cut taxes, cut spending and cut govt. intrusion Harry Browne Browne - much smaller gov't spending, taxation Harry Browne. He's a libertarian. Harry Browne - Tired of the Some old thing! BILL CLINTON BEST CANDIDATE RUNNING Alan Keyes - Fresh ideas, good values, down-to-earth Buchanan - we need to restore this country to the Constitutional Republic that it is supposed to be BOB DOLE BECUASE WE NEED A MAN WHO HAS GOOD CHARACTER AND A HISTORY OF PUTTING THE COUNTRY BEFORE HIMSELF. Rick Tompkins - He's the best candidate I know of. Bill Clinton because he is the closest candidate to my beliefs who has a chance of getting elected Bill Clinton because he needs more time to fix what the republicans broke! Colin Powell - a person of integrity Bob Dole's morals and depth of understanding of government's role is head and shoulders above Clinton. Bob Dole - Clinton can't stay on one side of any arguement libertaraian to downsize government Anyone except that amoral, pot smoker, drug dealing Slick Willey. Socialism must be stopped before its too late. Irwin Schiff, he will abolish "money". an "taxes" a quality leader who puts the American people first Harry Browne -- I would like to experience at least a little bit of true freedom in my lifetime instead of having religious fanatics dictate to me what is 'moral' and if something is considered 'immoral' it is banned. I would like to see people have more sovereignty over their own lives and quit yielding our country and our government to anyone who feels they have a 'good cause'. Bob Dole because he will work with Congress to make necessary change. Bob Dole I think he will head us in the right direction. (Less Government!) Mario Cuomo - Brilliant and Persuasive Man Harry Browne or other Libertarian -- we need MUCH LESS GOVERNMENT AND WE NEED IT NOW! At this stage, Bob Dole, but only because Clinton is a spineless used car salesman with less than minimal character! And as for your survey, in question #13, where are qualities such as "integrity", "honesty", "moral character". BOB DOYLE. HIS CHARACTER clinton.... republicans/dole too scary Bob Dole - he is the best man for the job! He has proven leadership and experience. His dedication to the country throughout his entire life shows the pride and leadership in the country. someone who will reduce taxation and government intrusion. Harry Browne - less government intervention in people's lives Pat Buchanan. Because he will stop illegal immigration. anyone other than Clinton Harry Browne: to get uncle sam out of my life I'd like to see a candidate who understands The Constitution. Dole - He has character - he is not an unmoral lying cheat as we have now. Harry Browne; return to limited Constitutional government. Bill Clinton--he is a democrat. "Free or drug free....America can't be both" (i know this has nothing to do with the topic) Bill Clinton, because he's the best that can win. harry browne -- he is the only one who recognises that the current federal goverment causes more problems then it solves Vladimir Lenin because he is a true revolutionary leader, which is what this country needs Harry Browne. Lower taxes, reduced Government. Ostrow, because his library rules! harry browne, because we need smaller government Nader because he represents working-class interests more than Clinton and because he has the support of a progressive third-party Colin Powell - Our national political leaders need to be more leaders, less political. I don't think we have true leadership now, and I don't see it coming from Washington in the future. Ralph Nader/ proven morals Dole--restore integrity and credibility to office Bill because everyone else scares the devil out of me. Bob has become Newts shadow and no one else has a chance. Ralph Nader because of his environmental platform. COlin Powell He is a good leader and seems in touch with the every day problems people have. Harry Browne, because he is one of the very few people who will turn this country around to what it should be. bill clinton-he still has a job to do and am hoping we can progress bi-partisian into lowering the deficit for our children, coming up with a national healthcare system, better education encentives, less crime and violence on our streets and media, more power back to states in alot of these issues would go a long way..... Bill Clinton. Incumbancy carries weight. Dole is responsible for Gov. Shutdown. Pat Buchanan, because he is a man who will stand by the Constitutional foundations of our Great Republic! He IS NOT the racist anti-semite that the media would like you to beleive he is. Instead he beleives in the freedom and liberty of OUR PATRIOT Founding Fathers! He is NOT a member of the Trilateral Commision or the Council of Foreign Relations. He would be the LEADER to keep America An Independent and Soverign nation, just as our founding fathers had invisioned!!! "IS LIFE SO DEAR OR PEACE SO SWEET AS TO BE PURCHASED AT THE PRICE OF CHAINS AND SLAVERY? FORBID ALMIGHTY GOD, I KNOW NOT WHAT COURSE OTHERS MAY TAKE, BUT AS FOR ME GIVE ME LIBERTY OR GIVE ME DEATH" PATRICK HENRY(FOUNDING FATHER) Thank-you! Harry Browne. Clinton and Dole are too ingrained into the political system to represent anyone except themselves and the corporations that pay them off. someone honest, open,not a puppet, a true "leader" BOB DOLE because he is the republican can. Bob Dole. He has the maturity and experience to lead an American renewal. He is respected by people on all sides and is the only hope for working to break the logjam in American politics today. Harry Browne. Enough of being a tax slave and social slave to others who have the cohersive power of the government. Bill Clinton, because I think he could do the job if they would just get off his back!!!! Jack Kemp. He is a true Republican. not sure -- but she/he isn't running Dole, Clinton has not fulfilled ANY of his campaign promises. Clinton talks a good game, but he lacks substance! Harry Browne, because I want the government out of my life. Harry Browne will clean house Ralph Nader, because he is speaking about many of the issues that have been neglected by professional politicans and he isn't a tool of his party (he stated he'd run on his on stance and not that of the Green Party platform) clinton Forbes: He makes a lot of sense and seems to know what he wants I prefer to see a Libertarian, because they opposed the CDA, oppose the war on drugs, oppose killing doctors who perform abortions. Bill Clinton with a Republican Congress pulling slightly Right should be "Good for the Country combination" Pat Buchanan. He says he wants what everything that I know I want, with abortion being debatable. Clinton, done a good job, learned from mistakes Dennis Peron, the Grassroots Party's anti-prohibition candidate. Free the weed! Harry Browne, because of the Libertarian ideal of freedom. Harry Browne since I donot preceive him as aligned with mafia groups in this country and of course, his greatest contribution to reduce government in reality, not fantacy. clintn - the gop scares hell out of me Bob Dole will lower taxes and reduce the size of government. Bill Clinton because I believe he understands the plight of the average American. He came from humble beginnings, and hasn't forgotten what that is like. He knows all about working mothers and their needs and children from broken homes. I think he trul Bill Clinton. He is the only candidate who can balance the zealot agenda of the Religious "wrong" Bob Dole :) Perot. He seems to have new, insightful ideas. Bill Clinton. Because of Hillary Ralph Nader, he fights for working people Harry Browne because government is too damn big Harry Browne, his views mirror my views Bill Clinton - he truly cares about people/country. Someone other than the incumbent. We need honesty in our leadership. Dole - Clinton is the most corrupt President every to hold office Harry Browne. Most of the problems we face in this country are made worse by government, not better/ I want to see a man who is not for Murdering Unborn Babies, and does not push immoral behavior homosexuals is an abominaton to the Lord! Someone who doesn't cheat on his wife, and LIE every step of the way, someone who did'nt protest the war 2 times , and is now running OUR country. Someone who's wife can keep HER PLACE, and keep her mouth shut!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!! Browne because less government the better Bob Dole, simply because of his steadfast conservative views and carefulness in making decisions. Richard Lugar- Honest, Intelligent, Doesn't rely on appearance to sell himself. He has little charisma, which is why he didn't get a nomination, but that may be his greatest asset. He's open-minded, and wouldn't rely on image to get him towards his goal. I think he had great ideas on how to balance the wants and needs of both ends- conservative and liberal without alienating either side. Alan Keyes, because he has strong moral convictions. Bill Clinton. He truly CARES about the people/country. Bill Clinton is the best of the worst. Bob Dole is living in the past and can not provide leadership for the future. Bill Clinton is more in touch with the "real America. Bob Dole is a tired old man who has not had an original idea his entire life. He should learn how to inhale. Browne, because he would actually fight for a smaller government Allan Keys - Listen to him speak.He's the only one who makes any sence.A man of strong morals and values.It's what America Needs!!!!! Harry Browne - fresh new ideas, he really WILL reduce gov't dole Clinton So far I am not impressed with any of the current top contenders. Still anyone would be better than Clinton. Harry Browne -- The only candidate who is serious about restricting government to it's legitimate functions. Those functions are limited to protecting individuals from force and fraud. Clinton because he is the best candidate Jack Kemp; He would be the fairest, brightest, most energetic and responsible candidate Perot or Forbes. We must get the reins of government out of the hands of professional politicians. They do not posess the knowledge of how the country "works". anyone who can set an agenda and follow it Harry Browne It REALLY is time for a change in the USA Steve Forbes (even though he is allready out of the running) because he seems to feel the same way I do MOST of the time. Dole - Clinton is incompetant Harry Browne. He appears to come closest to what I believe about the role of government. Clinton - for stability. steve forbes he echoes my sentiments on most issues Pat Buchanan - Because it's VALUES stupid! Harry Brown -- The only candidate who wants spending cuts, tax cuts, and balanced budget NOW! Jack Kemp - socially responsible and economically sensible Conservative for states rights Bob Dole, he is a strong leader I think Clinton will win, at least I hope so! Bob Dole, because I voted for Clinton against Bush, but we've had enough of a very shallow devious man - perhaps a Democratic "Tricky Dick?" Clinton - because of all the dire predictions of what would happen if he were elected, NONE of them happened, in fact the country is doing better than when he took over. He has proved himself capable. Bob Dole-caracter Ralph Nader. He shares many of the same views that I do. Harry Browne Need less government, more freedom I'd like to see Browne in the White House. He's the only one of the presently running candidates who I think is likely to make a serious attempt to reduce the scope and scale of the government, and to return it to its proper function of protecting our in Rick Tompkins, a true libertarian Alan Keyes because he is moral, educated, true to his word, pro-life, for re-building of the family, cutting the federal government, God fearing, pro-educational choice, pro-free trade, pro-parental rights and the best choice because he can unite the different reaces in America without being for affirmative action. L Alexander Bob Dole. As of this date, May 11 1996, Bob Dole is assured the Republican Nomination and Bill Clinton thye Democratic nomination. These two men are the only cadidates who can realistically win this November's election. Bob Dole would work with a republican congress to cut Federal Government. Bill Clinton is currently abstructing The Congresses attempts to make such cuts. I believe that at this time the actions of the Federal Government do more harm to our society than good. The Federal Government trough spending approximately 25% of our Gross National Product, and throug regulating the actions of Americans, American Businesses, and other institutions is controlling what is done in this country to an increasing extent, and is doing so on the basis of what politically powerful groups desire. This intrusion is eating away at freedom in this country and replacing it with rule from Washington. Harry Browne because government doesn't work. clinton Harry Browne, If we don't get someone with some sense of reality in soon, we're all gonna be going to hell in a handbasket! Bill Clinton pat buchanan: america first! FAIR trade. Colin Powell. He's a moderate conservative who I feel would make a good leader. We need some leadership in the White House. Bob Dole is the only candidate with integrity, courage, fortitude, and proven experience. Mr. Dole, To defeat the taxing-spending Democratic party. bob dole Justin White Buchanan He is the only candidate who gives a direct position and answer on any issue. Bob Dole, We need a man with strong convictions, and has a life that stands out. I also sinces that he respects and understands the Office of the Presidency Newt Gingrich, with John Perry-Barlowe as a running mate It's over, except for the formality of voting. Dole will never be an American president. Clinton because he's middle of the road Clinton. He's got a good track record as president so far, he's smart and he's young. I would like to see Bill Clinton again in the White House because I feel as if Bob Dole represents many of the values against which I believe, like prayer in schools, more money to the military, anti-abortion, doing nothing about the environment, and overall too conservativeness. I also like the plans which Bill Clinton says he has for the future, which I hope he will carry out. Clinton - Don't like Dole Harry Browne- Wants less government interference Pat Buchanan- The man is the only Patriot Republican canidate there is.He is electable and totally for the god given christian rights of our beloved people of The United States of American. Bob Dole because we need character and moral judgement in the Executive Branch of the Federal Government Ross Perot. I consider him a national hero. Without his involvement, we would still be clueless. I admire him for his courage in becoming the target for the special interests he is trying to dislodge. Before he tooke them on, he was one of the most admired men in our country. He hasn't changed, America. Harry Browne, i don't trust the Republicans or Democrats Ross Perot. I have been associated with Mr,Perot and his staff since 1992. I respect and admire his close associates. Mr. Perot epitomizes the leadership this country needs. He has the moral fiber, strength of conviction and leadership abilities to move us forward. Harry Browne because he stands for the fine principles of the Libertarian Party. Bill Clinton because he is the least of many evils. KEN GRIFFEY JR. - Good person. Great hitter! bill bradley, he has a vision for america Bill Clinton. I plainly do not trust the motives of the majority party. Someone with an education adgenda-education is the key! Pat Buchanan-knows there exists a right and wrong Presidet Clinton...because he was a person that reached out to everyone, not just out old people and stuff, but was actually a President that even people of younger ages could relate too. President Clinton, because he is trying to do the best for America. Bill Cinton. He has done a good job. Ralph Nader Since I have very limited choices it would have to be Bill Clinton.He has a faifly good track record.He could do better and this is something we need to make he understands. Harry Browne, because he is the only one who will really change what is done in Washington for the better. Bill Clinton, I believe he cares about education & social issues Colin Powell - He's strong in his leadership. Good history of foreign relations. Harry Browne, because he wants to reduce goverment to a Constitutional level. He wants to eliminate Federal Reserve and their collection agency the IRS. He believes in the Libertarian principle of Self-Governing. Forbes ... White/blue collar worker. Non-political experiences!! Pat Buchanan because he is the only principled conservative that I can trust to oppose the New World Order/internationalist agenda. Clinton, Status quo isn't that bad. Not Clinton or Dole Dole, because he will be the republican candidate Bill Clinton, Though he has trouble letting everyone know, I feel he has done an excellent job so far. Bill Clinton - best available choice of viable candidates Keyes/Dornan '96!!! Bob Dole Bob Dole would not be an embarrassment to this great nation. He is already respected as a world (leader) figure. Pat Buchanan- He is the only one that will get us out of NAFTA, GATT, WTO, UN. He will slow immigration and return economic nationalism with touher trade laws clinton (fair to labor) I want to see Harry Browne elected president because he is the only candidate that I feel truly believes in a much smaller federal government. He has said he would veto every single piece of legislation that increased the size of government and I believe him. One of the reasons I believe him is because he is the first candidate to qualify for and refuse to take matching campaign funds from the Federal Election Commission. He feels the matching funds program is welfare for politicians and will have n part of it. Buchanan, Moral character, supports established rights, i.e. U.S. Constituition Clinton, Things are not that bad Bob Dole-adult Steve Forbes. better than Dole, and any one is better than clinton. I will vote for Bill Clinton. Bob Dole is Newts' puppet. I wish the choices were better. Harry Browne, because I believe he is the only one who can be counted on to reduce the federal government Clinton, the Republicans are out of touch Clinton, because he is the best man for the job. Bill Clinton, because he has good ideas, and I would like to see him accomplish some of his agenda. Someone who cares about the future of America after they have been elected to a second term. Gen. Colin Powell because he seems upfront and honest Dole-he all about helping the people that need help, and those who do not need as much help. Bill, because he is free of "holier-than-thou" rhetoric Newt Gingrich, because he has truly apolitical ideas ABCD-Anyone But Clinton or Dole -both are incapable of being real leaders, they practice political expediency. Ann Richards, because she was a great Texas governor Bob Dole because he is the best in the field. Bob Dole, of all the people running, he has the best chance of beating Clinton. GEORGE BUSH--I LIKED HIM WHEN HE WAS PRES. Dole Harry Browne bob dole for his experience, integrity, international outlook. Bill Clinton is a unfocused people pleaser concerned more about his personal reputation than the direction of the country. I want less government and the Democratic party still represents big government! Harry Browne because he in the only one that I believe and he is saying what I want to hear for the most part. Dole. I don't trust or like President Clinton! Steve Forbes because he strikes me as honest and extremely intelligent Clinton, No better option Browne, supports the non-initiation of force principle I want Ross Perot because he makes more than empty campaign promises. That and he makes more sense that any other politician. Harry Browne -- to turn the country around. nader Harry Browne, Government should be held to Constitutional Power. Protect our rights and our borders. Get Government out of our lives and business! Bob Dloe because with a Republican majority of Congress one needs a Republican that can work with the congress rather than to fight the congress like Bill Clinton did with subjects like the budget, welfare, medicaid, and other related subjects. Leadership that will put America on track again. It isn't nece necessarily that I believe we must have a Chritian in the White House, but our nation has lost it's moral direction. Someone with moral direction needs to be our president. Bill Clinton Gen. Colin Powell, integrity, intelligence, knows what to take from both the Democratic and Republican points of view and find a healthy middle point Dole he is more honest than clinton Bill Clinton has shown more leadership than Bob Dole and is not a fascist like Pat Buchanan. HARRY BROWNE WE NEED LESS GOVERNMENT Do we really want Clinton for another four years? Vote for real change, vote for Dole! Dole Harry Browne buchanan - represents my views and beliefs The Democrats and Republicans are old news. For real alternatives try 3rd Party Central. Forbes struck me as the only open-minded and non-politically-involved candidate. But I detested his mud-slinging. "The man who throws no mud has clean hands" Browne so drugs are decriminalized and crime decreases. Harry Browne: Most freedom, smallest goverment, most prosparity, lowest taxes, best communicator Harry Browne. Because this country is founded upon individual liberty balanced with responsibility and we've gotten too far away from that. Harry Browne is the only candidate who can bring us back to it. Bill Clinton. To act as a balance against the republican congress. Bill Clinton - He isn't the best but he is the best we have! Bob Doke - I don't like Bill Clinton Bob Dole, he's the best choice Bill Clinton-he's done a good job and the only Democrat with a reasonable chance of being reelected Pat Buchanan-he's right Bill Clinton because he's doing a good job harry browne: people want to live their own lives. Harry Browne, because he has a viable plan for greatly reducing the size and scope of the federal government. (See his book, Why Gov't Doesn't Work) Harry Browne! End the income tax! Harry Browne - he stands for the least government and taxes He is more in line with mainstream America. The Republicans are becoming more and more extreme to the point that they cannot be trusted to run any country. Harry Browne. He is against governmnet intervention, against the unconstitutional IRS and against useless and ignorant laws and government programs. Steve Forbes, because we need a business person to make our budget balance. Browne, because of his economic approach and stance on personal freedom NEW BLOOD-I DON'T BELIEVE IN REELECTING ANY CANDIDATE. THIER TERMS SHOULD BE LIMITED SO THAT THEY ARE BEHOLDEN TO NO ONE FOR THE NEXT ELECTION! The democrats are spending us out of house and home. President Clinton - he's not in the pocket of extremists. Bill Clinton, he has dine a good job and IS able to compromise , he is bright and not HATEFUL like every republican I've heard. Bob Dole--we share similar government philosophy Mickey Mouse - no less of a fantasy candidate than the others Harry Browne, I have seen the platform he is running on and it is the platform to get this country back on the right track and put it directly back under the constitution. Colin Powell Ross Perot / someone who is business minded and can help get our welfare system and national debt in a decent perspective Clinton - because he's done a good job and will keep the right-wing in check. Clinton, because he's intelligent, compassionate, and can solve problems Harry Browne, He's the only one who would adhere to th eprinciples that made our country great. Not Bill Clinton Steve Forbes He is a realist, optimist, not a politician, and has shown hat he can get things done. Either Alan Keyes or Pat Buchanan because of their generally good ideas and their unwillingness to compromise with their principles. Harry Browne ... he is an uncompromising person whose political philosiphy most closely matches mine Harry Browne Harry Browne, Because he will do what he says. Harry Browne. His philosophy opposes organized coercion. Bill Clinton because he is smarter than any of the other proposed candidates I prefer a candidate that supports deregulations, the gold Al Gore, bc he is levelheaded and rational, and not easily swayed by extremists Someone that will take care of America first! Pat Buchanan, for he is the only HONEST man running. I want a credible alternative to Clinton, who is a worse opportunist than most politicians. So I will vote for Dole. Clinton: to balance a republican majority Bob Dole. He has the experience and integrity.Bill Clinton does not........ Bob or Bill (preferably Bill); I don't see much difference Bob Dole because clinton cannot be trusted. He is a liar. Harry Browne. He is the only candidate committed to getting the immoral monster called "the government" out of our lives -- the only candidate who believes taxing one group to give to another is theft, pure and simple. pat, downsize gov; curb illegal immigration; fair trade; wipe out terrorists.... Harry Browne: will reduce gov't and end income tax Clinton: Despite flaws, does have a "liberal" mindset llll Harry Browne. His views parallel my own. Pat Buchanan because he has principals. Go Pat Go. I want tp see Perot because the DEBT is eating our lunch! Bob Dole. He's not my first choice, but between Dole and Clinton, Dole is far preferable. Clinton is a smooth liar. His wife is also a liar. Their primary goals in life are to (1) satisfy their ambitions for power and (2) maintain the appearance of moral superiority over anyone who does not agree with them. (Even though what their positions are varies from month to month, sometimes from hour to hour). Bob Dole because he would have signed the bills that congress sent to President Clinton and gotten government out of our everyday lives. Bill Clinton-best choice we have right now and a man that is doing the best job possible for the Congress he has to deal with. Bob Dole - He has integrity and he did not shirk his duty when his country called. To late for this answer I would like to see Alan Keyes voted in as president in 1996 because his platform is the Declaration of Independence which is applicable to all people in the U.S., he is a moral and charasmatic leader, and he is a minority who could bring needed balance t Bob Dole because he has integrity. Clinton. 8 years a needed and he is doing a decent job Bill Clinton because he stands for most of the things I believe in. i want to see clinton because everyone else stinks!!!! Alan Keyes He's the most moral and in touch one of the bunch! Dole,Clinton is worst president in my lifetime. Bob Dole. I don't want to see Clinton elected again.. Harry Browne, Restore truely limited, consitutional government Any fair-minded, non-purchased Constitutional candidate Bob Dole--Generally share the same views on government Colin Powell. He has the character and is middle of the road. The Democrats and Republicans are old news. For real alternatives try 3rd Party Central Ross Perot - Above "being bought" Dr. Alan Keyes. The moral fabric of our society is crumbling. Jack Kemp, Newt Gingrich. Both embody philosiphies and ideologies that would be beneficial for the nation. Dole for a sound fiscal and foreign policy. Bob Dole - A man with character Harry Browne to get "big brother" out of our bedroom and homes, off our private property and out of our businesses. bill clinton - he is doing a good job Mickey Mouse, because Mickey cares about the common people. Clinton - the lesser of the evils ELVIS PRESLY Ralph Nader -- Time for a straightforward and honest president - non political and focussed on the common citizen. Anyone but Clinton newt gingrich. because the man is brilliant. his vision for the future is on that we should all embrace. HIS VISION/ NOT THE MEDIA'S OR THE LIBERAL FALSE PRESENTATION OF HIS VISION. Dole - character Harry Browne! Government doesn't work. The Democrats and Republicans will continue to take money from the tax payers and spending it on "social causes." It's stupid. The only reason government subsidies are needed is because we are over-taxed. Noboby would need government assistance if the government didn't forcefully rip-off the citizens. Polititions are merely weeds in the garden of society. Please, don't pay attention to the idiots on t.v.. Use your common sense. VOTE THE INDIVIDUAL AND HI/HER PLATFORM, NOT THE PARTY! We are all being bred to be sheep! Let's stop this destructive cycle in november. Harry Browne--he's the only choice, in my opinion, to stop the insanity, and get back our property rights--I'm including our minds and bodies as property, by the way--a novel concept these days. Bob Dole, EXPERIENCE, EXPERIENCE, EXPERIENCE. Bill Clinton -- Economy is healthy; peace in various hots spots due to negitiation as major tool this administration's foreign policy; sane awareness that, "It's the ecology, studpid," (to coin one). Harry Browne - Shrink Federal Government Browne- Neither Clinton nor Dole has much incentive to change things Harry Browne. Freedom. Harry Browne, Read the U.S. Constitution, That's what the government should be involved in and NOTHING else. We've had promises before and now we're a country of poor that still try to solve all the worlds ills. STOP., Secondly, your question #3 is unfair for those that don't wish to vote for either as is your question #4. The only way to stop segregating the races is to STOP segregating the races, so question #7 should not be asked and finally if you know about Harry Browne, question #15 is irrelevnt. I answered them because it wouldn't let me submit them without. In the final tally, I don't want them answered. Clinton, because HE TAKES A LICKING AND GOES ON TICKING! Harry Browne -- consistent; not a whore Harry Browne. 0% flat tax. Government based on the Constitution, not to support congress/president's outragous paychecks. Bob Dole, because he has excellent leadership and governing abilities, and seems honest. Pete Wilson, for he is practicle and honest with issues. DOLE clinton -- why not Someone who stands for common sense, no nonsense, and LEADS the country away from the current socialist trends. In a word "CHARACTOR" Harry Browne Less lGov Promised Nader -- We need to restore democracy. Colin Powell Someone with character. Because leadership is derived from character. Maybe (Alan Keys). Alan Keyes, he knows that today's problems stem from not having God as the center of our country. With God as the focal point everthing else would fall in place. Harry Browne - See above. harry browne new direction- old methods no longer work bill clinton for he has an incredibal record of achievment pat buchanan because he is pro life and anti-immigration Harry Browne because he makes sense Pat Buchanan - He is an uncompromising America-first conservative as above Harry Browne because he is the only candidate who really represents change. He calls for a reduction in taxes and government, not just a reduction in the rate of increase in government growth. Mario Cuomo because he makes a lot of sense. Harry Browne Browne - Libertarian - The only way out of this mess Harry Browne- he'll get government out of our lives!!! collin powell Who can you TRUST? Slick Willie? I don't think so... Bob Dole for 1996! pro-life, push for return to a 2 parent 1 income family centered life style in order to rebuild America. Harry Browne Anybody who (1) has integrity and (2) believes in liberty. Clinton. While he certainly has his weaknesses, Hatchetman Bob Dole has history of pandering to the most convenient groups that will givehim the vote. As my father so aptly put it, "If there's any postion on any subject, Bob Dole has had it." Harry Browne, because I'm pro-freedom! Steve Forbes...maybe he'll throw some money into the governments coffers Bob Dole because I do not think Bill Clinton qualifies to be president. Bill Clinton-he has done a good job of being presidential Because he will restore the Constitution and Bill of Rights Harry Browne, because he understands that government does not work. Harry Browne. He is the only one who is serious about reducing government. Bob Dole, because he could provide America with a strong backbone with his experience. Harry Browne. Government is far too big. Harry Browne. Libertarian ideals are what this country needs. People need the rights to do as they please, and not have large amounts of their hard-earned money stolen for 'social programs'. Powell - He's a leader! Howard Stern Bill Clinton. He is open minded, concerned, and effective. Harry Browne he is the only person who will truely downsize gov and get rid of the hated income tax and allow us to be free once again. Harry Browne, because he will put the government in its place. Harry Browne Jefferson Davis, he was the best we ever had, I know he Dole--experience Someone who is willing to listen to America and will do a good job. Bill Clinton - He has the intellect,wisdom, experience,and most of all compassion that is neccessary to be an effective leader. George Bush proved he could fight a war. Bill Clinton proved he could prevent war, the most honorable thing any world leader can ever do! Someone who has the best interests of the people in mind, but there is no one running with that agenda. Bill Clinton - He has the intellect,wisdom, experience,and most of all compassion that is neccessary to be an effective leader. George Buxh proved he could fight a war. Bill Clinton jproved he could prevent war, the most honorable thing any world leader con ever do! I want to see Dole because he will work with Congress to cut government's level of influence and control on the citizens of the USA. Clinton, for his liberal aids. Bill Clinton would be OK if he would just BE THE PRESIDENT instead of always acting like he's running for office... Good GOD MAN< you've already got the power, USE IT!!!!!!!! Harry Browne, At present the only thing that can save us is Freedom Harry Browne. He is for smaller government, for gov. accountability and responsibilty, Pro-choice, values individual liberty and The Bill Of Rights and therefore honors the Constitution which is uniquely American. Bob Dole because he is a hero of a war of liberation and will not flinch in projecting our glorious national will. Bob Dole, We need new leadership Harry Browne because government doesn't work. bill clinton. because his social and economic stances are helpful to ALL americans and not preferentila to rich, white, straight males Bill Clinton - I feel the Clintons are much more in touch with the trials, tribulations and struggles of the average American. From the information I have gathered it seems that the Republican party is definitely a "rich mans" agenda, of which I am not privy to. Bill Clinton is only human and has made mistakes, however, overall I believe his philosophies and integrity are evident. Jack Kemp or John Kasich (They are both honest and know what needs to be done to fix the country and can get it done) Bob Dole Honesty and Character Someone who can tone down the government, put power in people's hands, Bob Dole Someone new. Harry Browne He means what he says No confidence Harry Browne - The government is a pain in the Ass Pat Buchanan Bob Dole, I want Clinton out and someone in who will forward conservative ideals. Dole-- Eliminate the current barrier to making positive progress in fixing some of the major problems facing the country Harry Browne/ He represents true freedom and real reform clinton because he most closely reflects my opinions Harr Browne: Let Freedom Reign on this 220th anniversary year of the Declaration of Independence! Clinton-he's the lesser of the evils. Clinton, because he sure looks better than any of the competition Ronald Reagan, but seeing that is impossible...Bob Dole because he is NOT Bill Clinton I would like to see Bill Clinton elected again because he is the only candidate who believes in seperating religeon and state. A president's job is not to define the MORAL codes for the country, as Bob Dole, Pat Buchanan and the rest of our conservative Harry Browne A Libertarian, everybody else compromises individual rights Harry Browne Harry Browne, he stands for the same moral and philisophical code to which I belong Harry Browne. He's the only candidate who appears to have read the Constitution. The Democrats and Republicans are old news. For real alternatives try 3rd Party Central Harry Browne. He's the only candidate who appears to have read the Constitution. Harry Browne. Because government doesn't work! The Federal govt. is a foreign power. Bob Dole is the lesser of two/three/four/five evils Harry Browne - He's smart, he recognizes where we've been, where we're headed, and why, and he knows how to solve the problems everyone complains about. Clinton, because he is a Democrat and better than any Republican. Clinton will win because Buchanan and religious nazis will puch Dole to the extreme right and frighten the living daylights out of the American public Harry Browne. He would gut the federal government but leave the state governments alone. Quit the bandstanding and get to work on what Clinton stated 4 years ago. Also tell Newt to back off and let him do his job. Pat Buchanan is the only canidate that is fit to be President because of his no-compromise moral and economic convictions. Harry Browne "Government Doesn't Work" Harry Browne will shrink the size, and the burden of government. Harry Browne A flat tax of 0%!! Harry Browne - He will Balance the budget, end the income tax, and cut spending NOW!! Not at some time far in the future. Harry Browne - America should be a free country again!!! Bo Griets (sp?) downsizing is proof busines doesnt care about people and no matter how much help it gets its not going to be the saving grace of society. big business and ceo's are bleeding the average person. republicans call this the American Way I call it rich people and politicians wanting more and not caring where the middle and low income end up as long as they get out of their way Collins, He apears to be the only HONEST alternitive. He is completly ignored by the biased media, & his political counterparts DOLE-BEST QUALIFIED-BEST MORALS-BEST LEADERSHIP The Democrats and Republicans have failed us. For real alternatives try 3rd Party Central The Democrats and Republicans have failed us. For real alternatives try Harry Browne, Americans are supposed to be "free" Harry Browne - because government doen't work Dole-get republicans back in the white house and to give the presidency the respect it should have--clinton is not someone who one can trust nor does he have what it takes to run our country. Ralph Nader; because he has good hair dole He's a good, decent, and honest person Harry Browne, Long live the American way, I do not want to see freedom die and believe me it is on its death bed right now... a Libertarian candidate Harry Browne-I am a capitalist and so is he! Ralph Nader because he has a proven record of fighting for the average guy and sticking to moral principle. clinton---calmness nationally and internationally steer the nation away from hate/meanness/fractioning meanness BOB DOLE - AFTER SWALLOWING VERY HARD Ralph Nader, he is the only canidate willing to defend consumer,worker and environmental interests against corporate interests. Harry Browne - to reduce the power and influence of government in our lives, economic and personal. Leadership, experience and a record of solid victories for the middle class--Clinton/Gore in '96. We don't need to return to the failed policies twelve years of Republicanism brought about. Bob Dole, in studying his life found in different readings, he is very consistent in what he does. I like how he can make a somewhat moral decision for a politician and stick with it. He seems to have a foot hold on the values he wants to instill in America, a lot of past Presidents didn't have specific goals in mind or on how to accomplish them. I also like the fact he is a war veteran, he's not afraid to fight for his country and give his life for it. He doesn't run and hide. Pat Paulsen-a sense of humor, humility, and cndid bewilderment Browne - Government doesn't work. Harry Browne- Forced redistribution of income WILL stop! Harry Browne David Duke or Pat Buchanan. We have let the blacks in this country run lose for far too long. It is time to put some anglican self control on the marauding gang mentality in the black community. Sadly, Bill Clinton. The Republicans have a poor candidate. Nader; he's the most liberal Harry Browne I want to see a major reduction of government. Bob Dole because of his experience, he is pro-life, and it would get the Clintons out of office. Forbes--good personality, good person, very knowledgeable Harry Browne, because he says he will cut government spending, start to pay off the national debt, and reduce taxes. Lamarr Alexander because of his conservative viewpoint and his respect for life and traditional values. In addition he acts on his value system Bob Dole because we need a signature on the Contract with America Browne, Less government. I have paid taxes all my life and have gotten nothing for them. Harry Browne, because we NEED a Libertarian President bob dole, I would rather have him then bill clinton. I don't really like eather of them. Anyone who can get Congress to quit "out of control" spending. Dr. John Hagelin of the Natural Law Party, and why is he not listed here? He WILL be on the ballot! I would like to see him president since he will bring recognition to the party he represents, which has the most progressive ideas for positive change, in light of modern science. If he were not on the ballot, I would vote libertarian. Democrats and Republicans are old hat: nobody likes either party any more, and people vote for whichever one they hate the least, which is pathetic. I've switched becuse there are people out there are actually are worth voting for. (sorry for the length here). Clinton - He's the least abhorrent ROSS PEROT - BOB DOLE IS AN EMBARISEMENT WHO WILL BE EXPOSED AS A NO-IDEA INSIDER WHEN HE DEBATES CLINTON. WILL ALL THE MAJOR REPUBLICANS RESIGN AFTER DOLE GETS TROUNCED IN NOVEMBER. WE SHOULD HAVE MADE STEVE FORBES OUR CANDIDATE. Experience, leadership, four years of Newt Gingrish Harry Browne: personal integrity, smaller government Harry Browne,"Government Doesn't Work": only Libertarians say what they mean and mean what they say and if H.B.is elected will do everything in his power to carry out his message. Bob Dole because his vision is better for the country Bob Dole- Clinton has screwed things up enough its time for someone eles to try their hand. Like a republican!!!!!!!! a moderate - any moderate - fringe groups scare the pants off me Bill Clinton. He'll live through his term Harry Browne - Aflat tax of 0% Bob Dole because the economy is going down. Just about anyone instead of Clinton. Collin Powell...He is not a politician Bill Clinton. Republican Party tied too closely to Christian Coalition Forbes because he has corporate/business insight. Dole, he is not a liar or a disgrace. Harry Browne Bob Dole - he's honest, has integrety, he's a patriot and he's experienced. Bill Clinton is "NONE OF THE ABOVE" Harry Browne, because he wants to reduce government now, not down the road. bill clinton The Democrats and Republicans have failed us. For real alternatives try 3rd Party Central. Of all of the candidates, Clinton is the "lesser evil". Not a great reason to vote for him, but I could never vote for Bob Dole, and I don't know much about Ralph Nader's platform. I don't even have to expound about Ross Perot. ;-) Harry Browne - Less Government, Balanced Budget. Harry Browne -- I want to be able to be responsable for my own life. Dr.Alan Keyes - The most remarkable national candidate I have seen in my lifetime! Harry Browne because he is a Libertarian. dole - experience, solid, trustworthy, lower taxes and eliminate debt I do not think that Bill Clinton is an effective leader. I feel that he sways back and forth between what is popular rather than going with his convictions. Harry Browne. His beliefs come the closest to matching mine of all of the candidates I have seen. bob dole, experience and character Dan Quayle or Alan Keys or Pat Bucanan because they are the only true conservatives worthy of my vote. Harry Browne: the only candidate who will truly shrink government Bob dole- represents less government and more ind. responsibility. Harry Browne because he is the only candidate that talks about specific problems and solutions Harry Browne. He is the only candidate who is completely committed to reducing government to its Constitutional limits. His ideas have the visiom to make this nation free and prosperous once again. Bill Clinton because despite the criticism, he's done the job. anyone who wants to declare the party system unconstitutional Bill Clinton,because he deserves to be re-elected & he has a clue! Bob Dole; He has the proven ability, and moral character the job requires Bill Clinton- he is better than the other candidates Harry Browne: He's Constitutional and Principled! Buchanan No one world government,improve the military Rep. John R. Kasich: He is a freash face in polotics with new, modern, responsible ideas. BOB DOLE BECAUSE SIMPLY HE WILL BRING A SENSE OF PRIDE BACK TO THE WHITE HOUSE Bob Dole, because I agree with the general principles of the Republican Party. Also, the Republican Congress has very little chance of making any effective reform while the Democrats control the White House. Bob Dole. Experience, both military and political, high moral character, and conservative. Clinton--has the vision and leadership we need a more integrated US where there is no class or race barriers BILL CLINTON BECAUSE HE HAS DONE A VERY GOOD JOB ON THE ECONOMIC ISSUE UNDER THE CIRCUMSTANCES Not Bill Clinton: I want a president who will do what he says, not one who says what is expedient and doesn't mean it. Bob Dole Harry Browne because the two major parties are theoretically flawed Harry Browne is the first Libertarian who has a chance to win and the fresh air that a limited government would bring to our country would be much welcomed by me. Bill Clinton Bob Dole, character, integrity Harry Browne is one running who truly wants to reduse Government, To cut taxes, and to live by the Constitution and the Bill of Rights Harry Browne. The other parties are missing the picture. Harry Browne. Government is way too big and he's the only one that will reduce it. Harry Browne will reduce the government to what's allowed by the Constitution. Harry Browne to restore the Constitution and strip the federal government down to it's Constitutionally mandated functions. Ralph Nader Government Doesn't Work Bob Dole, He can help lead us in the direction we need to go Harry Browne, only candidate who promotes a free america Harry Browne. Abolish the Income Tax Bill Clinton is the only sane choice B. Dole - he's the only choice available to work with Congress CLINTON, BECAUSE HE IS THE LESSER OF TWO EVILS Someone outside of the maistream of politic, because the ones that have been there are all crooks Harry Browne, enforce Constitutional limitations on the Fed Bob Dole. He has a proven record and I know where he stands. He has demonstrated his willingness to put his life on the line for his country. He is a compromisor, but he is not two faced. He states how he feels, not how he thinks his audience will feel. My only concern is that he has not yet articulated his vision for the country. Matt Small Bill Gates Harry Browne. There is no longer a difference between democrats and republicans. They both usurp are freedoms and rip us off. Clinton, because he has demonstrated his leadership Not Bill Clinton. He is a draft dodging liar Ralph Nader, he is not a corperate lackey. Clinton-- I don't see another choice. Was disappointed when Powell announced he would not run. would have voted for him in a heartbeat! Mr. Robert Dole, because he is by far the best man for the job. Its time for the republican Party to return to office. Clinton has done more destruction than good and has such a proplem of contradicting his beliefs. His short lived rein as president will soon be over. clinton, he's the best option Harry Browne Lamar Alexander because he has the Executive experience needed to hold the office. DOLE, THE ALTERNATIVE IS SO MUCH WORSE. Nader The environment matters Bob Dole because I think he is most in touch with the moderate sentiments of most Americans Colin Powel, My impressions are that he is intent on seeing a more equitable society in which the American people can feel a greater hope for the future. He appears unwilling to play politics as usual. Unfortunately he is not willing to run in an atmosherer of political distrust and one that seems unwilling to let go of the past political vises! Harry Browne, I fully support Liberitarianism Harry Browne. It's time to begin disbanding the bad joke we call the "federal Government." The curent administration, without a doubt, is the most corrupt ever. For example, look at the minimum wage increase. Raising the minimum wage to five dollars sounds great, right? The problem is that the fed and state governments are the only ones that gain anything. Sure, wages are higher, but so are the taxes on that money. Business will be the big loser in this debacle. If a business has more overhead,jobs will be cut. It's all relative and crappy for everybody except our slimmy reality chalenged "President." I just thought I would try to illustrate a point to all the "bed-wetting liberals" out there. Wake-up. Vote for the man not the party. Harry Browne. He will bring this government back within the confines of the Constitution and restore freedom and democracy to the United States. The responsibility is ours. Please vote. Harry Browne-He is a capitalist and so am I Harry Browne - because he has announced support for 0% flat tax AND massive reduction of federal government. Freedom In Our Time! I'd like Buchanan but will settle for Dole. Morals & family bob dole because anybody is better than clinton Colin Powell -- He represents a new perspective in politics bob dole because he can help continue the Republican revolution and The Contract With America. Pat Buchanan becuase he has ideas that need to be implemented but most politicains aren't willing to risk being ostracized for them. Bill Clinton because Jessi Jackson is not running! Clinton, I cannot support any of the Republican candidates who have no sense of establishing equality for all. CLINTON BECAUSE NO BETTER CANDIATES AROUND Bill Clinton. I feel that he has done a good job leading the country and trying to further the interests of the American people. I think that a great many people feel the same way and appreciate his attempt to improve many aspects of the government. I also feel that on the whole, he is more in touch with the goals and ambitions of the younger generation which is becoming the dominant politcal force in the country than his opponent (Bob Dole). H. Browne - No govt is good govt. Pat Buchanan, he'll put the fear of God back into this country Harry Browne, because he is the only candidate running on issues I agree with Clinton because of his intelligence and ability to create a check against the strongly Republican Congress no in place Bill Clinton because he has made changes, and has kept most of his promises since 1992. He is also willing to sit down and work with anybody to improve the U.S as a country. He has made changes and will continue to make changes as long as he remains presi Robert Dole because he is NOT Bill Clinton (the biggest disgrace to sit in the Oval Office since Andrew Johnson). bill clinton Harry Browne, We need to get back to the contries original ideals. Bob Dole Bill Clinton--he's too conservative, but he's the best thing going Harry Browne! Clinton because he is not influenced by the far-right Dole-honest,experience,less government,eliminate debt totally Ron Regan Pat Buchanan - integrity, sincerity, FOR THE PEOPLE less goverment intrusion. less taxes Dan Quayle because he is a very respectable man. Dole Pat Buchanan; He takes a definite stand on issues and he wants to make America and America's families the number one priority. Ross Perot - Down home common sense and business experience. Bob Dole - much, much better than Mr. Clinton Rush Limbaugh Harry Brown, The 2 big parties have no idea how to run the country, Browne at least appears to have a clue Rather than a flat tax, I prefer a national Sales Tax to replace the income tax. This way the IRS can go and saving will be encouraged. None of the candidates running is qualified to be President. I liked Perot until he dropped out -- bad game for him to play. Bill Clinton because Bob Dole will destroy himself. Harry Browne -- He is a responsible, ethical leader. Harry Browne -> We need change, not talk, and we need it now. Harry Browne - government spending has gone from 5% of GDP in 1910 to 22% today. All of the other candidates are too frightened to even mention dealing with ballooning entitlements and military spending. Dole because progress can be made with Republicans in control Harry Browne - Less Taxes, Less government, more freedom Steve Forbes or Ross Perot,If they can run a buisness in the private sector maybe they can run this country????????? Harry Browne - Because he recognizes the fact that "government doesn't work." If what your doing doesn't work, the dumbest thing you can do is continuing to do it. We've had over 100 yrs of government intervention - I do not see anyone who is happy with the results. Harry Browne Harry Browne (or any other Libertarian candidate) because only the Libertarians have the balls to institute REAL changes in the way government operates! Clinton: Economy has improved. No recession. handling of foreign affairs is good Bill Clinton because I believe he remembers what it's like to be a middle income average American. HARRY BROWNE. Browne: freedom is morally right AND it works Dole. Clinton is unprincipled, shallow, and a liar. Rick Thomkins because he opposes theft Richard Lugar, he's honest, ethical, and has foreign policy experience see above Bob Dole, as the election gets closer people will begin to focuse more on the candidates then now. The differences between Bob Doles work ethic and Bill Clintons Demagogery will direct the swing votes in Dole's favor. Clinton. Least of the evils. Clinton He's doing as a good as he can while battleing Cong. Clinton because Dole is bad Bob Dole, in short, Bob Dole has integrity, the current occupant of the White House does not. I have no Idea Harry Browne, because his platform is based on reducing government intrusion and returning to the Constitution Any Libertarian is better than a democrat or republican; who are both basically the same. I want to see drastically less government, and not just talk of such. Bill clinton, he's done a great job and should be relected Alan Keyes-is articulate on critical issues Clinton, to balance the republican Congress Ralph Nader. Defends workers, consumers, and the envinronment. Harry Browne: I want a freer society Pat # 1, Not Dole under any circumstances. Shoot you television. Burn your newspaper. I't time to say no to the Democans and Republicrats. Any libertarian because we need to dramatically reduce the role of government and no other group will do this. clinton Harry Browne -- because government doesn't work Bill Clinton, because he's the only candidate whose views I'm comfortable with. Forbes Dole He's a man of integrity and leadership Harry Browne, Because he believes in individual rights over those in power... Steven Forbes because he was the only major candidate (with all due apologies to my Libertarian friends) who actually talked about privatiziing Social Security and Medicare. Steve Forbes - Conservative/Intgellegen/Has a workable plan Bob Dole Character Bill Clinton Newt Gingrich - good character, good elbows, acceptable balance of conservativism and libertarianism Coling Powell would have been an ideal choice, but Clinton will have to do. Colin Powell. Because I believe he is experienced and would be concerned about the common good. He would not base all his decisions on getting re-elcted. I think he is honest, family man, and doesn't have the baggage the other candidates have. He would be a Harry Truman type president. Bill Clinton because he is the best man for the job. I would rather live in Cuba then have Dole as president sad enough to say. Bob Dole / He has experience,courage,consistency and honesty. Harry Browne Reduce the Federal Gov't Bill Clinton because he is the best man for the job. I would rather live in Cuba then have Dole as president sad enough to say. dole Harry Browne because he espouses personal liberty while others would like to have more control of indiviuals. Harry Browne Bob Dole, Because he doesn`t change his mind hourly. Alan Keyes--Because he is the only candidate addressing all the issues in ways which I would support. Harry Browne because government does need to shrink... Clinton (who else is there?) Harry Browne -- Revolutionary ideas for changes in Governments LAMAR HE SEEMS MOST HONEST AND CAPABLE Ralph Nader Harry Browne because he will reign in the federal goverment. harry browne - we have to reduce goc. before it's to big to touch! Clinton has performed well enough to deserve another term. He has grown over the past three and a half years and has certainly shown increasing political adroitness. His views are generally enlightened and progressive. The alternatives--persumbly Dole and Perot--are extraordinarily unattractive, both personally and on the issues. Harry Browne, he's the best candidate by far Harry Browne, I feel the fundamental area of concern in current American society is a lack of personal responsibility - I see personal responsibility as lying at the heart of Libertarian thought harry browne would significantly reduce the size of the federal government someone who will reduce the power and scope of the federal got Pat Buchanan. He stands for what he believes in. A patriotic American! Bob Dole Steve Forbes. Flat tax, abortion stand, common sense Bill Clinton Clinton, all the others suck. Dole - Promoting a stronger economic climate for the future generations Ross Perot because he cannot be bought by special interest and PAC's which are one of the largest cancers on the federal government today. The US Government should not be for sale to the highest bidder. Clinton because I can't trust a person with a perfect record Bill Clinton; he's a normal person and a good president Harry Browne. End the War on Drugs. Slash spending. Leave us alone. Buchanan because you know what you are getting Bill Clinton. He hasn't been perfect, but he has helped this nation considerably from four year ago. colin powell Bob Dole - I believe he is stable and has experience and will lessen our national debt along with the help of senate and congress. We need to lessen welfare and allow the working man and business owner to keep more money to use for their own lives instead of supporting people who do not work. It has to end - the "free" handouts. We need someone who is unreasonable about holding the line and who can say "No". dole. He's electable, and Clinton is unacceptable Harry Browne, not tainted by politics At this point, Bob Dole. Ibelieve he will sign the GOOD legislation brought fourth by the more conservative Congress instead of the constant VETO of President Clinton! Ralph Nader -- he seems sensible and is not interested in more big business Harry Browne -- he's a fantastic speaker! Get a chance to hear him! Harry Browne and FREE MARKET and REAL FREEDOM Bill Clinton - because he'll do the least damage.... the Republicans are too influenced by lobbyists.... the N.R.A., religious extremists, etc. Dole=ABC Browne: Get govt out of our private lives; less govt regulation; eliminate confiscatory laws; eliminate the IRS; seriously consider fed sales tax or VAT; overhaul basic economic policies Bill Clinton. He has been a fair president, and cares for people. He knows what is best for the country, not Bob Dole! BILL CLINTON-BEST ONE FOR THE JOB Bill Clinton - He is doing a reasonable good job. Bill Clinton will prevent the Congress from cutting those services and programs that are effective and make a real difference in people's lives. Clinton has also provided leadership on deficit reduction, job growth, and managing the economy. He has provided moderation and sensible action on foreign policy. Bob Dole would basically pass whatever Newt Gingrich sent up and this would be a serious mistake for the country and hurt the middle class, working poor, and benefit big business and millionaires. Alan Keyes - he is the only candidate who seems completely convinced of his principles Harry Browne. Say NO to the Republicrats and the Demogins. We can no longer afford their empty promises--fiscal or social. Harry Browne, because he's the only one currently proposing anything other than business as usual. Bob Dole...he is the only candidate that is qualified for the office. Bill Clinton, obviously If you can't think for yourself, you aren't a libertarian. Harry Browne because I believe the federal government has over-stepped the bounds of the Constitution. I would like to see someone open-minded (maybe T. Ahearne) Bob Dole, America can't withstand 4 more years of Clinton Bob Dole - Because this he will work best with the republican congress harry browne. we want freedom! Anyone who truly recognizes that gov't is the problem, not the solution. Bill Clinton because he works hard and he get laid a lot (I think) Harry Browne, he is the only one who wants to reduce gov't Harry Browne is the only major candidate who understands liberty. The Democrats and Republicans have failed us. For real alternatives try: 3rd Party Central Bill Clinton, feel he's done a better job than given credit for. Harry Browne, because I value Liberty over Security. There are no sure things in life. Bob Dole because Bill Clinton cannot be trusted. He says what he thinks the public wants to hear & rewards special interest groups. He is basically a dangerous dishonest selfish man. Hilliary is even more dangerous. The Democrats and Republicans have failed us over and over again. Bob Dole because Clinton is a terrible president and no one else has a chance of beating him!!! General Colin Powell because he isn't a politician Harry Browne - To restore individual liberty Harry Browne. We need a principled, moral leader. Clinton, no better available choice... Actually Gore would be better. Neither democrat or republican will make good on promises, last term I voted for Perot (I know, gasp!), this term, it's Browne. Someone has to make good, otherwise there WILL be anarchy! Pat Buchanan Harry Browne- he wants to cut taxes, spending, and regulation of my life. Pat Buchanan - He is not part of the SYSTEM bob dole because he is a man of good character Colin Powell - Leader, Strategist, Foreign Relations Clinton - The GOP must be returned to its conservative (not radical principals. BOB DOLE, GET SLICK WILLIE OUT!!!!!!!!!!!!!! It's funny reading the postings fron the uninformed, clueless, pro-Billery socialist goobers. You losers. Change your diapers and don't expect the government and others to wipe your noses and control your lives. Try to use your brains and logic this time. Vote for individual freedom and independence this time. But, of course, I don't expect miralces, you'll probably just vote for who the politically correct, scum bage, liberal talking head on t.v. tell you to vote for. Baa, baa, baa. Socialist lierals suck! As long as it's not Clinton or Dole, anyone. This country' Any conservative. Liberalism has failed. Harry Browne. Jack Kemp; fits libertarian mold better than other candidates Harry Browne is the only consistent believer in Human Freedom. President Clinton would be the best choice in the present times. He offers a direction for navigating our country and its citizens into the 21st Century. The world is a more dynamic environment than ever before, but offers the promise of great possibilities in trade, education, and cooperation. President Clinton has attempted to reduce the federal deficit without removing programs unless they are unneeded, or have a more economical alternative or interim program for transition. President Clinton hasempathy for business, the religious, workers, students, law enforcement, the poor, and the disadvantaged. His ability to make decisions based on what is best(this may be best only in the short term i.e. vetoing legislation crafted to be unacceptable, or longterm i.e. GATT and NAFTA) rather than take a rigid approach to each issue which doesn't serve the interest of the nation. Forbes - I'd like to see someone with business experience instill a business sense into the federal bureaucracy. Ralph Nader, because he has an understanding of the proper role of government, i.e., to protect the populace from power-mad world-destroyers. Ideally...any non-Republican or non-Democrat candidate, so that we could begin to move away from a two-party system which prevents any real progress. Though the parties contend that they are considerably different, they truly don't offer the American public clear and DIFFERENT platforms. Colin Powell - He has ideas and integrity and he stands up for what he believes Bob Dole Character Pat Buchanan, He's moral, uncompromising, strong. Bill Clinton...lesser of the current evils Harry Browne, because Amerca needs to start going back in the direction that it was when it was founded. Pride needs to be resrored to America and Harry Browne in a man that can lead us into this revolution! Harry Browne - See above Hillary Clinton - She's got the brains, heart and guts to lead this country into the next century. Bob Dole with John Engler as VP because I think that it is time we did what is necessary to lower the national debt and I think that we need to focus more on the family and morals. Bill Clinton. His administration have brought fincacial stability, through low inflation, minimum govt corruption, world wide stability. Harry Browne! Individual liberty is important, dammit!!! Harry Browne for several reasons:1)I'm sick of government intrusion, and he will reverse this growing trend...and 2)He is fiscally responsible, and has outlined some brilliant ideas in his publications. No other candidate comes close to him in terms of standing their ground on real issues. Harry Browne. Because I share his libertarian views. christine whitman governor of NJ she gets things done Bob Dole, because he is better than Clinton! Your pole is partisan to left. Jack Kemp because he has new ideas that both business and working people would benefit from. Bill Clinton: skill bringing divergent interests to the table Ned McWeataor, he did wonders for tennessee Ralph Browne. All the other choices are "fake" choices. The "Demopublicans" all support basically the same policies and approaches. They and the media play up the minor differences between their rhetoric but both parties are nearly identical from where I stand. I only which my fellow citizens could overcome their childish obsession with voting for a "winner" long enough to effect some real change. Bob Dole PAT BUCHANAN == *NOT* business as usual! Bill Clinton, because he has proven himself to be a capable national and world leader. Harry Browne: Libertarianism must suceed or this country is through. Alan Keyes Bob Dole, he would stick to consertive ideals. No Answer Bill Clinton pat buchanin Ross Perot, Bill & Bob are bought and paid for. Harry Browne is dedicated to ending the "drug war". That's enough to get my vote. Buchanan, only candidate not member of Council on Foreign Relations Bill Clinton has done a good job and deserves to complete his programs with a Dem. House and Senate. Bill Clinton. I think he is a great statesman and I like his stand on many issues. Bob Dole. I want someone who is ethical and says what he means and means what he says. Bill Clinton...He's done a good job If you like our socialistic federal government taking your money and controling your life, vote Billery. If you like the aforesaid and are pro-life, vote Dole. If you look forward to April 15th and enjoy being ripped off, vote for either one of these parasites. If you want to discontinue keep the government out of your life. If you want to take control of your life. Vote for Harry Browne. If you just don't want to make the effort and are affraid of change, don't worry loves to make decisions foryou (baa, Baa, baa. Hillary Clinton. She is incredibly qualified $ brilliant. As a second choice, I'll take Bill. There are others who might be better, but the way our political system is set up nobody but the top two have a chance. someone who can make decisions based on the interests of the largest number of people while considering goal of total equality and tolerance Forbes -- flat tax BILL CLINTON Rick Tompkins, because he doesn't change his positions or his principles with political winds. Jack Kemp - He's a proven leader who has proven he can get things done. He has new ideas and isn't afraid to try them. He cares about more than his own political future, power etc.. Bill Clinton - he's the best one running Bill Clinton, because i do not want to see a president who will compromise on the legality of abortion or who will kowtow to the gun lobbyists! Harry Browne--Only one we can trust to defend all our liberties Bob Dole.Because he thinks like most like Americans do. Harry Browne because the government is too big. I hate religions. Tsongas, has the best and most honest ideas for addressing real issues facing our governement and has the ability to form multi-partisan coalitions Bob Dole dole he is honest Clinton-he is going in the direction that I agree with most Colin Powell would be a good compromise candidate. He has solid judgment, which Clinton lack. He's not a seasoned politician and party hack like Dole. He understands the role of business, but is not is champion like Dole. He understands the problems of race but is not an advocate per se. Bob Dole, because of his lengthy experience in government Bill Clinton: Don't trust Religious Right ralp nader , so that corporate influence on our political process can be stopped Jello Biafra. It would be the closest thing to anarchy possible Harry Browne: the only candidate taking a principled stand. No more parasites need apply. WAKE UP EVERYBODY! Vote for Harry Browne in '96. Clinton should be reelected because of his experience and to continue his agenda. Harry Browne - America, freedom was the whole idea! Bill Clinton: He's people person. He looks out for all. He tries to accomodate as many people as he can despite their status in society. He's not out for one specific class, like the upper class. He's done a great job these past four yrs and I would like Bob Dole. He.s for smaller government and lower taxes. Harry Browne - the only candidate who will cut government. HARRY BROWNE, HIS CAMPAIGN IS BASED ON A LOGICAL PHILOSOPHY Harry Browne--to end government tyranny Clinton - He is balancing economic imperatives with human needs. Harry Browne reduce the size and intrusion of government NOW! Ralph Nader because he wishes to increase participatory democracy. Harry Browne, because the democratic and republican parties are both opposed to individual liberty. Harry Browne had Principles and that's what we need! Well, the man that I did want to see in the White House is outta there. I guess that leaves Mr.Dole because I would not vote for Bill Clinton (and I'm from Arkansas) if he were the last person on earth. He is a out & out liar!!!!! The Democrats and Republicans don't deserve our support. Try 3rd Party Central for real alternatives. Harry Browne because his ideas will spur the economy. The dominant parties play games with our money and treat us like children. I'm voting for Harry Browne . Some one to get this country back to moral standards Harry Browne, He's the best choice for any principled Libertarian. am not enthused with republican nominee but he's the only one available Bill Clinton. I think he's done very well so far, and would do even better with four years as president already under his belt. He also seems to realize that America's future does NOT lie in a futile attempt to return to an earlier time in its history, bu Harry Brown Will REALLY balance the budget and Cut the Government Octupus down to size. Any one but Bill Clinton. Clinton LIES. He lies to his left wing suporters, he lies to his right wing opposition, and he lies to every one in between. If America wants a liberal president elect an honest liberal, if America wants a conservitive president, elect an honest conservitive, just DON'T VOTE FOR BILL CLINTON,, because he LIES. Ralph Nader: I don't always agree with him, but he cannot be bought. He genuinely believes citizens -- not money -- should dictate the laws of the land. Harry Browne: the answer is in his book An intellectual free-thinker who doesn't have contempt for the Constitution. Newt Gingrich, he's the only one with true vision...also the most intelligent! Harry Browne is the only candidate who would reduce government, giving people greater control over their own personal and economic choices. Ralph Nader Pat Paulsen I'd like to see and talk with Bob Dole, to get to know him a little better. He is a good man, by all accounts, but does not translate well via TV. Colin Powell, he isn't a politician Browne - he's the only one who'd dismantle the federal govt Bob Dole - Because he DOES what he SAYS! HARRY BROWNE!!! Vote for real substance over style! Harry Browne because his platform is the most sensible.www.HarryBrowne96.org Clinton, because he's proven he can do the job effectively. Harry Browne, to reduce to size of government,and stop spending my money on things the government has no business spending it on.Return to the original founding fathers belief in individual freedom based on personal responsibility. Remind the American people that we were not founded by Men who where christens, but Deists. Franklin,Jefferson,Adams. Long live freedom Alan Keyes or Bob Dole - both have good moral character HARRY BROWNE, FOR PERSONAL FREEDOM Don't vote for the Democrats or Republicans! -- They don't listen any more. Try 3rd Party Central for real alternatives. Ralph Nader. He stands against those entities which wrestle control from people over their own lives, such as huge businesses which attempt to squeeze as much as they can from people while offering as little compensation as possible and sectors of government which go along with the business elite as they strip liberties away from the people. Dole or Clinton will be pretty much the same. Clinton because I hate Dole Pat Buchanan. Harry Browne-The two party system is broken. Government is no longer "for the People" Bill Clinton, because there is not anyone else I could trust totally. Ralph Nader because he's a genuine populist. Bob Dole appears to be the lesser of two evils. Harry Browne for freedom from fear of a government run amuck! Jack Kemp & Bill Bennett - substance & virtues! Harry Browne - end government intrusion into our lives Harry Browne - Because he is the only person who has a proven record of integrity!!! Bob Dole Clinton , because he is doing as much as any man can do in his position Clinton, because the republican platform is divisive and devoid of substance. Clinton is not perfect but he is willing to compromise and will represent the nation better than a right-wing, self-serving demagogue like Dole or Buchanan. Browne, I most agree with his consistent ideology Bob Dole - he doesn't lie, he has a consertive economic philolophy and doesn't change with the wind. I haven't been around long enough to be able to answer this question with any real expertise, but I honestly believe that Clinton is trying to do what he feels and thinks is right for the people of this country. He may not have all of the right answers - maybe no answers at all - but I'd rather have him for another four years than some one new because being president of the United States of America is not a job that you can prepare for. Haveing some one start from scratch will just keep us running inplace. Clinton already has four years experience at the toughest job in the world and that alone makes him a better choice than the others. He is not an evil man. More importantly he is more of an everyday American than Bob Dole, Steve Forbes, Ross Perot, etc. dole, because he can handle congress and compromise Harry Browne -- Government sucks Bob Dole, principled, honest, experienced I would prefer to see Bill Clinton re-elected. I'm reasonably happy with the job he has done, and I feel that a republican would pander too much to the religious right. Ralph Nader. He isn't owned by big business. Colin Powell, I believe he is an excellent leader with the country's best interests in mind. Clinton - He's smart, Colin Powell someone who will completely reject interest group money! Bob Dole experience and character respects the office of president Bob Dole. He has experience enough to know what direction the country should go and the integrity to do what it takes to get there. Bill Clinton comes closest to my own political philosophy. On the Republican side, Colin Powell would have been the most acceptable candidate. Personally, I would like to see Bill Moyer (PBS) take a stab at it. I would like to see that guy Joel from MST3K be president because I think then the state of the union address would be much more fun to watch. Crow and Tom Servo. Wow. Harry Browne: Only the libertarians stand consistently for something. Ross Perot, so the 2 clone parties don't get a monopoly ANYONE who is socially libral and fiscally conservative! HARRY BROWNE, THIS NATION WAS BUILT ON OUR FREEDOM AND THE LIBERTARIAN PARTY IS THE ONLY CHANCE OF GETTING IT BACK. president clinton- c Harry Browne, Balanced budget NOW! Less Government NOW! Harry Browne, he is the only candidate that has a plan to shrink the federal government back to constitutional levels Dole, Clinten is too liberal, dishonest and still inexperienced Dole. He generally represents my views and he is a proven leader. Ralph Nader go after the corporations DuckMan ... makes the most sense .... Clinton - he is not a puppet of the christian right Bob Dole - Well supported conservative with experience Bill Clinton anyone but Clinton Ralph Nader--integrity, critique of Big Biz,democracy advocate Harry Browne! He's the only candidate that will abide by the constitution and dramatically change the status quo! harry browne I want less government intrusion, lower taxes Harry Browne. Democrat=Republic=same old crooked buggers Bill Clinton. He's doing a great job. Harry Browne, he believes that "the people" are not stupid and have minds of their own. I think if Clinton is re-elected there is going to be irreplacable damage! Pamela Helms Clinton isn't perfect, but he's running against the most awesome collection of flakes and weirdos... so he's my man. Harry Browne. The only candidate who seriously wants to reduce gov't (Tompkins will not get the LP nomination) Someone who actually will make returning the federal government to it's Constitutional limits their Number One priority. BOB DOLE BECAUSE CLINTON IS THE WRONG CHOICE Dole will fit into the political line-up with the republicans controlling Congress. I'm not real happy with my choices, but I think one term of Bob Dole would get everything back on track. Bill Clinton - He's not a conswervative Bob Dole; Need a person who will govern through a vision not through daily opinion polls. Clinton, because he open minded and moderate. Dole. His leadership skills, Clean record, Dignity and class that he wuld bring back to the White House. Harry Browne, If people get it through their heads that we are responsible for the consequences of our actions and must behave like adults, then the least intrusive social paradigm should prevail Ralph Nader. He's honest. Dole-to turn the tide of taxing working people to pay for non working people. More accountability placed on individuals who will not work, have children and want tax dollars to provide for them and people who break the laws and then spend tax dollars finding excuses, Phil Gramm because he the only true social and fiscal conservative Bill Clinton... at least he is not going to die of old age while in office (like dole) DOLE, clinton lies too much,he campains one way,governs opp Don't Know : There seems such a limited field Bob Dole. His views are closest to mine, plus he has a chance to win. There is no sense in voting for a third party that can not possibley win. I vote one of the two major candadates I agree with. I can't vote for someone I always agree with, because I am not running. Harry Browne- The constitution is a great document, freedom is a precious thing. Any Libertarian because they are the only ones saying what I want to hear and I believe they really mean it. Pat Buchanan Harry Browne for more peace, prosperity, and freedom Fidel Castro Ralph Nader -- he's honest, intelligent and really seems to care about the planet President Clinton - has done a fairly decent job and has learned from his prior mistakes since being in office. I feel he is a moderate and in this day and time I feel that there needs to be more moderate and less conserative and liberals. We need more people with pllain common sense and less political affil ation. BOB DOLE RULES!!!!!!!!!!!!!! Bob Dole, To get rid of Bill Harry Browne. He will give us back our freedom and help create tremendous prosperity by letting the free market really work. Harry Brown - less government, less intrusion, pro-life my mom. She's fair and she tough and she's just. She can put the politicians in their places. Ralph Nader - He cares about our future and is not owned by outside interests. Harry Browne - The idea of personal responsibility and a VERY limited government appeal to me. Bill Clinton, record since becoming president Alan Keyes because he represents my positions in an uncompromising way Harry Browne; return to liberty and small government. Bob Dole, because Republicans believe in peoples rights Forbes because he doesn't stand firmly for anything I disagree with Anybody BUT Hillary & Bill Harry Browne-we need to reduce the size of government Harry Browne- He is the only man or woman running who has integrity!!! Non -Political!! Bob Dole is on the right track, and will sign Republican Congressional legislation. Harry Browne. The difference between Democratic and Republican budget requests is whether to spend this many more trillion than we take in or this many trillion more than we take in. Harry is the only one with a plan to cut spending in half, cut the size and power of the government, and restore the nation to the Constitution that it has been led away from. Harry Browne Harry Browne will reduce the size of the federal Gov't. Dole & Clinton will increase it. I want less, I want Harry. Dole, get rid of Clinton Democrats are socialists and republicans are now what democrats used to be. It's all a sham. It's time for the people to use their brains and logic: Harry Browne '96 Harry Browne Libertarian because he would definately shrink government and eliminate the I.R.S and eliminate the National Debt and get the Gov off our backs. Preident Clifford cause he do a fine job. Harry Browne, the leading Libertarian candidate. His new book clearly shows that he has given a great deal of thought to the critical issues of our time. He also does not pander to the worst in people, as do most of the major party candidates. He has a positive, optimistic vision for the United States, balanced by realism... a good combination. Harry Browne because the rest of the candidates are greedy, unprincipled morons. Who I want to see, and who I get are two different answers. However, among the candidates that I will have to vote on, I would like to see Clinton - at least I know what he's like - the ones the republicans are running (and I am a republican) are either crazy or senile! Harry Browne (LP) - He is the only candidate that would truly cut back the size and scope of government & expand individual freedom !!!! Bob Dole, he has the best experience, and a chang eofr Washington Buchanan-- seems to have good moral standards Pat Buchanan, his hard stance Harry Browne -- the only candidate who could possibly make a positive change and bring America back to the ideals on which it was founded -- human dignity and freedom. no Because you American are very stupid peoples clinton best choice--things aren't so bad and he's not bigotted as are others ross perot Ross Perot because I liked his idea about government by the people through the town house medium(s). Harry Browne, cut taxes, cut spending, reduce federal govt William Bennet- Great principles, great communicator, openminded conservitive Anyone advocating the end of the drug war since it is failing at a great loss of freedom. HARRY BROWNE HE IS THE ONLY HONEST ONE AND WILL REDUCE THE GOVERNMENT TO ITS CONSTITIONAL SIZE Clinton, because Dole is the Anti-Christ more concentration on the little guy A President That is Against Abortion Bill Clinton. He is extrememly intelligent, well read, and not afraid to change his mind if given new information. His speeches are long on content and short on "party slogans". Bill Clinton He emulates President Nixon on foreign affairs and he has done a great job on the domestic level as well. I believe the GOP is kind of jealous to the point of begging General Powell. No more smoke and mirrors. Pat Buchanan; He is solid in his core values, a great leader for the Pro Life movement, and our only possible means to have GATT and NAFTA reversed. Although they don't have the proverbial snowball's chance, I'd like to see either of the main LP candidates (Browne or Tompkins). Only Libertarians will have a federal government dedicated to protecting citizens' rights as laid out in the Constitution, end the stupid War on (some) Drugs, significantly lower taxes, cut military spending and bring the deficit down to an amount analogous to a typical credit card debt. Harry Browne because he would not fall to the general policics of Washington. I think that he would stand tall with honesty and bring America back to the country that it used to be. And Free Our Children! Harry Browne. We need new ideas. Bill Clinton - so he will receive all the blame due him for the largest tax increase in history and what will surely happen to the economy because of it. Bob Dole, the better of two not so hot choices Harry Browne-best platform&integrity Harry Browne, the only candidate who is talking about eliminating large chunks of our bloated, intrusive government The Democrats and Republicans are taxing us all into bankruptcy. Harry Browne is the only one who can fix the mess. We need to get back to common sense. We don't need to elect another established political parasite spewing empty rhetoric. It's time for people to take charge of there own lives and to stop expecting and trusting our government to act as supreme sheep herder. It't time for REAL a change. It's time for Harry Browne. Dole, can win, should be much less left wing than Clinton Bob Dole,--Anybody BUT Clinton Ralph Nader - He has integrity Harry Browne, because he knows that Government Doesn't Work! Bob Dole, Media is misleading people with inaccurate polls. Ross Perot - I like the stands he takes on the issues, and I think his ideas are workable and not clouded by too much political rhetoric Browne. I want a governent contained by the Constitution. Bob Dole because he is not a coward I think Bill Clinton should be re-elected President in 1996 because he has made some important improvements to this country over the past four years. A mature person with military and international experiance Harry Browne. Restore individual freedom. Pat Buchanan - Pro self defense, (Has good chance to win) or Harry Browne (Platform most consistant to mine) Harry Browne; Because he stands for less government. Bob Dole, we need a president with integrity Paul Tsongas, but I'll settle for Bill Clinton I will vote for Bob Dole, not so much because I am crazy about him but because I don't want an ultra-liberal in the White House. Harry Browne - less government - more personal freedom Person I can respect, has learrned the hard wya,knos history Clinton- He's getting stronger and has learned from his mistakes. He REALLY wants to do a good job because he loves our country. He'll continue to try and will continue to improve. Bob Dole- At least he's not Clinton BOB Dole Harry Browne. Basically to get big government out of the lives of the citizens. Clinton may actually get stuff done without having to deal with re-election in this second term. I like Nader's Green aspect, and Browne's libertarian bent, but it may be more practical to vote for Clinton. Browne. He's a libertarian. 'nuff said! Bill Clinton, because he has proved his mettle in standing up to an extremists laden right wing that tried to overthrow the duly elected leadership of this country and lead from the congress, while continuing the ruinous policies of the Reagsn era. There are two to choose from; I will choose Dole. The Clintons represents everything I disdain and abhor. Bill Clinton has not been a president; he has been a demagogue of the worst kind. Dole is not my ideal choice because he is a legislator, but he h Bob Dole Bill Clinton - He is doing a good job! It doesn't really matter. All of the candidates represent vested interests, so nothing will really change. True change will have to come from within our country, by the citizens themselves. I want to see a president who will work with the Republican Congress in its effort to downsize the federal government and balance the budget. To my mind, this would have to be Bob Dole. Clinton stands for nothing. At least Bob Dole stood with Gingrich in demanding a balanced budget and other parts of the Contract with America. Harry Browne: Only principled candidate who would really try to increase individual sovereignty. Harry Browne, stands for Liberty and Individual Freedoms! Jack Kemp- I think he would do the best job. Bob Dole. He will work towords a reduction of Federal Government. Because he will resore our constitution and bill of rights Harry Browne to eliminate most of the government and taxes Harry Browne, for less government, less taxes, more liberty Dole--The best of the worst ! Harry Browne, This is the only candidate who has spelled his entire plan out in a book. The other candidates dont spell out anything, they rely on sound bytes made to sound Libertarian so they can cruise into office on the popularity of Libertarian ideas and name recognition. They then do the same old thing that has made the Democrats/Republicans so rich. That thing is writing legislation to please special interests with a piece of the tax paid pie. We need someone with integrity in all public offies. Harry Browne is the man for our highest office. Mary Cal Hollis (Socialist) Because I think people are more important than profits. I want to see Clinton reelected because the Democrats are generally for the middle class while the Republicans represent a colition of religious right wingers, gun nuts, and big business Clinton--he doesn't have a perverse interest in my private life Harry Browne Government doesn,t work. Bob Dole. Conservativism is right.Our nation has grown too lax. Like Rome and othergreat nations, the US is not invencible and is crumbling within for lack of morals which liberal attitudes have destroyed. Harry Browne. Government that governs least governs best. Browne: to stop the fast erosion of civil liberties on all fronts. Questions, comments, suggestions? Contact us. Return to theHome Page. Copyright ©1996, /InterCommerceCorporation, All rights reserved worldwide Send comments to Webmaster@Survey.net WT02-B22-39IA060-000333-B025-174http://www.survey.net:80/sex1c0.html 204.107.221.240 19970115055757 text/html 107694HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 15 Jan 1997 05:51:40 GMTServer: Apache-SSL-US/1.0.3+1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 107510Last-modified: Mon, 25 Nov 1996 20:26:46 GMT SURVEY-NET - SEX Survey User Responses (ARCHIVE I) Your source for information, opinions & demographics from the NetCommunity! ANNOUNCING: The Internet's finest interactive, totally-automated,immediate survey system. We can take any form and instantly create adynamic demographic database and show you the results as soon as youcomplete the survey! User comments [ARCHIVE I] What do YOU think about Sex & the Internet? Censored!!!! I hve no problems with sex on the internet, you just have to watrch out for the childre with access to the internet I am always surpised but what I accidentally find during seemingly innocent searches If you dont like it go away it a leaening tool It's fat! i like it, it an alternative to videos,mags, etc....... Interesting. It's a matter of personal choice. If you dont want it, it doesn't appear. If you have children, you should be monitering them as would would in all things. It is fun to play on the net with sex, when you are home by yourself. No Big Deal It's fun when I'm not gettin any elsewhere Lots of fun Not as hard as I thought it would be Keep the Jesus freaks, and liberals off of the net. No new censorship! i think it's the greatest thing that i've found Efforts to regulate content on the internet should not be discussed during an election year. grooovey It is good! I luv it boring I think pornography in general is rather stupid, but what other people want to do is none of my buisiness. I think it promotes curiosity and misleads people into fantasies that hurts most partners I've only just begun to explore It's very overrated... I have no problem with it, and in fact I think it's funny Its a good place to sexually fantasize I really can't find any, I guess I just stupid HAVE NOT SEEN TOO MUCH OF IT (YET) I think in recent times it has been maturing into a type of standard practice of do's and don'ts by the net self regulating. Not too much fringe stuff anymore... good to see government is not required to mediate this. The Net is just like the real world, you'll find anything you look for. It is a good sourse for information and natural interest its fun when you cum...uuhhhhuhhuhh..hhuhh.. I think this is the last compleat place of freedom. Human beings should be able to look inside human nature and be aware how sexually oriented our society is. Other characteristics come up on the internet and those should be the moral thermometer to all I like it a lot. That is the main reason I surf. Where? When I was with America Online, I really enjoyed it. So did others. Now that I am on the net, I have been working solo. I have yet to communicate with others on the subject. I like all the access of information though. not so bad I love it. It's great fun and better than going out to the bars!!!! great safe outlet for fun and communication Current situation is about right. Censorship is too close to book-burning for my liking I'd love to get involved. I wish it would be more accesabile and I hate these site that you wait 10 min to get in then find it charges for there service i like it alot leave it alone. it's parents responsibility to take care of their own children. it`s good very interesting,have found a lot of information on subject I am interested in. yeap I think that it's all a matter of self regulation. If you don't like it, don't visit the damn site! An incredibly tempting, and therefore, dangerous source of sexual stimulation. I say dangerous because people are often very dull until something stimulates their mind and body. Once their mind becomes engaged with something that thing (depending on the amount of stimulation and the enjoyment derived fom it) can lead to acts that are dangerous to yourself and others depending on your level of self-control (everyone has a limit), the influence the stimulation has upon you and the opportunities presentd. Let's face it, sex is an incredibly strong motivator. Very interisting, but keeping in mind it is user who accesses to this kind of information and therefore maybe offended. Much to be discussed, one thing is sure, many people view sex on the internet as a form of entertainment thus never going down the wrong path, and others use it as a tool to reap havock among the innocent. We can't deny the fact that crimminals are on the Net. Terrific - but it's difficult to manuver th mouse during orgasms US will have trouble enforcing their prudish attittude to WW Freedom of choice should be allowed Not of great interest Rather than trying to change the net (an infeasible task), someone should create a "sanitized" environment, which of course would not have many of the nets benefits, but would be safe for kids. People who subscribe to Boy's Life don't get Playboy. Unfortunately, they seem to want to change the existing net to be that sanitized environment, and the net is not amenable to that sort of control. Porn delivered to your home, without even a brown paper wrapper. It's great! Not enough reality - all fantasy i think its over rated, its more masturbation materials From what I have observed, the deviant nature of sex is not somthing that HAPPENS to be on the net, it is on the net, because people WANT it to be there. The fact is that people are SICK indviduals underneath all of the business suits and dresses, and th Everyone has curiosity. If parents don't want their children looking at pornographic stuff, MONITOR THEM! That's what parents are SUPPOSED to do!! Interesting I feel It should be allowed I think that if people want to see sexually explicit material they should be allowed access to it. Sex belongs in the bedroom between married couples only. if you're responsible and mature enough, it's okay...you really have look for it. it seems ironic that people want to censor the internet but won't educate themselves or other about the responsibilty of sex/sexuality (ie:aids/std/pregnancy/sociological as haven't been able to find any other than soft sex, playboy, hustler,etc. It's there if you get bored but nothing to get all worked up about It's a new way to construct sexuality, and it looks like it will extend a sort of benign experimentation. I have not yet successfully met people from the net for sex (well, one who did show up was so pathetic that I never introduced myself, and another w go on, girl! I just started using the internet,and was surprised about the amount of material that can be obtained through the www.I am not a computer wiz, but in just five minutes using netscape I figured out how to access anything. I believe the ease of transmission to unsupervised persons (under 18) is not good for society as a whole. Curious junior high boys are probaly acessing stuff that otherwise would be difficult to obtain. I think the internet is an amazing thing, and I do not know how it could be regulatd (or even should be by the gov.) No opoin at the time Let the net open, it is everybody freedom to decide what they want to see or read. The responsibility should remain on people themself and nobody else should be allow to decide what other adult should see or read on the net. I really do not like somebody playing God and decide for me. Thanks. Great! I think it's great.You can learn so much from it. more especially gay WHEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEE!!!!!!!!! sex is what one person thinks not society as a whole It should be available if someone wants to access it. "Big Brother" should ONLY be interested in crime against others (theft, fraud, etc...) Noy bad!!!!!!!!!!!! more,more,more... there's none. there should be lot (real life ,uh). It's a good thing,more people should try it. A valuable service for those that wish to use it. A form of freedom that needs to be protected at all costs. Want to explore more. This is a good private place to seek "taboo" information. It's terrible! One would expect a higher standard of those technically capable of using the Internet. there should be more DON'T LET THE GOVERNMENT STEP IN ON THIS ONE, LIKE THEY HAVE IN OTHER ISSUES. WE KNOW WHAT HAPPENS WHEN THIS TAKES PLACE!! i'm a little annoyed, cause i keep hearing about all the interactive sites on the net, but i can't find any. drat drat and damn. Like 'em both =) Cool Great Too many sex sites on the net are commercialized. its good We need more and it stay more open Popular media has blown this way out of proportion. I have seen very little of it, but I specifically avoid it. Sex is a beutiful thing but should only be had between a man and women who are married. i like it It's a nice way to kill a few hours It provides harmless entertainment. Sex for adults is ok for the net i wish i could find it easier There does need to be some type of "Over 18 Only" system In all countries, sex is not to show in public; so there are always hidden place for them everywhere. dude, it rocks!!:> It's out there, but the truly "hard core" is hard to find. The govt. should not regulate the net content. But there should be some measure to verify age, etc. Mostly what I have seen is text. i have no interst in paying for the pictures. It is frightfully easy to find, and the more popular, crowded places seem to be the most blatantly depraved. I thought that I had depraved instincts-I am attracted to younger girls. (Fantasy only.) Some of the shit I have seen here has really disgusted me. I explore it in part because of my own depraved sexual instincts, and in part because of an intellectual curiosity in the depths of human depravity. Although there s little here that I could not find somewhere else, I would have had to look a lot harded. Like most other kinds of shit in the internet, there is little porn. that is remarkable in and of itself. What is remarkable is the ease of access and the realtive privacy it offers. (I am the exception. I use a public, college terminal, having no computer of my own.) This makes the ultra-depraved come more out into the open. While it is valuable to know just how low we humans can go, it is also scary, and I woder if this will have the same effect on rapes that other kinds of porn. have. (Encouragement.) THis is mostly what concerns me. The lowest, most depraved in our society now have an outlet. They can grow in number, exchange ideas, and appeal to people with latent tendencies that have simply never come to fruition. I think that this survey is a valuable tool for understanding this depravity, If you are able, please send me a brief summary of the results. (The long version would probably crowd out my -mail account. I have seen survey results before, and they are many thousands of pages or reports.) My e-mail adress is sk3698@cnsunix.albany.edu it is pretty cool but I wish there was more nuidity! Make it easier to find it through a net search. advocating government regualtion could be understood of abdication personal moral responsibility not so bad There is a wide range of experiences to be had, and the openess is refreshing. I think the people should leave sex alone - do there own thing. I have learned MANY NEW SEX TRICKS from communcating on the internet. I love it.... The internet is an exciting new way to exchange all kinds of information and sex is one of the most natural things on earth. It needs more sexy pictures of women to download for free ok if you don't let it go to your head. Internet provides a very informative and valuable source of information I love the Internet and Sex! The day the Government starts to regulate the morality of everyones sex life is the day when we have lost all the freedoms granted to us by God. Never have done it, but it can help in my relationship by giving me some insight on how to make my sex life more interesting. Good! Hold on while I say my alms... eh-hem. Sex is what it is and the internet is,well an open forum. People that are offended that sexual material exists on the net should go back to Calvin. Parents that are worried about their kids should learn about the off switch. I dont think there is anything wrong with sex on the internet as it is largely annonomys and is victimless if used and viewed in a responsible way. Anonymous place to safely express and explore feelings and desires. I think the inet is a great medium for anything sexual and should be encouraged and continued as long as people are not threatened and lines between free speach and blatant ignorance are not crossed. It's wonderful, except for Child Pornography & Beastiality! it really needs to be expanded to all aspects of sexuality. I think there should be more of it. I think that the sexual information on the internet is a great resource, and it has improved my sexual performance. It should be protected under the constitution like everything else like any other media, books, TV, magazines. It's there if you want it. This is the information super highway, and sex is a part of our world. Therefore it should be allowed on the net. ITs fun Hard core literature; lot of hype. I do not know yet It it not the government's place to monitor sex on the Internet. The role should be performed by the parents of the minors. If the parents don't have the time or care enough to watch their children, that's too damn bad for them. Their irresponsibility shouldn't effect everyone else's freedom of speech and expression. My concern is that the government will attempt to regulate the internet. With governental intervention, the internet will lose its role as a means to express all ideas (not just sexua). Not really shocking...it doesn't bother me I like it to each his own may be interesting great fun and mind expanding I'm a newcomer to the Net. I have had no experiences. Will write more later or as I get more familiar with the contents. Thanks for your putting this forum on the Net and for giving me the opportunity to participate. I Don't know that much about sex on the Inernet. I think that this is largely just another distraction from the real issues challenging American society and our polity: it's much easier to scapegoat "bogeymen" under our figurative beds than it is to deal with the problems of race/income disparity/employment/belief/community which are tearing this culture apart. In this age of AIDS, safe sex is the only safe option. There is no safer sex than Net sex. should be easier to locate without too many advertisements No one should interfere with what is distributed on the Internet. sex is nothing to be ashamed of ...most people like it...what is wrong with lokking at it/ thinking about it I do not feel that it should be government regulated. I think there needs to be more sex stuff on the net. After a hard day at school, you need a break and some entertainment. There are no government regulations on movies or magazines after all. Educational&Entertaining We as mature adults should have the right to veiw not the goverments they have enough to do with out butting into our private lives it's good, every one can find wand and don't be bad with the other people. This is the first survey I've seen dealing with sex on the net, It is great that someone actualy cares about the internet and the people on it to ask there opinions, unlike the US goverment. I'm a sixteen year old bi girl and have been sexually active since I was twelve for. for the past year I have been accessing sex pages on the Net. I think its great there is so much sex info on the net; because of what I've read I will no longer fuck with Very hard to access and restricted. I think it's great that people of all ages can explore thier sexuality on the net and my parents encourage my exploration Sex is great, and the Internet is great!!! Its Great!!!! It's fairly difficult to find, takes a lot of time, and just is a cool way to meet people, tell very personal info to, and remain annonymous! Thats pretty heavy, if you think about it. Interesting content. Sex, and related items, on the Interent give people a place to release their sexual anxieties without stooping to a "low" means of doing it. It should be clearly publicised where sexually explicit material is, so that those who prefer to avoid it don't bump into it, and those who want it can find it easily. Should be available to those who enjoy it good It is available just like anything else on the net is, and it should be that way. Otherwise it could be called discrimination, or censorship. It was bound to happen. Open discussions allow society to mature in the area of sexuality and male/female relationships. Open discussions allow society to mature in the area of sexuality and male/female relationships. I feel it is up to the individual but that parents should be held responsible for their childrens conduct when using the net Broadens ones horizons. Offers experimental opportunities. I love sex I have it all of the time.... It's an escape at times when you need to escape. thanks for giving me opportunity! Most sexual content seems to be in Newsgroups, I Think its great for adults, but sexual newsgroups should require a password, given to adults only. sexual content on the internet is fine. its up to the parents to censor their children. and if you're a 'prude' don't enter the site if you don't wanna see it! Keep it up..... PLEASE nothing to say I think people hear about sex on the net, call in to see if it's true and then get added to the lists of data collectors like anything on the internet, it's too damn hard to find what you are looking for! The internet is providing a medium for exploring, discussing, and exposing sexual issues that has for too long been hidden and ignored. Plainly, the use of contemporary methods (i.e. TV, radio etc) have not allowed interaction in a way that the internet has and this has meant, at least in my experience, in a more useful and responsive medium for discussion and information on a multilateral level - this is truely wonderful. We all must learn to accept that knowledge is for everyone who wants it. Haven't seen enough to answer. I LOVE IT As a net veteran of some 15 years, people are going to bring their excess baggage with them! not enough interaction I like I like it and think there is nothing wrong with it. I thinl they go together great EXTREMELY COOL where is is? if people want to see it they should be allowed to see it. it's a buyers market in a way. Sex sells. PERIOD. So, if it attracts people to the net, then hey... so beit. I am a monogamous married woman. Reading sexual fantasies such as in alt.sex.stories has enriched my fantasy life which in turn enriches my sex life. While sex-related "literature" is easy to come by (pun intended), downloading and accessing truly pornographic pictures is not at all easy. I mean, what the hell do I do with a .jpg or a binary??? I like it a lot Sex is great. We love Sex. Everyone have sex. MORE SEX!!! There should be more... it's a beautiful thing! Sex is a part of life. The Net is no different than the rest of the world, nor should it be. Freedom of expression is one of the most important rights we have, and it must be preserved. should be unrestricted for adults I think, very interesting it's usually what i look for It is a way to express and delve into the many different forms and fashions. Its differences in the individual which makes the world so interesting to live in.. As it is a facet of life, sex is a facet of the Internet. jerk off in the wheelchair everybody!!! It's an adequate medium in this era of aids and safe sex i find it to be a relaxing way to communicate my sexual desires, and helps me relive many of my frustrations. Why don't people start taking responsibility for their own actions and stop worrying about everyone else? Human sexuality is as natural as eating. Why the drive to censor ? What's the big deal? It's fun to read and fun to talk to people about my foot fetish. N/A I like it but I cannot find a talker that allows pedophillia I find this survey insulting! My own preferences have absolutely nothing to do with the validity of my answers. This could have been done intelligently, without all the S&M questions. The only reason I even answered this was to balance out all the pervert I think there is nothing better than sex and perversion and it should continue to be a pervasive part of the net from what i have seen it is highly overated should be more of it. luv it on irc!!!! Some of it can be a little extreme. (beastiality, kids} no bid deal no cencuro The good things either costs money or is difficult to reach It's oke. It's a big part of your live. Use it and enjoy!!! If the InterNet is the "Information Super Highway" then it must NOT be censored by any entity other than by the people who use it. This government (USA) or its people do not have the right to enforce their morality on the rest of the world. It's softer than sex in a bookstore or in 42nd street in NYC Whats the big deal. I've found it easier to download/view pornography from regular BBS's. i think sex on the internet is okay. but it's to hard to find anything good. unless i'm just looking in the wrong place. i'm new to the inter net so that's prbally my problem. amusing I look on the internet for sexual release and find it increasingly difficult to locate .....anything ! It is definitely made for us dick-ruled males. i m new to the net but believe that sex in any avenue should be dealt with more honestly and openly to put a stop to the puritianical attitude. there is so much more on the net besides Sex I wish it was easir to find. I also wish I knew how to use the MPG, GL and other viewers. I believe that censorship of the net completely negates its purpose; people should be able to view what they want to view in the privacy of their homes. I am furious with the "moral majority" telling society what is or is not appropriate for them. It relives you of inhibitions -- makes you open your min and jump out of your box! A nice mental break from micro programming YES!!!!!!!! ITS GREAT, BUT I WISH IT WAS EASIER TO GET AHOLD OF HARD-CORE PORNOGRAFY! I have no problems with it. I oppose censorship, but agree that there should be a product that allows for parents to lock children away from certain sites. there isa wall between my sexal tendencies and my intellectual goal. so, idon't want tobe intelectual reduced, because i was sexual actve, espicially with animal It is nice to look at and a good learning and teaching tool think it fun ans exciting More! More! More! could be better if i knew more I feel that parents should be the mian censors of sex on the net. It is their responsibility. The government should have some sort of rating system and more restrictions to ensure that only those over 18 have access, but that access should be free and open. its not to bad but ive had people asking for cybersex quite often. I find it factual and fun. I use it for both information and pleasure. It is very easy to be offended by material found on the net. It's there for those who enjoy it. I doubt very much that it contributes to crime, etc. It is no worst than the public library! It's o-kay sometimes, if your in the mood to look for it. we need more Being new to the internet I do not have much to contribute as this is the first occassion to see anything remotely envoling the ? of sex. I think it's great and I don't want it taken away. It's an outlet for fantasies. I have trouble imagining it being anything more. Sex on the internet is a wonderful thing if it's not abused or goverment doesn't become involved. It increases the chance that people are going to have safe sex and it provies a comfortable enviorment for people to enjoy their sexuality safely reguardles don't know yet I feel its fine. Ithink its great We need more, More, MORE! easy to find, turns me on, it's great!!! I think there is more talk about it than actual practice. And I don't mind what people do, as long as nobody starts censoring the Net because of some (imaginary) sexual 'misuses'. It turns me on. What I have found. I wish there was an easier way to get to it. We need more sex on the internet I think it's a very good idea match made in heaven It is rather difficult finding some things. Perhaps with more experience utilizing the net I will know where to look and how to access any information. It's a part of the essence of the Internet (Open Information)! cool! The uproar caused by X / R rated material on the net has been blown out of all proportion! Sex On the internet is made out to be a big deal, I think that it is helpin the world! Parents are the key to correct upbringing. The internet is for adults or parental guidence. The internet is no different than walking into a city. Sex is where you find it. If you're looking you'll find it. It's important I, who does not use the internet for sex of any description, feel that a lot of emphasis is placed on something (sex) which occupies such a small part of the internet. I beleive (although I have not investigated this fully) that most "sex" found on the net is available through other means eg magazines, word of mouth or exchange of photos etc. Children could find adult material from their owm families and take that to the school ground too. If we look back at our own childhood, sex was always a contrversial issue. In summary, I beleive that governments and authorities are afraid of the internet as a whole and are using issues, such as sex and crime, to stir up the public so regulation and censorship can be arranged. I wish to stress that I beleive that sex and crime are definitely in the minority of the internet resources available. And this is a small sacrifice to pay for such global uncensored communication. Personal Choice. Parental responsability. Individual responsability. I found more sexual material 25 years ago on the news racks and locker rooms than I do on the Net today! The specific web providers have the ability to police their specific web sites. not much pornography on the net great It's great i wish it were easier to locate and download images from a central source, or many sources that are much easier to track. over used and over explioted finacially it is a great way to anonymously express and explore your sexuality. i feel that is important, especially in our society, where you are judged unjustly and ostrisized for exploring your sexuality. It should not be banned!!!! There are too many companys that want money to view pics. I'm trying to find it before the police state takes it away I think it shouldn't be there!! not a bad idea, for the most part compleatly harmless, and keeps (possibly) some of the perverts at home instead of on the streets raping/insulting women. It's not that big a deal still mild compared to whats been happening on bbs's for years I like having the access, but do believe that it needs to be controled to some point so that people are aware that it is there and that certain people should not have access. The net has no more sex on it than there is in the real world. There is just as much sex on TV, in magazines, and throughout the cities as there ever will be on the net. It is impossible to censor it - Imagine making a law that all magazines that contain sexual material be outlawed - and then add on the fact that law would have to be INTERNATIONAL. Its not going to happen - as well it shouldn't. Oh yea - Cool picture at the bottom of the page =) Like most of the Internet, a lot of hype and not much substance This is a matter of personal , adult choice , and should be left to the individual , not bigotted ,narrow minded zealots and busy-bodies wiyh nothing better to do . Regarding child access to the NET , it should be a parent/guardian responsibility to monitor NET activity . I think there should be more sex on the internet, I enjoy it very much I think that it is a fun & exciting way to express sexuality. However, I do fear that children may get involved, & not realize what they are getting into. great Hey, let people do what they want. I mean, if someone wants to get off on computer generated images- go for it! I like it, would like to find a woman or couple that just comes out and says would like to find someone to fuck or suck. also would like contacts by location in the USA> I think sex on the internet is great. It's really fun, and everyone should try to find this kind of stuff on the net. The Internet has provided me with an alternative to bestiality. Thank you. I would hate to see chat sites monitored. I think Americans should be free to choose for themselves. We don't want the government to monitor everything we do. I think a rating system would be enough. To me more of a curiosity than anything brought on by all the talk that has been in the media I don't know yet! Parents should supervise kids on the Net, this isn't a babysitting service. Parents who don't, are the main cause of their childs problem-Inadequate parenting! great!!! Since it's always going to be on the net, we need a way of dealing with it. Children always have had access to magazines and videos. I think the media has blown the whole thing way out of proportion I love all aspects of sex on the net. LET IT STAY AS IS!!!! Personally, I'm annoyed by trapsites, like the "you're a loser" page. I enjoy hunting down sexy places on the net, but I don't want my children to do likewise. Parental controls _ and I'm not sure exactly what's available _ should be the answer to any perceived "problem" of sexual materials on the net. It is discouraging to see special interest groups trying to censor what ought to be a free forum. It has been blown way out of proportion by the media. They really don't know anything about the 'net. It's just part of normal life. Except for parental supervision of minor children, let the market place make the rules. There should be absolutely NO censorship on net. The net should remain a place where all can exchange free information.No censorship should apply other than the on\off button we all have. While sex is open on the net it is monitorable; try to stop it and it goes underground, which is more of a risk. It should be fun!! The Sex and InTERNET are sports, practice them Hard to find and too much for Apple McIntosh I have seen ads for sexually related topics or products and have followed the links to check it out but most of these did not allow much more than info about the item and most were quite expensive and required verification. My answer to the previous question is not"difficult" (your arrow is outside the reach of my computer) it is "you have to be specifically looking for it". As to sex on the internet, it should be more difficult for children to access it (kids are sometimes much more "internet and computer savvy" than their parents, and this fact should not allow the availability of information to supersede authority of parents, which it currently does. I'm brand new to the Internet, and haven't run across anything offensive yet. I think if I accidentally ran across something in a place I didn't expect it, I'd be wary of the whole internet idea. I want to know what is at a site - not be shocked when I get there. a good idea. great You will never stop pornography. It has been with us through the ages. Sex is an integral part of human consciousness and is (usually !) unsupressable. Parents are responsible for the upbringing of their children. In what thy watch on TV, what they learn, which school they go to, for raising them as individuals. Part of this can be internet access. Parents cannot say they don't know what is there if they allow their children access as this is grossly irresponsible. Providers are going to have to help prents, say, provide access resticted logins ( ie. no 'pornographic' newsgroups ), but there are always sites to access. This is the drawback, but parents should take on this responsibility as internet access is 99.9% purchased though credit cards, so ... parents buy in - parents regulate. It is their responsibility. You cannot restict everyone just for the sake of a relatively small fraction of net-users. parents are the key for viewing Interesting. I like it. It's there. What can I do about it? Not much. There is always going to be this sorta stuff. lobe it It's interesting. Wish you would fondle my pussy. I am so wet and my mipples are erect with desire! Don't know yet -- all my time on the internet is at work so I'm too scared of getting caught. I suspect it would be fun at first but grow dull. I would have liked to explore it more when I was single. People who have a healthy marrage don't need sex on the Internet. Sex is something to be enjoyed by married couples. I'm aways looking for it and I should have access to it all. nice very nice it can be cool NEED MORE VIDEO ACCESS. sex on the net is great It can be a great outlet for closeted desires. It can also make one realize that nobody's fantasies are really unique. And its the safest sex available! OK porno!!!! porno!!!! porno!!!! to hard to find It's fine with me - I don't burn up the keyboard seeking it out, but I do know it's there if I want it and that's as it should be - thanks. Just as long as Big Brother and the religious fanatics (trying to save "our children and the world at large" stay more! more! more! ok I find myself in a problem that has no easy solution when it comes to Sex and the Internet. I don't believe government has a right to "shut it down", but I do beleive we nned to somehow police it to keep it from our children. The problem: how to do this ... ? I think that on the Internet, like anywhere else, the key is to provide the education necessary to make the experience of finding this type of material on the network not a surprising one, or a condemned one that children will try to experience in order to defy their parents. I hope to find people that share my phantasy (just on the net!) why not? The internet is the best forum for all types of sexuality to communicate with each other and exchange views and promote friendship around the world Great! No fucking cencorships and stuff. I want more sex on the Net!!! I LOVE IT!! It is easy to become perverted and sexually stimulated blah, blah, blah, blah, blah does't make any difference internet has no effect LEAVE THE INTERNET ALONE FOR PEOPLE TO DO AS THEY LIKE I find NO OFFENSE in sex & the 'Net. I ENJOY it,and promote it as a good diversion. very dangerous for children. it cannot be controlled at all. Nicer to watch should be much more exciting! I believe it is a right to have unrestricted sex on the net. Well, obviously I am biased because I found this page. Tell parents to take responsibilty for THEIR own children in THEIR own house if they don't want them to see pron. If they don't like what they see, turn it off, don't turn ME off. Because of my "condition" as a TV, I've gained a lot from the net. I've found contact's to other TV/TS's, TV/TS oriented shops, usergroups and the like. So all in all I think that "sex on the Internet" as you put it, could help a lot of people. A lot more people than it could hurt! BTW... I think that you should expand certain fields of your survey, with a 'other' field, so that it would be possible to tell more precise what one would answer to a particular field. Thanks. they're both great.. I like sex - I like the internet - So there you have it! its great, i get satified shoul be more I think this is regulation that create problem like rape, pedophillia, homosexuality, etc. I everybody was free to make love, the need of sex should be less present. The sex is taboo, this is the mistake. If it helps me a partner, I think it's Great! I think it's a "service" that should continue ..... Just another way of having sex! Free and Free and Think something about ... I have no objections to ANY sex on the net. I LIKE TO RUB MY PUSSY WITH MY MOUSE WHILE I LOOK AT PICTURES OF LUCKY VANOUS!!! broadens the mind Its easier to talk about problems, if you not facing the other one. a harmless outlet and source of information Great I think it's good, I like it, and it's very safe ! There should be no censorship, and only service provider regulation. What you see should be what you get. The internet isn't a children only area. Sex is part of most adult's lives, and internet reflects that (more openly than in real life, but so what). I do think there should be a rating system so that people know what they will be getting. A rating system would also help with "netnanny" type programs. If something doesn't have a 'G' or "PG" rating, the program wouldn't let a child access it. fucking goog thing The net is an environment in which people can pseudo-anonymously carry out their wildest fantasies without a majority of the repercussions of real life Greatly over-rated. It's new media for underground. has helped me open up to taboo subjects and ideas; i still do not buy into everything i see/read, but i like the opportunity to make up my own mind. Its great except cuddling afterwards is a problem As in all things in life, I think the individual should control him/herself first, before endevaoring to control others. That said and done, ALL things should be available and accessible. hope to find sex on the net, possibly in hitherto unexperienced forms It's not bad. ok It's gotten WAY out of hand! Great! Would not change a thing. I think the internet is a excellent source for people to find others of like interests. New friendships are created and the feeling of being alone in a world that does not understand is reduced. Exon should be assasinated ATTENTION AMERICAN GOVERNMENT: Leave it the hell alone!!! Everyone talks about how bad the content of the net is, there is nothing here that you can't get through the US mail. I find it interesting and stimulating 'coz I'm so shy, it's good that I can enjoy here easily..:) I think we should as adults have it if we want it. If you don't want it you don't have to look at it, the same as getting a dirty video. I'm still a virgin, and was curious about all the consequences and physical and emotional conditions involved in sex, so I turned to the 'net rather than Penthouse to find answers. I've been overwhelmed, and disgusted, and on whole, I've been desensitized by this deluge of information, and have become numb to the chastity and importance of sex. It's impossible to suppress or censor sexual traffic on the Internet. However, providers and users need to think about the consequences of their actions on the net. Moreover, promotion of good netiquette needs to be strengthened. I see too many hostile and inappropriate messages on the newsgroups. True, they cannot be prevented entirely, but there should be stern access penalties for those who abuse their access privileges. It doesn't bother me one way or another. Good, relaxant insted of boring computers It's great, you can meet people who have the same fantasies�as yourself. I met a couple of people who are into something rare like me ;-) More private than sex shoppes. I think it's up to the the user to know what to look at. And it is possible to inform people about risks with sex used the wrong way. It's basically a non-issue. If your are open minded, there's no problems I met my current lover while surfing the net. She caught me downloading nude pictures and asked me if I wanted to see the real thing instead. Obviously, I answered in the affirmative. She gives the best head I have ever had in my life. I think the net could be of great help to parents wanting to teach their children about sex, but are too embarresed to talk about it. The net has a great potentional, if used right. I think that it causes people to forget their morals and their happiness that they have otherwise. one word: more! It allows you to explore things without exposing yourself The Internet provides freedom of sexual expression and should not be censored. it's great!!, but it must be a restricted way for childrens It has been very interesting to me that most conversations between strangers meeting online eventually become sexual. Perhaps its one topic that everyone is interested in to one degree or another. I feel that the internet should be COMPLETELY open. You can never have enough of either. It's a form of freedom The NET allows for a casual interest in this sort of thing, also allowing a person to 'sample' new areas (not just sex, by the way) to see what they are interested in. The net should remain completely uncensored by the authorities, it would only ruin a particularly special and effecive info. source! I 'dlike to find sex without difficulty Sex is part of life and can't be ignored, but pornography is bad. It's there, easy to get to, but most people won't access it, it's so much easier to go to a shop and get a magazine or phone chat-lines. I love to chat about SEX! No harm, just pure clean fun. It's out of control, but should not be censored. That's the beauty of the Internet. It should be self-governing, and any censorship should only be done for parents/guardians of children. Advertizing for sex, however, should be removed (ie 900 numbers from Prodigy/AOL/etc.). Fuck yourself! younggirls fucking Sex and the Internet should be available in much the same way as printed material, if you want it OK, if you dont OK. The individual (or Guardian) should decide whether to view adult material, without attemptling to enforce their beliefs on others. If more people would be responcible for their own (or their charges) actions we would not have to contend with censorship. .... No censure, more bandwidth! That's what I crave for. If no one gets hurt and parents monitor their childrens access the what's the harm? I think it great like watching tv......change the channel It's OK It would be a nice future to have a fantastic night with an American girl through internet. :-) I think in light of the emerging trend towards commercializm on the net, that all these arguements will be mute within a few short years. Forming an opinion hi ! it's an easy way for people embarassed about sex to see things about sex, without the embarassment. Reminds me of the peak days of CB radio only with pictures and less static. over rated *yawn* just my life Much ado about very little. Sex is everywhere; always was and always will be. Real sex is better! I like to shoot my creamy load on the screen when I see the sexy babe on this web page. The Internet is mainly college-age males. Of course there's going to be a lot of sexual stuff out there! I can never find it when I need it!!!!!! I think it is definatly there. If you want it you can find it. But, just because it is there dosn't mean that it should be abused or that children should see it. I think parents guardians should take the effort to teach the children and to monitor thier activity. non-issue. Washington is turning up the heat here to discourage communications amongst the politically active. I hope the gov't doesn't censor it all due to the kiddies. at this stage i am new to the net and although i have been looking for light nudes have found very few so believe if people want they should be allowed to find It's fun.And harms nobody.The goverrnment should stay out of it.They screw up everything they get involvd with anyway. If you're looking for it, its out there, if you're not interested, you can avoid it. I have not gone looking. But if this medium is to grow like the movies or TV there must be a way to establish self control. I would recommend some sort of self governing body that establihes Ratings for a site and Browsers that can be configureded at the workstation to provide password control for those sites. I would like to give my 12 year daughter unlimited access to internet but will not under the current situation. There is material that is without redeeming value on the net and access should be ontrolled. it's ok as long as people don't take it too seriously like they are now. If you look you will find it, so in order for children to find it, they have to already know it's out there and look for it. Meaning that parents *already* have failed in discouraging it it's bound to happen, it's human nature! It's OK Not accessible enough Reflects the freedom of the Net, everyone has their say. ok If it is only erotic it is o.k., because you can see such stuff everyday on TV. Hardcore is another thing, but the Internet should be free and selfregulating. Stimulating at first but in no way can approach intimate contact with another person. kool beanz Internet should be open for Sex and should be free, not censored. In this time of AIDS, thank God for the Internet which gives me a safe outlet for my sexuality. fucking great! More Sexpictures... Could be better with some vr and electrical chocks just for fun! Keep it up but monitor it. Local gouverments should restrict access. silly It's an open frontier! I think it's great. I think i'ts great Censership, by anyone but one's self must not be allowed. Notes about content is a good idea. You are only a free as your information and data are. it's most interesting in that everyone seems so interested I am new to the internet and so have had difficulty finding serious hard pornography. I am not looking for sexual encounters but only like following others attempts at getting sex. great! Getting a partner would be helpful for most of the losers on the net. If they had someone maybe it wouldn't be such a big deal. take it or leave it Should be more women online. Most of the media attention has be sensationalistic hype, and very ill-informed and un researched. In general sexual content is well protected from any casual contact, you have to go searching for it very specifically. just leave it there! The Internet, among other things, is still a bunch of toys. They should, therefore, all be available to us kids. We'll decide later what to do with them all. Freedom of speech, if the law is worried about it I think they should go and get, drug dealers and thifes. Censorship, not sex, is evil! As adults we should have access to any type of material we choose. Leave it up to parents, not the state to monitor and control children's use of the net. I think it's lame, so I haven't looked for it. I enjoy sex very very much, and have no desire to look for stuff, but I am always wierded out by the number of men who do. I think it's really sad that they can't think of other, less degrading, more interesting ways to satisfy sexual desire. I feel that the Net has allowed me to come into contact with my true feelings, discussing them with people of similar views and circumstances The Inet provides an honest (if a bit "stressed") place for communications. Rather than censoring the net (impossible anyway), it's the responsibility of adult users to control the access of their children to material they find objectionable. The communications taking place can--and do--open users to new ideas and values, to everyone's benefit! For myself,it provides endless entertainment for an otherwise dull existance.As for children,i'd rather they view porn,than violence. Honestly, I'm glad. I'm not as sexually repressed as I used to be. Keep in mind I use the internet daily. For sexual purposes, I probably use it weekly. fgjhfgj one day people will have to face up to the truth. we find truth in things we cannot control. the internet was created so it caouldn't easily be controlled. it would be a pity if the net were controlled by anyone in any way. I think the openness of the net will contributes in the end, to openness in society. If you know that it's just fantasy, then you're fine i'm excited to experience it and open my mind. it is a new alternative that must be more closely studied. it is still young as is growning fast.unfortunate instancess may mar the subject, but anyway individuales can find to meet safely is great. I think the level of sex on the Internet is no more than the level of sex anywhere else in the free world. Children should be monitered to prevent them from exposing certain sexually orientated materials on the Net. Many software programs are available and more are in the works to prevent access to certain areas of the Net. I believe final responsiblity lies with the parents. I find it hard to believe that people have spent thousands of dollars for computer equipment only to view smut and engage in sexual perversions on the net. You can legislate moral values its better than the book/video store. There's something for everyone, every taste - not surprising that the moral right panicked. They're convinced any kind of sex is basically evil, so when you show them all kinds of fun and imaginative sex...can't be surprised. I have a child by a woman I met on the internet. As a father, I think that children should not have easy access to sexual material, but I think a partnership between service providers and parents is necessary. I find nothing wrong with sex on the net.Adults should be free to do whatever they want,as long as it doesn't hurt or infringe on some else's rights. Has increased self-confidence and sexual activity. Positive. If our society were less puritanical and more open about sex, there would be fewer adolescents pushing carriages around. It is a healthy outlet if we satisfy our desire and move on. That's how we grow. Our society is too preoccupied with the subject, because qwe keep all types of sexual issues in the closet. Everthing from viewing images to open discussion is taboo. If we dealt with sex in a mature and open fashion, our kids would be educated and the need to experiment would be diminished. We can thank christian teachings for the plethora of teenages pushing baby carriages in this country. I am not referring to the churchs' teachings on birth control, but rather with the "if you sin you wil burn n hell" approach (the stick) to teaching morals. Please don't make it too convenient to find. I'm glad it's there. things I'd NEVER ask anyone are spoken of openly. I understand myself and my body better. i love it !!!!! Sex is human, so why not put it on the Internet? I am a adult content provider so I guess my opinion is a biased one however, I believe in the freedom of expression in most areas of sexuallity. It is an overhyped topic. Too much anal retentive nonsense. The "Sex" subject is wider than I thought It is a good information media for those that desire it. uncertain I think if you want to find pornagraphy thats your choice. It is just as easy to find porn and sex in the real world as it is to find porn and sex on the Net. The Net is far safer, however. binaries news are fantastic!!!!!!!!!!! There should be more of it What I think of sex and the Internet. Responsible People should have a (PASS-WORD) so the children will Not have access to the Internet. For the Parents this is the 90's Sex FAQs are helpful. Should be regulated, but NOT restricted. Its really not all that exciting... Haven't found all that much, except to really look for it, It seems that the news stories on TV brings more interest for those that didn't know how or where to find it. Mostly fantasy, it is. good masturbation material Not a real problem I'm glad there are ways to access sex-related material online. Live and let live. Parents are responsible for their children. They do not allow there children to drink at home, so they should apply the same rules to the internet. It is time parents take some responsibility ans stop blaming the Government. The people are the Government! I parents can not be responsible for bringing up their kids, they should not have them! I think sex and the internet allows people to express themselves without fear of "too" public exposure. If sex is banned, then free thinking & expression will follow!! okay for those who are searching for it, but I think that the internet should control the amoung of sex material that can be viewed. It should also have more sex pictures of men and or stuff that would be of interest for females and not just for men. For example, naked women together, the "ideal " fantacy for a man. People are making it a bigger issue than they should. The internet should be left open as it always has been in the past. Law should stay off the net.... All they have to do is enforce the present laws. don't know I think it's good fun, but some of the fetish stuff is disgusting. I just stay away from stuff that offends me. Much better than reading the sex magazines Sex in the net is surprising. There's the dirtiest stories written by women, the most stupid misconceptions teenager americans have about sexual variations, there's the best hints and tips for any kinds of sex, there's IRC channels where guys are girls and women are not, and everybody has good time, and there's IRC -channels where gay men have to hide under female nicks to avoid from str8 women "rescuing" them, and lesbian channels that resemble more a smoking battlefield than a chat-channel, because eery other 14-year old nerd tries to take the channel over just to show he can "handle" lesbian women, too. Then there's AOLusers posting "Me Too" to alt.sex.* requesting nonexistent XXX-ftp -site listings. In the Net there's people like AnnD, SueNH, Elf and other "specialists". The Net is a place of sexual extremes, were they how kinky or how vanilla... because it all blurs. after the sex=death AIDS fear that destroyed my ability to enjoy sex, it is nice to ponder the possibilities again. I got myself so programmed not to think of sex anymore that I felt sexless, all of my friends did this too and I think we sort of became dead inside. I would not activley go find a sex chat line or magazine outside my home so the Net is a sort of innocent re-introduction until I reawaken to the real thing again. Use it or lose it. It's the same as with any other medium (Magazines, Movies, videos). It's there to find for adults (or kids) that want it, but can be avoided by those who don't. Freedom of Speech...People should be allowed to do what they want to do on the NET As with any other subject of human interest it as to be on the NET I like it! Keep government out! I think adults should have it if they want it but I do not like the idea of not knowing if you are speaking or dealing with a minor. i am looking for a man to talk with and possibly have cyber sex with, but am having trouble, please if you can help write midnite@netaxs.com thanXXX People should be able to find what they are looking for. The Internet is the only place where the 1st Amendment is completely operative. Sex is not just on the Internet, its every where. Sex is a part of what we are and is a natural function of our existence. Parents should decide when their children are old enough to know about sex and monitor what information and access they have to sexual material be that on the internet or any where else. lots of good safe sex information The net provides unique insights into some sexual activities that one might not normally see or even hear about. Therefor it is a multi-cultural tool. it's ok and proper If you can handle the subject, it's fine. It is very open. Every possible type of orientation is available. its bloody good! I think it is a way to allow adults to be more open with what htey are looking for. They can experiment with open discussions without anyone knowing who they are. It is a great way to share experiences I think its good..Keep it the way it is. That's good. A forum for expression. Just like for the other subjects. But Pictures or stories about sex acts considered like crimes should not be authorised. I think people make to much fuss about it Sex in Internet should be allowed as well as any other part of human activity. somewhat interesting, like it in the privacy of my home. I think the Internet provides a valuable forum for sex talk etc and would help in the release of a lot of pent up/suppressed sexual energy. However I'm not too sure how this development effects peoples' ability to actually relate sexually in the real world. Maybe future generations will become totally alien to traditional forms of sexual expression, being replaced by virtual sex etc. I love sex. I hate censorship. Keep the Internet free! I WANT PUBLIC CUSEEME EXHIBITIONS! It despert libid and i like to see. But one thing should be said. In almost (if not all) places, we are warned that there are adult oriented material in there. So, we only watch if we want to! Jeder muss selber wissen, was er will ! I have no objection to sex on the internet, provided it is not a tool for child molesters, pedophiles, etc to search for support in their crimes. It should also not be used to commit or assist to commit crimes. People that post these types of messages should be flamed, and the messages should be deleted by whoever sees them. I hope we stay self regulatory. Kids make sex from fourteen (average) on, so why should the not be allowed to see how it workes from 0 on??? Sex is natural and nothing to hide for children or anybody, except for people who do not like it. And they should just stay out and should not post 'stop this shit xxx'. Remove the idiots and non-openminded people from the net, not the sex. i enjoy it to an extent Sex become international, you can meet exactly what corresponds to your desire I don't have aproblem with the information found on the net. I feel that if someone wants to find something there then they shouldn't be restricted from finding it. Many people may in fact be helped by what they find, such as couples needing ideas to rekindle romance in their lives. Love it. Keep it. dull Whats the big deal-I am not forced to read it-Ithink my esc key still works. I think that the government should mind its own business, and if that we want to have sex on the net...that's our business I want more sex related stuff. no big deal Rather Big sites, but hard to find (execpt for alt.bin*) It surprised me to find so many like-minded people on the net. It made me realize that my interests are not perverse but rather a part of who I am. Thus, it allowed for a greater freedom of self-expression It's cool! Much too much fuzz about it, so much for the American way of life. People are responsible for their own morals. I don't need some bloody US-senators to tell me what I can see/access. BTW, if you ask for people being T*, it would be advisable to ask whether they are MTF or FTM, too, and if there are on the net only, or out with it. Makes a LOT of a difference! Goverment hands off the Net... Far to much pedophilia and NC Yet another diversion! allows you to be more open Sex and the Internet was always a logical progression. If parents have a problem with their children getting on, then that is the parent's issue. The same applies to the religious fanatics who spoil everyones fun on some channels,they should stick to their own and not preach. Personally I am not into young kids and teens, but provided it is done in a secure environment and no one gets hurt, then I do not see a problem. Celibate is not a "sexual orientation." Sexual orientation describes one's sexual *desires and attractions* -- it can be homosexual, heterosexual, or bisexual. Celibacy describes one's sexual *behavior*. A celibate person could have heterosexual or homosexual desires. A person with heterosexual or homosexual desires could choose to be celibate. Please spell adultery correctly. Your misspellings and incorrect use of terminology lead me to believe that you are a teenager. I think this survey is vey shallow. For example, under #8, "What sexual aspects are you into?" why don't you list things like monogamy, faithfulness, having children, raising a family, love, affection, conversation, trust, etc.? Or don't these have anything to do with sex? Under #9, "In what way do you feel the Internet contributes to sex?" how about an option that says, "The Internet is simply a tool. Depending on the person, it can be used for any or all of the above or for none of the above." Under #10, "What level of expeience have you had with sex on the Net?" how about an item that says, "Have had intelligent and mature discussions on subjects relating to sexuality," and, "Have discussed the religious and spiritual aspects of sexuality." In #14, "Are you in favor of children having access to online sexual material?" you fail to distinguish between being "in favor of" children accessing sexual material and being "in favor of" government regulation of the Internet. I can be opposed to children accessing sexually explicitcontent and at the same time believe that parents rather than government should guide their children. I like both. :-) I believe that the Internet, like any place where many and varied people meet and converse, is going to be a place where sexuality make a showing. I also think that this is the healtheist thing in the world, a place where people are free to say and do things without fear of personal retribution. As I stated above, individual freedom, unless at the expense of another, is the most important thing in this or any other world. It should be preserved at all costs. Parents should be responsible for the actions of their children. I am responsible for what my friends children see in my house. The same should hold true in their own homes. The role of parents has been lessing over the years, they are less involved in what their child do and see. This is the reason that the net has as much trouble as it does with children. My sex life was fine before the internet, what do you think? I LIKE IT, DO TO HELPING ONE AN OTHER,"A RELATIONSHIP" The safest sex I've ever had I enjoy viewing sexually related material and am offended when others try to force thier "morals" on me I would like it to stay... I need it!!! THINK ABOUT IT! YOUR USING A COMPUTER TO SATISFY YOUR SEXUAL DESIRES. Is there any way to control what is on the net? thank you... end of conversation! A bit overdone, but OK. It's anyone's option not to view it. Sexual stuff should be allowed to be viewed or whatever by adults. The hell with those self-righteous groups! I think it's great, if you want it you can find it. Who came up with the idea that 'other' people have the right to govern what normal independant intelligent ( you must be semi smart to use the computer in the first place ) people can or cannot view in their own home for their own pleasure ? A great time waster when one can't be bothered to work! It's good. Nothing's new under the sun. No net-specific sexuality has yet emerged. The USA should be a forerunner in openness on the net. There should be no monitoring or regulation. The internet is an open forum - it is up to the end user to deside what they want from the internet. It is the role of parents to ensure that their children are not exposed to any material that they deam as unsutable. Material should be made available to teach parents what to look for/monitor to make sure their children stay away from what they find objectionable. I dont see anything wrong with it. The problem is with the people who blow it way out of proportion. Censorship should be a self taught tool. And as for minors, parents whould be very involved with "regulating" what they see. Also, government should not have any rights to censor something I want to see. Why should the few who don't agree with it decide for me whether or not I want to see it? The Net provides an incredible interface between the adult members of the world and should always remain openn to us all. It's cool! A natural part of the Net (and human society, as well). ok I believe sex is a very important issue in most human beings lives, so it is quite natural, that a worldwide communication device as the net reflects this interest. And, as I also find sex to be a profound liberation force, I see the net ad a very positive thing. I think that it's good (for some) to have some, bud it has to have a good securety in a way of a password or something. Known to those who access it. For ex. like YR: Vip Access has... I think that it's good (for some) to have some, bud it has to have a good securety in a way of a password or something. Known to those who access it. For ex. like YR: Vip Access has... I think that everybody should be free to express what they wish. Why not?? Great I think that it's an over fed media explotation of a non-existant problem and I think that the it's an individuals choice what he looks at. To other parents/guardians of minors (children) don't give up your rights and responsibilites to 'teach and instruct your children'. The internet, online services etc., like tv/video games etc, are a tool to be used to instruct and entertain. They are NOT a baby sitter. Put your PC in an open area of your home and use it with your children. You'd be surprised how much you can teach each other. very interesting. Don't take it away. I love it! I think it is cool Wonderful!!! Im not It�s very good There is not much hardcore on the net that i have discoverd!!Maybe i havent looked enogh I enjoy the fun of it. Dont take it at all seriously internet is only an other kind of media like books or movies. Let it go ! GREAT!!! great I think it is too limited and very soft on all subjects. It's a whole new world that needs new thinking Its not easy to find, pictures only last a few days or weeks on WWW site before its gone great,wondful,openmined,and many more Some sites are interesting while other sites are completel trash Sex is part of nature. So, what is the big deal anyway? I believe that the internet is like money, neither good nor evil, rather it is up to the individual how they choose to use it. harmless Parents should be responsible for limiting their childrens' access to the adult sections of the Internet. I highly encourage it. Regarding children on the net. If they have access they should be allowed to find what is available electronically the same way that they can browse a library or walk down a city street. The more phobic and secretive this society is about sex then the les The Internet is an information source. It provides information and services that can be cencored at home. Monitor your kid's and talk to them about what is out there. I think its great fun and much much much safer. I think EVERYTHING should be available! There is less sex on the internet than there is fear of it. It makes outrageous and strange sexual practices seem normal and proer. I once looked at alt.sex.stories and was completely shocked to find that most of the stories were of rape, strange fetishes, incest, teen sex--all rather distressing. I am afraid that if teenagers (especially teenage boys) see such material, their sexual development (i.e. feelings, desires) is going to be distorted. One could understand a 50-year-old being so jaded that he can only respond to "golden showers", but an 18-year-old? Lok at what has come out from the Paul Bernardo case to show how people can be subverted by access to such things. The internet is very much international and cannot be regulated, and should not be regulated. Doing so violates 1st amendment rights (at a basic level). It was argued in the 50s that communism posed a threat to the US and was considered indecent as well. You can never have anyone deciding what is indecent for someone else except parents/gardians in a parental role. its a good thing for shure� Sometimes, you think that's all there is on the internet... but then you realize it's because of where you hang out! Sex should be a matter of consent, not regulation. Internet needs only rating and suited commands in the browsers... otherwise, shut down access to minors, don't shut down sexual content, freedom and creativity! I like the idea of the " sexual freedom of the net. I thinkthat it will hrelp alot of up-tight republican's get in touch with there alter-ego's. The ppl that want to keep the net sex free, are usually the ppl who are sexually hungup. It is scary to think that some ppl answered "there needs to be international morality laws in place", and trhey were serious!! It's nice to have sexual material available when it's wanted, and if I DIDN'T want access, that's easy to arrange also... I enjoy all the material on the Internet (sexual and otherwise). I don't see a need for regulating the Internet as long as parents do their job and teach their children about sex and the difference between what's right and wrong, what's moral and immoral (by their standards), and monitor their children accordingly. Since my husband doesn't have the same sexual interests as I do, I'm very happy that this material IS available on the Internet! I need more of it, could you e-mail me good site names? WOW!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!! It isn't as big thing as the media says. I cant find a thing I like sex and the internet! I also think they make a great combination. People can explore themselves in a way that they couldn't or wouldn't face to face. If there is an audience for something then don't close them out, entertain them! I love it. I want more online places like Hustler Online, but with penetration, especially anal! I would like to see more free xxx sites and less witch hunts It holds a certain fasination. Some of it is disgusting, but that's just my viewpoint. If I don't like it, I don't download it. People should be free to express what they want. It's great. Fascinating there is a vast amount of sexual material on the network if you know how to find it all, and where to find it. sex on the net is like sex everywhere, even our schools. In my City they found two children haveing sex in the hall, but there has been no talk of shutting down the school! the net is the last place in our once free country, to actually be free to express onesself, We HAVE to keep it that way!!!!! safe entertainment I think that people, particularly Americans are far too hung up over sex and nudity. If you see something you don't like, go elsewhere. Why should anybody care what others are doing? As to children, it is up to parents to raise their children - not govern It is great!!!! You make it a big deal, then it DOES become a big deal To each his or her own great !!! cool cool Generally should be a parental responsibility, with the aid of parental "lockout" facilities. The idea of rating (voluntary) is reasonable, but under no conditions can I support government control. At best, if it's either that or something else, then the democratic net-wide body should be considered. I want more sex It's kind of weird, but fun. I could never do any bi (w-w) face to face I believe the internet will accelerate alarming trends of sexual preoccupation. Great!!!!!!! Sex is a natural phenomenon of humanity and an open-minded, well-adjusted perspective is vital to individual health as well as the health of society in general. Government censorship in any form is akin to tyranny. The direction of society is the responsibility of the parents, raising their children with good moral values and a healthy attitude toward sex. When the government, who have no real perspective on the common people, set arbitrary standards for us all it inhibits the free evolution of societyas well as creativity. Progress stops. should be more openness I love it. Super! I enjoy it! People need to take responsibility for what they do/allow on the net (in terms of minors having access) Parents should be held accountable!! sex is human; excitement is human and has always been there. So the INternet is just a reflection of human-ness = ok. I think it's a great way for people to explore their own sexuality in private. In general, I don't believe that it makes sense to legislate against showing pictures of activities which are legal. Why does the government think that EVERYTHING is its business? I'd like to think that exposure to the unfamiliar breed tolerance. It is not bad for mature people (over 18), but not for under 18. It's pretty cool It's fun...! I have no problems with sexual material on the net. Sex is a natural thing, why do people have to hide it. The human body, no matter what "position" it is in, is an incredibly beautiful thing, every person should respect this. People without control become perverse, if you cannot control yourself then move off to some other place. The final decision when viewing or reading sexual/erotica material on the Net lies with only one person, the viewer/reader -- and that's where it should remain, not with a goerning body. This sex thing of the Net only started when the Net became a commercial thing. The Net should be free! I don't know!!! Really!! like to find out like to find out Relatively harmless. Encourages the young males to learn net skill before moving onto more serious use of the net. It's great, open totally new aspects on sex The Internet is an area where mature people come at there own discretion. They should realize that they are offended by subjectional materials and avoid such materials to stay "comfortable" SCC. I believe sex & internet belongs together ... It's here, so we have to deal with it. Net.relationships are hazardous - it's too easy to get burnt - but possible. It's great for maintainging existing long-distance relationships! (grin) Sex should not be restricted on the net. Where is the real stuff? It has in general made my life as a quad easier, I no longer need embaris others in my quest for visual stimulation. IMHO, Parental guidance to prevent children's access is the best solution for the (percieved) moral issues, and let everyone else look after themselves. NC stuff is suspect tho' It's OK if the people who have access to it are old enough or have permission. i think sex is something good and human. it is our nature, so why should we censor it? violace should be censored, not sex, like "make love, not war" It's a good avenue for people who are shy, and could be a positive benefit for those not willing to discuss something face to face or get help with a problem. Even without the Internet, kids would have an access to lots of sexual stuff-----But who the hell cares?? Every kid grows up like that, learning many things about sex. Sex on the Internet is no different than sex in the real world. It's there. Period. My first sexual encounter was when I begged a non-virgin high school classmate for it. I didn't need external influences to know what I wanted. I enjoyed it. Getting to the point where I could ask for it was the tough part. DON'T MAKE PLEASURE A DIFFICULT SUBJECT TO DISCUSS!!! The internet needs to be censored, not because of "sex" per se, but because of DANGEROUS THINGS such as Child Abuse, Murder, Terrorism and Snuff. I think it's harmless entertainment. If it weren't for teh net, i'd not have been able to fully accept myself as a zoophile. - "Miami" from Alt.sex.bestiality The internet is no different from the telephone system. It is a common carrier that has no responsibility to monitor its use. Parents have the ability to block 900 #'s, and they should be able to block access to certain newsgroups and web sites. This would involve a rating system that would be keyed to block sites or a scan for keywords before displaying an article or web site. just a new arena for the culture to face its hidden fears I think it's fine for the people who choose itt It's virtual sex, eyes filled, hands void(except your dick within them) :-) Keep the internet free of censorship. Prents should teach the values to their children that they want them to have, not the government. I think it is a great place for free expresion. Costs too much! It's like the real world. If you're willing to look hard enough, you'll find whatever you want. It's open to abuse, but what isn't anymore in this electronic world? I've met some wonderful people on the net. Without it, I could never had reached out across the country, and across the world, to talk to people. There are ALWAYS going to be people who abuse technologies. Consenting adults do NOT need Congress to outline what they can, or cannot say to one another. The operative phrase here is 'consnting.' Naturally, children are curious. It is up to the parents to not only teach children openness, but regulate what they can or cannot see. Therefore, I see the need to have some sort of regulating software to disable certain access to the net - IF they feel inclined. Personally, I see the net as the ultimate in safe sex. There is no more sex on the internet than in real (as opposed to "virtual") life. I've been on the net for many many years, and find that if you aren't looking for it, you probably won't find it. The Internet has so much more value to it, that regulating it would amount to destroying it. I think that if people want to do it, that's their opinion, so let them do it. I like it I guess... They have to be regulations for access to all public, but no censored, this could be a interesting way to interconnect the world together Not easy enough to find!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!! It;s fucking awesome! I think its something that will fade away as more people use the net daily. I am frustrated by conservative moralists who would invoke government control over net content but deregulate everything else; it's hypocritical. just let some private provider offer a family-oriented service. great! for adults though! fun...gives opportunity to explore where never had courage because identity need not be revealed mura I think you have to look for it, except in the cases of CHAT services from providers like AOL and Prodigy where chat-sex runs wild in the open. People who are not interested in it should not view it I think sex on the Internet is great! To become experienced in finding/getting material requires a certain amount of skill, which not everyone possesses, particularly those who have no one to learn from. I feel parents should regulate what the children see not the goverment. I do not want someone else regulating what I do on the internet as long as I'm not maliciously causing someone else harm. I the goverment regulates adult material on the internet then they should also regulate religous material also. In the last 3 centureys more people have been killed or severly hurt in the name of religion then by anything relating to sex or ponography. It is there to view if you wish. it's something very strange. The last thing we need is more laws...Parants should be the ones who control their kids...not the Government. I know that many households both parants work so perhaps it would be wise to put a access code system on the internet services locally or nationally. Then the parents could accdes the adult materials by just entering a code or password. This is a far as I would go. If people do not like see adult materials then no one is forcing them to veiw it. The people that want to ban this type of entertanment are the first to talk about their freedoms & rights ...we all have rights & as long as we do not hurt one another we as adults should be able to view & enjoy what we desire...the kids of today are exposed to a lot of things in the real world even the local Newscast are violent. I think that we as parents must do our job and not relay on Big Brother to raise our kids. It might even help if we would get a little hardnose on the people that we put in jail and not be so fast to release them. Jails shouldbe jails & not Resort1 Thanks for taking the survey! Never really thought much about it. Like just about everyone else I download erotic pictures and such from time to time, but the thing about having so-called net-sex (or tinysex if you're in a MUSH) is that it feels silly. I mean, you sit there writing dirty words at eachother? Big deal. pics ok IRC is a great way to meet like-minded people, especially those who aren't afraid to send pix via dcc. I've even ended up visiting some of them. You can usually see through the posers. The USA is an open society. The Net must reflect that as well in my opinion. Parents can provide precautions for minor children and sensitive adults need not wander into invironments in which they may be offended. If they do, its their problem!! I met my husband on a talker, but neither of us engaged in net sex Get rid of it on the Internet! Awesome stuff... Sex is a central aspect of our humanity and spirituality. I am not surprised that there is a huge amount of sex related material on the Internet. interesting I like the free exchange of info & idea's . Kids are a problem though. It's great! Slack off, or kill me. The more the better!!!! :) It's great! The best way to aqquire pictures and stories, and coming in contact with others into the same things as you. If parents were fullfilling their responsibility in bringing a child into the world, the children would not be given a chance to access it. I just wish there were more women there As modem speeds increase and technology improves, I look for real-time video and audio exchange to be the safe sex of 2000 and beyond. I want more heavy stuff, easier to find The problems with sex on the internet is not any worse than in the real world. As with all net info, a usually valuable source of information OK Like it. Its adds a bit to my sex life. Safe, fun, outlet for one to persue sexual interests pretty coll, loss of inhabition, able to be whoever, whatever. ok Usefull! It's way over rated. Time/Warner should not have never run that "CyberPorn" scare-tactic story. It was a classic "yellow journalism" at its best. But I suppose, SEX sells, so give the people what they want as long as they are stupid enough to pay for it. Usefull! Internet should be open for everything, including sex and porno. I find the fact that the net provides a large open forum for everything EXCEPTIONAL. If any body gets the authority to censor sex related subjects then the next step is political censorship and the open forum and freedom to report on anything is DEAD. KE same as finding sex in bookstores, bars and clubs only safer and more private. I think that the media has made a "tempest in a teapot" out of it. It's a non-issue. The Internet is there for all to use--let them use it however they will. I think sex should be available on the net for people who want it! No better or worse than any other medium eg Mags. Too many commercials �Too much commercials Good, but pour. It educates me about Human Nature. Even the 'mee to!' posts. The More... The Better... Sex is healthy and fun... Simple fact finding.. basic questions.. curious I don�t like censorship... Hmmmmmmmmm..... :} Cybersex is a whole new dimension and it has come to stay. i think its good i mean if it weren't for the sex i wonldn't go on I think that sex on the net is rather interesting it's a way for ppl to share ideas and fantasies, or find sexual gratification in some ways, it's not *real* it's a creative outlet for many :) I think it's a good outlet. People can ask anonymous questions and not feel embarassed. A relatively healthy experience. Give's one a chance to explore areas of sex safely with many different inputs from other areas. why not Mostly harmless in my opinion, but I'm concerned when I see references to practices such as pedophilia. It's that aspect that will be the death of the net as we know it, as it's the only thing constantly referred to in the media. I enjoy viewing the pictures and reading messages (usenet) It has been a great way to exchange ideas with other people about sexuality and to help my wife and I find others like us who encourage us to feel sensual about ourselves. It's an excuse for right-wing political activists to sponser censorship that restricts the first amendment. I think people should be responsible for themselves, and if need be- for their children as well... If your children get into sexual material, don't blame the site that posted it.. It's great and anonym Hey, I'm not complaining! :) the real hard core stuff is usually hidden away and sometimes tricky to find... you just have to know where (and when) to look... also, I maintain an extremely large adult page that is currently getting around 6000 hits a day; Fascinating area on all sorts of levels The Ineternet will die were it not for sex what sex, I haven't found it yet Private, in homes as opposed to goining to a store I really like what I've found and it brings much pleasure! Overhyped and overrated. I find some good scans and it is good to relieve some sexual tension over the verbal chat system and mail. It is all in your mind how you construe what you see and how you interpret it! Love it escept for the hyped pages that entice you for money A keyword is sufficient to avoid children access. In my opinion my private behaviour is strictly mine and it does'nt be of political interest. It's confusing! It's out there, and it deserves to stay! I think sex has been one of the largest single subjects that has contributed to people's interest and attraction to the Internet. It is not the only big reason, but certainly one of them. I think this is perfectly fine. Sex on the net is not a problem for government but for individuals and parents. Over-regulation of the net (e.g. making providers responsible for content) could result in closing the net. This could happen because it is impossible to monitor activity while still permiting rapid transfer of information. Open interchange of information is a halmark of democracy It's a benign outlet for fantasies. I believe that a rating system should be created, and web browsers some sort of restriction mechanism. I see nothing wrong with it as long as it is kept to people over the age of 21 and that pornography containing children is banned. For those who want it or like it they should be able to find it. No governmental entity should be permitted to interfere. I love it and wish I could find more & experience more. Again, I say Freedom of Speech, Press and all that. Parents should be responsible for thier kids activities. No government involvment, NOT because I dont believe in the gov, but rather because they will screw it all up and go overboard. Its a great way to exchange media I believe that the over all level of sexual awarness is being raised cause of the openness of sex on the internet. anonymity lets people more honestly interact with others! Like reading a magazine. It has allowed me to fill sexual needs that I can't get now. The best system so far IMO is the rating system, where a parent can set a filter that kids can't get into certain sites that are rated past that filter. Oh Baby!!!!.....hehehe Where is it? Why not? It doesn't appear to hurt anyone. Censorship is a matter of personal opinion, parents should be responsible for their children. I am a mature adult and should be able to choose if I wish to see it. If you don't want it don't look for it!! Sex has been around for a long time... Tell me, what's 'The world's OLDEST profession?' Carpentry, right? Wrong. Sexual material will be wherever there are people who have sex. Wake up, my governmental-type people! It is the safest way to have sex. Even though you only masterbate with your partner... it is still safe.. Wish we could tell the real females from role playing guys It's the best part of the Internet There are a lot of sick people on the net... I think that one of the basic tenets of the Internet lies in the free exchange of information. Any censorship or regulation would greatly diminish the Internet concept as a whole. Just as with television viewing and reading material, concerned parents should monitor the behavior of their children if they are worried about the dangers of sexual content on the net. Rather than making the government responsible, these parents should be paying attention to their children's lives. I feel that parents/legal guardians are the beginning of 'moral' teaching of children and really should be the majority. It is not the responsibility of any government to raise children and decide what is best for the health of children. I think that I will try to be open and honest with my children about sex and will not prevent them or discourage them from engaging in non-health threatening acts, sexual or otherwise. I've never done it before. I find it ironic that the same polititions who believe us responsible enough to carry automatic weapons do not believe us responsible enough to monitor our children and/or turn off our computers if we are offended. I feel the internet should remain an uncensored medium and the passage of material, no matter what type, should be accepted. sex is fun. intnet link people together, providing a media It's been blown way out of proportion. It's no easier to find here than it is at the newstand. I wish it were the way the media makes it sound, I'd be having a blast all the time! seems rather silly. If that is what you look for, okay. Books and videos are certainly better for that sort of thing. Honestly, there is simply no substitute for the real thing. In truth, i would seek to make leasions with women where more real sexual encounters was a bona fide possibility. Like most males, what i want is more sex with new and attractive women. this usually happens through close encounters of a friendly kind. i am unmarried and sex with several women has been memorable, significant, inocent (!), and means of enjoying these new people in my life in a close and exciting way. i can't think of anything more unrelated or distant than "demeaning" or "degradation" to describe these intensely emotional and exciting moments. I think it's great to have access to certain material that you normally could not get in the real world. I like the Net, I like Sex. Better find Sex on the net than aggression. You left out "I married someone who I met on the Net" from! Great celebrete pics... I ENJOY IT parents are to irresponsible and/or ignorant to take responsibility for their children's actions - why should the rest of us pay? more info. as swing clubs in all cities and local ph. numbers No more available than other areas of society I considered it as entertainment Have always heard it was there...haven'y found that much yet but I am still new here. More, please. Great for the curious Makes you an open-minede more curious person. Its cool... Very Cool... I like it. It is a fairly benign outlet, for adults. Much of the material is inappropriate for children, but monitoring of children is a part I have, what i believe is an open access ro this material. I do though believe that there is some censorship. I want my c=access and believe it should be without 'big brother' mentality controls. One Word - Overrated girl wearing short skirt How would you deal with the issue of regulating sexual/offensive content? install some kind of access code open net, with posted warnings before explicit stuff Sexual content concerning children should be discouraged ignore the paranoid christians verify ages dont look at what you dont like! programs that filter for children, leaving it still there for adults Ban sites that violate the Criminal Code: ie, those relating to pedophilia and necrophilia require code access along with identification of person accessing site of sexually explicit material. Parental controled lock-out device or program Let them create Puritanet, and charge people who use it extra to avoid offensive stuff. the only time to connect is say past 1:00am to these sites since no one seems to mind on tv, maybe its time that there is some resposibilty taken on the internet to educate to greater extent on sexuality and issues pertaining to it Make parents do their job... should be regulated by parents some sort of offline sign up before connecting general education. People should understand that the stories they read are STORIES alone. This kind of education would also probably reduce the demand for porn. to begin with. (ie people who read the internet porn and then get excited and rape or become corrupted would not get off on this stuff if they had some moral education like the type that would also teach them the difference between fantasy and reality.) Since this type of moral education would be difficult to enforce in a free society, we hve to just concentrate on teaching the difference between fantasy and reality. For the record, I explore internet porn as an intellectual curiosity in the depths of human depravity, and to help to come to terms with my own depraved instincts, which I wish to get rid of. Create better security measures to block pages to children the net should be open for non-violent individual pleasures Make censoring avaliable ona personal basis Internet should be everythin', nothin' censured. If parents don't want there kids to have access to the "Obscene" Net, then they should censor or terminate the childs account parental censorship Service Providers should require a password for adult access. proper parenting Shouldn't people judge for themselves? let the individual develope scruples Let parents control both their children and their computers hey gov dudes! leave the Net Alone! Adults can shoose where to go and parents should regulate their chlidrens' activities on the net and elsewhere! Develop electronic, partentally controlled, lockouts Produce software to allow for parental lockout of unappropriate material. No censorship! allow parents to have the option of locking out certain areas so that kids can't get into them. Otherwise leave the net completely open. If an adult doesn't want to look at sexual content, he/she has the option of not doing so. free sex for all and adult Software controlled by caregivers Have to be 18 to get your own account. Keep the Kids away from adult stuff shoot the moral minority Parents should actually 'parent' thier children Parents should have a lock on their internet access from children, after all, you have to have a password to get on the provider. and most people i know didnt get access until univ. let parents start taking responsibility for their kids fUCK EM, IF THEY CAN'T HANDLE IT!! I think most people can judge for themselves Those people who are offended just shouldnt look. have software that parents can buy to block content in cooperation with the web sites using the same standard Rating system, plus restricted pathway to gain access to X-rated areas. The sites of erotic materials should have restriction acces systems there should be limits, as in any media-access medium, to what children are allowed and able to view. Providers allow logins with newsgroup restictions for the under-age or those who don't want to see certain things. Parents should be responsible for minor's access Self-regulating body with ratings for sites Avoidence if it bothers you. If it offends,DON'T PARTICIPATE !!! add passwords to certain parts of the "sexual net" individual personal are the only acceptable and "sure" method of regulation If someone objects, they dont have to look!!! The internet-community should enable the internet-user to apply a software blockade in order to prevent their children to acces pornographic material User Pays They have a law already 18 and over Net should be open; could rate sites like movies Shut down internet completely Let people talk freely, that is BEST. more sex! It should be the user's responsbility to avoid sites they dislike Regulate Access to the Internet, but keep the Net completely free Estalblish a software lock-out capability so the net stays completely open, but parents can block what they don't want their kids to see. Let parents be responsible for teaching thier children. The goverment has no place pushing morality on people. If parents did thier job then this wouldn't even be an issue. castration if sex taxes are not paid to the Emperor let the software co.come up with somethng to keep kids out of the adult areas Fuck the conservatives Make the parents responsible for monitoring what their child does. Teach parents to monitor their OWN children! Self-imposed (18+) or parentally imposed (18-) censorship (Don't show me/my children anything containing any of these combinations of letters: "sex" or "gay" or "erotic" etc... Let those who desire the outlet have it. design parental guidence software I think people that want to control others behavior should get a real life. Accounts only for Adults, for their management Influential groups offended they need back out of the site & NOT go forward. But the influential groups & (GOD) knows that they go forward & check out the sites. SO WHO DO THEY THINK THEY ARE!!!! PS.___God get over the idea that sex is bad Use laws already in place. Let contributors be responsible for screening who gets it. fuck censorship, open the net entirely!~ fucking is for me!! it should be up to each individual's preference. If it didn't sell or noone read it it wouldn't stay on line Let parents deal with moral issues, as is their responsibility. Sex crimes should not be admitted (pedophilia...) Limit access for children Password for children Let the Net be open, except for childsex Let the parents decide Its a partents JOB to monitor childs exposure to material online Allow local service providers to determine content; allow customers to choose service providers. Kill the bigots, keep the net free for us who REALLY belong there Individual Freedom is Paramount - The Net should be free! The Net is self censoring - It is up to the end user to choose Establish some sort of anon style registration service requiring the registree to certify age, but not really in favor of any restriction at all secure those systems with a password secure those systems with a password As most individuals/groups who complain about the net and protecting children from "evil-sex" I say "take charge of your computer and exercise your parental responsibility to watch, monitor and control minor's use of computers - not just for the net but also for server chat areas etc. If you give up your responsibility to government and/or others, don't complain about outside interference in your lives and your rights. if your are offended by this sort of thing don't look open eccept for criminal offenses (child-P.etc) Remain open and regulated by the people of the net. It is up to the individual. Let parents govern their own children!!!! each site makes its own rules Open, but with mandatory warnings to parents. There should be some multinational 'laws' conserning mostly childporn which should be totally prohibited. By the way neither i or any of my friends have ever seen those awful photos ! It is up to the parents to watch over their kids use and exposure of the internet. As for adults: If you don't like it, don't get involved with it, look at it, read it and etc. It is like a bad TV show, if you don't like it then dont watch it!!! censorship should be parental Parents should supervise their kids. Otherwise it should be completely open. Parents schould monitor under age Levels of access restricted by provider at customer's request Give parents means to limit child's access Require proof of age of some sort. Parents should parent their children -- ease them into the world. Growing up is growing up, you will constantly be challenged (to grow) by things that you haven't been exposed to before. Slowly adjust to the real world. Your mom is not a virgin, neither is the mother of YOUR children. Sex happesn. If you're lucky, you'll enjoy it. develop software to block access for families Block sex sites from minors. Restrictions for computer of children against porn let folks who care choose a monitored service, but don't kill unmoderated services Software that restricts access (with rating system) like Surfwatch or whatever it's called Password Services Lock them in a rubber room The net should be open but a rating/pass code would be OK Rating system for sites; providers register your age and open up questionable sites if over 18 Allow providers to restrict access by age/request The net treats censorship as a fualt and routes around it Educate parents on what kids can access on the net It isn't a case of "The net *should* be open"; it IS and always will be no matter what silly laws are put in place. Fuck off let parents/others be responsable for selves Open - Parents take care of children Use a software that controls what minors see If you can't buy it at your local adult book story - it should not be on the net. (ie kiddie porn, beastiality, shit eating, you get the idea... Provide means for people who wish to limit different types of content on the web (could be sexual, political, etc). The problem would be both the desirable and undesirable definition of the net (ie, it is open and exciting but unorganized and confusing to use). fuck em' all, who cares what they say! Shut down sick material like child and animal sex Allow parents to "lock-out" sites (ie the V-chip for televisions). Proof of Age required Subscriber should have the ability to lock-out areas Return to theHome Page. Copyright ©1996, /InterCommerceCorporation, All rights reserved worldwide Send comments to Webmaster@Survey.net