WT02-B28-1IA007-000076-B034-13http://www.euthanasia.org:80/96-3boat.html 194.88.132.128 19970222055510 text/html 9587HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 22 Feb 1997 06:03:19 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/html [VESS Homepage][Subscriptions][A to Z][Books][Feedback & Questions][Email vess@euthanasia.org][FastAccess] [Back to VESS Newsletter Page] The Liberty Boat Nathan Kripz Nathan Kripz is a freelance journalist working in Ireland. He is especially concerned with religious issues and current affairs. Though I am from a Jewish background, my late father's experiences as a naval commander during the war persuaded him that if there was a great fairy in the sky he, she or it was a damned fool. He therefore became a born again evangelical atheist and raised me as a secular Jew, i.e. one who though made aware of his ethnic origins and identity was not smothered in religious gobbledegook. Accordingly, I grew up without the hindrance of undue pressure to accept irrational mythological philosophies and was therefore in a position from a fairly early age, as soon in fact as I became aware of wider social and moral issues, to appraise the respective arguments for myself without any preconceptions to cloud my judgement and colour my conclusions. Consequently, while still in my teens, I had formulated a rational personal philosophy about many matters, among them issues relating to death and dying. It seemed to me that if the consensus in society was that it was humane and appropriate to put a seriously injured or terminally ill dog painlessly out of its misery, them there could not possibly be any objection to applying the same principle to a human animal. The vast difference of course is that whereas the dog would have the decision taken for it as it would be capable neither of considering the implication of such a decision nor voicing an opinion, the human animal, being possessed of reason, intellect and communication skills, would ideally prefer to be personally involved in any such decision, particularly as there might always be the possibility that any one making such a decision for another person might not always be giving selfless consideration to the genuine needs of that individual. My father died almost twenty years ago and for the last three years of his life he existed in mental anguish. The ravages of Alzheimer's disease reduced this once strong and dignified character to a pathetic shell. His memory became so erratic that if he managed to leave the house unaccompanied he could never find his way back. Frequently he failed to recognize me and spent hours looking for Rusty, his long dead cocker spaniel. He was always very helpful about the house and usually assisted Mum by preparing the vegetables for the evening meal. However his sense of time disappeared and one night we found him downstairs around 3.00AM peeling potatoes. As if that was not bad enough, the sink was full of blood where he was quite obviously peeling as much skin off his fingers as off the potatoes. During another night I nearly flattened him. My wife and I were lying in bed sound asleep when we both awoke with a start and realised there was a prowler in the bedroom. I jumped out of bed and was just about to administer a general anaesthetic with my fist when a feeble little voice said "It's only me - I'm taking the watch tonight". Dad was back in the Navy and we started sleeping with the door locked. I am a musician and used to spend a great deal of time at home, especially in the mornings, practising, arranging scores and meeting pupils or other musicians. Dad would come into my studio when I was working to ask me to fasten his shoes or to put a knot in his tie. He would then sit on, rendering work virtually impossible. He kindly produced a cup of tea on one occasion. Unfortunately he neglected to first boil the water. One day I had to go into town to pick up some music. On returning shortly after 11.00 AM I was greeted with a rather pungent odour. Facing me on the stairs was a trail of excrement culminating in a pair of none too wholesome trousers on the landing outside the bathroom. The lavatory and walls were plastered with the stuff and dear old Dad was nowhere to be seen. I went downstairs and found him in the kitchen attempting to wash his underpants in the sink which was clogged and overflowing. "Oh, hello Son - I've had a little accident", with a smile. I wept. That was the last straw. I rang our GP and arranged for Dad to go into hospital. Two days later he was admitted to a geriatric unit where he was to remain until he died about eighteen months later. While he was in hospital he suffered a series of minor strokes. We were summoned by staff with such frequency that we began to think he would never die. After three nocturnal calls in as many weeks we told the staff that in future if we received a call during the night we would not come out until the morning. It was following such a call that he eventually died, just under an hour before we arrived at the hospital. On the many frequent occasions when we visited him we frequently thought that if ever there was an undeniable argument in favour of euthanasia, or assisted suicide, this was it. Sometimes he was lying in bed weak, helpless and uncomprehending. At other times he was conscious and moving about, but clearly confused and frankly, not my Dad. But worst of all were the few occasions on which we briefly got a glimpse of the man he once was. One such occurrence took place on Christmas Day, the year before he died. I offered to play the organ in the hospital chapel for their carol service and afterwards I visited Dad in his villa. He looked straight at me and said "Son, I hate this place. I wish I was dead." Our eyes filled up and we both began to sob. Long after Dad's death I used to ponder the question "What if the doctors caring for my father had been able to assist him to die with dignity?" I found this question often led to other questions, such as "What if his doctors had suggested to me that it might be timely to end Dad's suffering?", or "What if I had found the courage to assist him to commit suicide?" But, another question which I found a little frightening was "Do I want Dad to be released from his suffering or from mine?" You see, some times there is a danger of looking at some one you love, who is slowly dying and in great distress, and to feel such personal pain at their condition that you want them to die because you just cannot bear another minute of it. This unfortunately is only a small step away from desiring some one's death because they have become objectionable or a nuisance to look after, or costly to maintain and perhaps eating into possible legacies. It is to protect against this extra step and to minimise the possibility of any one being coerced either actively or inactively into agreeing to euthanasia that any possible legislation must be very carefully worded. Not only should the right to die in dignity be recognized and upheld by law, but the individual consciences of those persons who may be called upon to assist in acts of euthanasia, either by authorising, supplying, prescribing or procuring the means, advising on methodology, counselling or administering, must be honoured and protected. We must also recognize that for some people dying in dignity may mean seeing it through to the end. Their consciences too must be honoured and protected, and if that means providing hospices and extreme medical care then that is as it must be. Those of us who believe that we have a right to determine when our own lives are no longer worth living due to unbearable physical or mental suffering, have a right to do so, but if we are to be taken seriously and not to be labelled as dangerous cranks we must rely upon the voice of gentle persuasion and afford alternative viewpoints the same respect we seek. Once when I was visiting Dad he said "Hello Nathan, I haven't seen you for a while" (I visited him twice a week); "I'm just waiting for the liberty boat". That was the name given to the boat which took officers and crew from ship to shore and leave. I do not know if he really recognized me as his second officer, after whom I was named, was also called Nathan, but I thought "Dad, I hope your liberty boat comes in soon". It did, about three years too late. © 1996 Nathan Kripz You are the 26th person to browse through here since 5 July 1996 using the above URL WT02-B28-2IA007-000076-B034-46http://www.euthanasia.org:80/apr96.html 194.88.132.128 19970222055522 text/html 3183HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 22 Feb 1997 06:03:30 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/html VESS Newsletter Oct 1995 Contents Newsletter VESS Newsletter April 1996 Contents America Gives Green Light to Assisted Suicide - Cheryl K Smith What's Happening Know Your Rights - Paying to See Your Medical Records Quote/Unquote End of Life Decisions - Joanne Lynn The Face of Death - Halla Beloff VESS on the "Superhighway" The 1966 AGM A Living Will In Action - The Story of Albert Goodheir Dying and Living - Clare Penny Interview Outreach - the News from around the World Janet Johnstone - A Woman Not Yet Dying How Should We Decide? - Sheila McLean Five Commandments - John Beloff on Peter Singer's new book Don't Kill the Piano Player - Chris Docker Advance Directives/Living Wills - New Patients' Guide You are the 58th person to browse through here since 5 Feb 1996 using the above URL WT02-B28-3IA007-000076-B034-76http://www.euthanasia.org:80/cks9th.html 194.88.132.128 19970222055534 text/html 24184HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 22 Feb 1997 06:03:41 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/html America gives green light to assisted suicide Newsletter America gives green light to assisted suicide Cheryl K. Smith Cheryl K Smith is Legal Services Director, Oregon Rehabilitation Association and was a primary drafter of the Oregon Death With Dignity Act. She has written extensively on death and dying and has been an Honorary Research Associate to VESS since working as Interim Director and Staff Attorney for Hemlock. Here she examines the historic U.S. Judgement that has rocked the movement around the world. How did it reach its conclusions? Delighting right to die advocates and shocking opponents, on 7 March 1996, the 9th Circuit Federal Court ruled 8-3 that Washington state's law which prohibits "aiding" in suicide violates the US Constitution. This was the first ruling by a federal appeals court in support of physician-assisted suicide. It opens the door for doctors to begin responding to requests from dying patients to help end their suffering. It also may accelerate removal of the injunction that has held up the implementation of Oregon's Death with Dignity Act for the past year and a half. Although technically confined to the nine states within the 9th Circuit's jurisdiction, the detailed analysis of the arguments at such a high level is sure to reverberate in courts around the world. Judge Stephen Reinhardt noted in the ruling that the decision applies only to "the prescription of life-ending medication for use by terminally ill, competent adult patients who wish to hasten their deaths." The opinion did not reach the issue of whether physicians may administer such drugs. Despite that, anti-euthanasia campaigners immediately began painting pictures of the involuntary euthanasia of innocents they claim will occur if we allow dying people to "determine the time and manner" of their death. US District Judge Barbara Rothstein, in 1994, had previously ruled the Washington law unconstitutional, but a three-judge panel of the appeals court had overrruled that decision a year ago in a 2-1 decision. In an unusual turn of events, a majority of the entire appeals court then voted to refer the case to the 11-judge panel for a rehearing, and this ultimately generated the affirmation of Judge Rothstein's original decision. The well-reasoned and comprehensive majority opinion ( Compassion in Dying v. State of Washington, No. 94-35534), is morethan 100 pages in length. While the decision is significant in itself and is expected to be widely cited throughout the United States, it applies directly only to those states and territories in the 9th Circuit - Alaska, Arizona, California, Hawaii, Idaho, Montana, Nevada, Oregon, Washington, Guam and the Northern Marianas. As a result the decision had no effect on the concurrent trial of Dr. Kevorkian.(1) In arriving at its holding, the court first had to determine whether a liberty interest in choosing the time and manner of one's death exists, and then to balance that against any state interests. It relied heavily on previous abortion cases to make out a liberty interest, in particular Planned Parenthood v. Casey.(2) Casey characterized the type of liberty interest protected by the Fourteenth Amendment as a matter "involving the most intimate and personal choices a person may make in a lifetime," a choice that is "central to personal dignity and autonomy".(3) This writer believes that to be a very apt description of the right to choose to end one's life when suffering a terminal illness. Finding a liberty interest Here we need to examine the technical methods which the court used to navigate through the ethical and legal minefields. In order to determine whether a liberty interest exists, the court relied on a "substantive due process test", first used in Griswold v. Connecticut, 381 U.S. 479 (1965), a famous contraceptives case.(4) Under such an analysis, interests are seen on a continuum, where "the more important a right or interest, the more persuasive the justifications for infringement" must be. This is in contrast to what may be referred to as a multi-tiered scrutiny approach, in which interests are first determined to be "fundamental" or "nonfundamental" and then the standard for review is applied. If a right is considered fundamental, the level of review - called "strict scrutiny" - requires that an overriding state interest be "compelling" and "necessary" to achieve the end. In other cases only a rational relationship between the statute and legitimate state interest is required to find the statute constitutional.(5) The court noted, however, that whether the substantive due process test or the multi-tiered approach is used, the interest in this case clearly rises beyond the level at which the lesser rational basis review is appropriate. The court goes on to note that previous failure to recognize the existence of a certain liberty interest, or even previous prohibition of its exercise, does not preempt recognitionof its existence. They cite laws previously overturned, including those against interracial marriage and abortion. This parallels the situation with laws against assisted suicide, which currently exist in over half of the states. Clearly, acceptance or prohibition of practices in the past alone is not enough to preempt recognition of a liberty interest relating to those practices in the present. As part of the inquiry regarding whether the right to assisted suicide is an important liberty interest, the court provides an extensive review of the history of suicide and how it was viewed in various cultures. Rather than being totally prohibited throughout history, suicide has been considered acceptable, if not honorable, at times. Even when disapproved of, exceptions existed. The most notable exception appears over and over throughout this review - in cases where an individual is suffering from illness. Even while it may have been considered wrong, or resulting from a mental disorder, in most states neither suicide nor attempted suicide has been criminalized since the turn of the century; and no state currently prohibits either by means of statute. After discussing recent polls that indicate societal approval of suicide or assisted suicide in cases of terminal illness, and comparing the refusal of treatment to assisted suicide, the majority moves its analysis to prior relevant court decisions which were decided between 1925 and the present. All these cases involved "decisions that are highly personal and intimate, as well of great importance to the individual", and the court correctly noted that "few decisions are more personal, intimate or important than the decision to end one's life, especially when the reason for doing so is to avoid excessive and protracted pain." They rest their conclusion that "a liberty interest in controlling the time and manner of one's death is a protected by the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment", citing two major cases - Planned Parenthood v. Casey, 112 S. Ct. 2791 (1992) and Cruzan v. Director, Missouri Dept. Of Health, 497 U.S. 261 (1990) (this latter was the historic case that lead to the introduction of living will legislation and concerned a woman in persistent vegetative state after a car crash). The language of Casey, which reasserted the liberty interest of women in obtaining an abortion, is most persuasive in making the case that such decisions are protected by the Due Process Clause: "These matters, involving the intimate and personal choices a person may make in a lifetime, choices central to personal dignity and autonomy, are central to the liberty protected by the Fourteenth Amendment. At the heartof liberty is the right to define one's own concept of existence, of meaning, of the universe, and of the mystery of human life. Beliefs about these matters could not define the attributes of personhood were they formed under compulsion of the State." Although that case was referring to abortion, the language could have easily have been about the right to choose to die. In fact, an arguably stronger case exists in this context, because only the individual whose life it is, not a fetus, is implicated in the decision. Further supporting the court's contention that such decisions are protected was the Nancy Cruzan case, which dealt with the refusal of unwanted medical treatment. The court concluded that "Cruzan, by recognizing a liberty interest that includes the refusal of artificial provision of life-sustaining food and water, necessarily recognizes a liberty interest in hastening one's own death." Because the intent in both cases is death, with the only difference being that one patient is being maintained by artificial life support and the other not, it logically follows that both would be encompassed by such a liberty interest. Balancing interests The court goes on to identify six state interests that must be balanced against an individual's liberty interest in controlling the time and manner of his or her death. These include: A general interest in preserving life An interest in preventing suicide An interest in avoiding the involvement of third parties and in precluding the use of arbitrary, unfair, or undue influence An interest in protecting family members and loved ones An interest in protecting the integrity of the medical profession An interest in avoiding adverse consequences that might ensue if the statutory provision at issue is declared unconstitutional.I will touch on the court's response to some of these issues below. Preserving life According to the majority, the state's general interest in preserving life is not always the most important factor, and may vary in strength according to the particular case. The individual's medical condition and his or her wishes are particularly important. The court harkened back to the "living will" statute, which determined that the state's interest in preserving life should give way to the wishes of a competent, terminally ill adult who refuses medical treatment. As they so aptly put it, "When patients are no longer able to pursue liberty or happiness and do not wish to pursue life, the state's interest in forcing them to remain alive is clearly less compelling." They did not, however, rule out the imposition of safeguards on decision making. Preventing suicide In justifying its statute, the state of Washington relied primarily on the argument that its interest in preventing suicide outweighs the interest of a competent, terminally ill individual to commit suicide. The court found this interest a relatively easy obstacle to overcome, by reasoning that "not only is the state's interest in preventing such individuals from hastening their deaths of comparatively little weight, but its insistence on frustrating their wishes seems cruel indeed." In analyzing the issue of whether physicians should be allowed to assist patients, the court carefully elaborated on the evolving ethical and legal line-drawing that has taken place over the years, and concluded that just as "ordinary" versus "extraordinary" treatment are not valid distinctions, neither is the distinction between "double effect" and physician assisted suicide. In a similar vein, they reasoned (disingenuously perhaps) that just as termination of tube feeding is not to be considered "suicide", neither should "terminally ill patients taking medication prescribed by their doctors" be so labelled.(6) They also gave credence to the phenomenon well-known to those of us in the right to die movement of dying individuals choosing not to end their lives when they are secure in the knowledge that they have the means to do so if desired. Avoiding involvement of 3rd parties and undue influence In discussing these two areas of concern, the court focused mainly on i)the various slippery slope arguments that the dissenting judges found so enticing, ii)the argument that we must first have universal health care, and iii)the claim that physicians will become hardened to death, rejecting them all. Protecting Families The court rightly noted that "witnessing a loved one suffer a slow and agonizing death as a result of state compulsion is more likely to harm than further the interests of innocent third parties." Although not mentioned, I would add that knowing your dying loved one is planning to end his or her life with a doctor's assistance is also likely to be much lessshocking and painful than finding the results of a failed or violent suicide. Protecting the integrity of the medical profession The court concluded that the integrity of the medical profession is not at risk with lawful physician-assisted suicide for the terminally ill. They noted that the current situation criminalizes attending to the needs of patients and so creates conflict with professionalism, or making criminals of compassionate doctors whom we know are now helping their patients. Recognizing the right to assisted-suicide would not mandate that doctors do anything contrary to their ethics either, according to the court. Balancing In balancing these interests against the liberty interest, the court first considered the strength of the liberty interest in this case. They found that "when a mentally competent adult is terminally ill, and wishes, free of any coercion, to hasten his death because his remaining days are an unmitigated torture, that person's liberty interest is at its height." Conversely, the court found that the state interests were "for the most part at a low point" in this case. They also noted that the interests in preventing assisted suicide were "different only in degree and not in kind from its interests in prohibiting a number of other medical practices that lead directly to a terminally ill patient's death." In applying the balancing test, the judges were convinced, in part, by "specific testimony involving individual patients" (see sidebar), as well as various publicized accounts of individuals who were unable to obtain a doctor's assistance, that the statute was unconstitutionally burdensome. A state may make reasonable regulations to promote the state interests but not make a blanket prohibition. While not prescribing specific regulations that would pass scrutiny under the Constitution, the majority did refer to the Oregon Death with Dignity Act and other model acts, as well as mentioning a number of procedural safeguards that might be appropriate. These include witnessing, a waiting period, second medical opinion, psychological examinations, and reporting requirements to prevent abuse. Finally, the court considered the decision in the case of Lee v. State of Oregon, 891 F.Supp. 11429 (D. Or. 1995), which held the Oregon Death with Dignity Act to be unconstitutional. They felt that the reasoning of Judge Hogan was incorrect, noting that it was antithetical to their own reasoning. Specifically, they stated: "The Oregon District Court's reasoning conflicts squarely with the reasoning of this opinion and the legal conclusions we have reached. Here, we determine that a statute that prohibits doctors from aiding terminally ill persons to hasten their deaths by providing them with prescription medications unconstitutionally burdens the liberty interests of the terminally ill. The benefit we conclude the terminally ill are entitled to receive in this case--the right to physician-assisted suicide--is precisely what Judge Hogan determined to be a burden and thus unlawful. In short, Lee treats a burden as a benefit and a benefit as a burden. In doing so, Judge Hogan clearly erred. Lee not only does not aid us in reaching our decision, it is directly contrary to our holding." Dissents and other problems In addition to procedural issues, which I will not discuss here, the three dissenting judges in the case gave a variety of reasons why the Washington state law should not be considered unconstitutional. These include usurpation of the rights of states to regulate the practice of medicine, a version of the slippery slope argument, a claim that the public disapproves of suicide as evidenced by current laws, and most worrisome, that no fundamental right is implicated, and the abortion cases cited by the majority to justify its use of substantive due process analysis actually reflected the Supreme Court's attempt to abide by previous decisions. At least one commentator has expresssed concern over the court's use of the substantive due process standard in this case, because it is vague, appears to be based on the values of the judges that made the decision, and is related to an historical abuse of judicial power.(7) While such fears may be valid, another equally valid concern is that if the decision is appealed, the Supreme Court will characterize the right at issue here in such a way as to deem it not fundamental. In fact, in his dissent Judge Beezer suggests that inquiry in this case should be whether we have a "fundamental right to commit physician-assisted suicide" rather than the right to control the time and manner of one's death identified by the majority. He also mentions a notoriously wrong-headed opinion by a severely divided Supreme Court in 1986, Bowers v. Hardwick, 478 U.S. 186, as a basis for his conclusions.8 In that case, the court indicated a reluctance to expand the rights that are considered fundamental. In order to be recognized as fundamental, an interest would have to be essential to ordered liberty and be "deeply rooted in history and tradition." Clearly, physician assisted suicide for people with terminal illness would fail the latter test, just as the right to abortion would have failed had the same requirements been applied when Roe v. Wade (the abortion case at the root of current American law on termination) was decided. Where are we now? We undoubtedly have not heard the end of the debate on the law of physician-assisted suicide in the United States, despite this historic ruling. A similar appeal of a negative ruling has been made to the 2nd Circuit District Court in New York and on a similar statute. If that Circuit's ruling conflicts with this one, we can expect the U.S. Supreme Court to settle the issue. In addition, if the Washington Attorney General decides to appeal this case to the Supreme Court, we could potentially see a temporary injunction against physician-assisted suicide as well as a different ruling. As to Oregon's Death with Dignity Act, it has been sent back to Judge Hogan by the 9th Circuit for a rehearing. It, too, may end up with the U.S. Supreme Court. Two of the nine states covered by the 9th Circuit Court, Nevada and Idaho, have no law against assisted suicide on the books; all the others do. Only one of the states - Oregon - has a statute that regulates physician-assisted suicide for the terminally ill, and it is enjoined from implementation. Both right to die advocates and opponents now have an opportunity, and even a sense of urgency, to work together to assure that physician-assisted suicide legislation with reasonable regulations and adequate safeguards is passed. References 1. Kevorkian's recent acquittal of assisting in the suicides of two people was determined by a jury, rather than a judge, who most likely had no knowledge of the specifics of the 9th circuit decision. Their decision hinged on the fact that the current law in Michigan is confusing, and citizens of that state see Kevorkian as a hero, not a criminal. (The technical term for acquitting a person who is otherwise guilty of a crime is jury nullification.) 2. 112 S.Ct. 2791(1992). 3. Id at 2807. 4. The court noted that recent cases suggest that "the Court may be heading towards the formal adoption of the continuum approach, along with a balancing test, in substantive due process cases generally." 5. The practical effect of rational review is that virtually any statute will be found constitutional; any state interest will justify the statute. Conversely, characterization of a right as "fundamental" tips the scales in the other direction. 6. This argument is clearly specious, considering the literal meaning of the word "suicide"--the intentional ending of one's own life. If the intent and the act are present it is suicide, albeit rational suicide, regardless of what we choose to call it and regardless of our discomfort with the implications. 7. Prof Charles Baron, private communication, by email.8. In a 5-4 decision, the court found that there was no "fundamental right to engage in homosexual sodomy." Dissenters in that case noted that the right under consideration was actually a "right to be let alone." They believed that neither the fact that religious groups were opposed to the practice nor the fact that laws against it had been in place for a long time were adequate grounds to allow a state to ban it. ADDENDA: The Attorney-General of Washington State lodged an appeal to the US Supreme Court on 25th March against the March 6, l996, decision of the 9th Circuit Appeal Court that the Washington state law forbidding physician-assisted suicide for the terminally ill is unconstitional. (Whether the Supreme Court chooses to take the case remains to be seen, but given its controversial nature it is most likely to.) Judge Michael Hogan has denied the motion to immediately dismiss his injunction blocking Measure 16 (The Oregon Death With Dignity Act, permitting physician-assisted suicide, approved by voters in l994). Instead he has scheduled a full hearing for April 24 to hear arguments for and against dismissal of the injunction in the Eugene Federal District Court. (The 9th Circuit said on March 6 that his ruling was wrong in law.) © 1996 Chris Docker You are the 1837th person to browse through here since 26th May 1996 using the above URL WT02-B28-4IA007-000076-B034-107http://www.euthanasia.org:80/goodheir.html 194.88.132.128 19970222055546 text/html 6874HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 22 Feb 1997 06:03:56 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/html The story of Albert Goodheir Newsletter The story of Albert Goodheir Mounting evidence suggests that living wills only work when part of a communication process. Relying on the document alone is not enough. Taken into hospital on Christmas Day, the husband of one of this country's greatest living will campaigners, died two days later. We are privileged to tell his story. Albert Goodheir, former minister, Esperanto expert and author, died at age 83 "in accordance with his living will." The phrase was picked up by newspapers around the country. To his devoted wife Phyllis, the moment was wonderful, even though doctors had pleaded to give him surgery: "I told the doctors, `I want to let him go.' I repeated it a second time, `Let him go.' He didn't suffer and I didn't suffer because we knew that was what he wanted. It was wonderful because he died in peace. His death was a joyous occasion." "As his quality of life disappeared, he was sustained by a deep belief in the emptiness of all things of the world, compared with the eternal - those things which endure despite all, a sentiment that often appears in his poetry... Albert was born at Utrecht in the Netherlands in 1912, and obtained a Ph.D in history at the University. During the war he suffered greatly under the Nazi occupation, suffering near-starvation and witnessing horrors that were to have a profound effect on his later life and outlook. He was very sure of what he believed, yet it was more an inner sense than a great sprouting of words. Following the war, he took a degree in philosophy and trained to become a minister, afterwards working for lowly pay in small parishes. Reading the living will and seeing his handwriting was like him talking to me... Later he became a Quaker and author, often inscribing his thoughts on toilet paper as he worked as an orderly in a mental hospital. His published works include much poetry and a book on the Dutch philosopher Spinoza, which he wrote in Esperanto. He met his second wife, Phyllis, whom he married in 1970, through his interest in Esperanto. Settling in Coatbridge, he became Secretary of the Glasgow Esperanto Society for 20 years, and published a journal, Esperanto in Scotland, which was circulated internationally. He became a life member of VESS in 1984. In February 1995, Albert suffered a stroke and his health gradually declined. His sight became too poor to study seriously, he could no longer enjoy hill walking or gardening, attend musical concerts or visit his family (five children, 11 grandchildren, two great-grandchildren and three step-children). As his quality of life disappeared, he was sustained by a deep belief in the emptiness of all things of the world, compared with the eternal - those things which endure despite all, a sentiment that often appears in his poetry and shared by his wife Phyllis, also a Quaker. Phyllis has distributed more than 8,000 living wills in the last eight years. Their motto was "Enjoy life, die in peace." Yet, when Albert was hospitalised and in severe pain from a twisted colon, the piece of paper alone was not enough to see that his wishes were respected. Again and again, the doctors remonstrated with Phyllis to allow them to perfom surgery, saying that if they weren't successful they would just "stitch him up again." She had to be quite forceful with them before they finally agreed to respect his living will, which he had updated only six days earlier. "Reading the living will and seeing his handwriting was like him talking to me." The document was on the front of Albert's notes at Monklands Hospital in Lanarkshire. It was the key that provided convincing evidence of his wishes. All Phyllis had to do was to communicate it effectively, but it took a lot of perseverance before the doctors finally listened to her. When she repeated that Albert was not to have the proposed operation, in front of witnesses, the doctors finally felt they had no choice, and allowed Albert to die in peace. Notes: In the UK, a relative has no legal authority to make treatment decisions for an incompetent adult, but it is not uncommon for hospitals to act as if this was not the case. A validly executed living will has legal force if it applies exactly to the circumstances, but often medical scenarios are not sufficiently clear cut. The whole effectiveness of the living will, in practice, relies on communication, not on laws or on the piece of paper itself. Close communication between the doctor and patient, while competent, with the strong active support of relatives when the patient becomes incompetent, are the most reliable options. A living will or values history is a valuable, perhaps even critical, part of this communication process. - Ed © 1996 Chris Docker You are the 45th person to browse through here since 26th May 1996 using the above URL WT02-B28-5IA007-000076-B034-137http://www.euthanasia.org:80/clare.html 194.88.132.128 19970222055558 text/html 6700HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 22 Feb 1997 06:04:05 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/html Interview with Clare Penny Newsletter Opening the safety net Interview with Clare Penny In many countries - New Zealand, Australia, Canada - AIDS support organisations work hand in hand with right to die societies (who, in turn, have learnt not to be HIV-phobic!). Not so in Britain. The needs and demands of people living with the HIV virus include trying to choose the time of one's own death. Conservative to the core, such needs are ignored by the politically correct organisations set up with government money to "help" people with AIDS. There is this myth that people don't die in pain... So it came as a pleasant surprise when a reporter from Positive Times rang the VESS Office. Unlike many mainstream groups, the people behind Positive Times get no government funding: the only source of income is from advertising in the paper itself. Clare Penny, the editor, spoke not of patients she had known but of friends. Her involvement is grass-roots; her commitment is tangible. She can be in her office from ten in the morning till the following midnight. She believes in getting results that make a difference, and the paper is notable for its head-on approach to tackling difficult issues with candour and a zest for living. "There is this myth that people don't die in pain. My stepmother died of cancer - very painfully. I was close to her and nursed her through, but it made a deep impression on me. But with AIDS there is more capacity to die in pain - there are so many diseases that a person with AIDS might succumb to. I've seen a person where the bones were actually pushing through the skin." Positive Times ran a general article on euthanasia and followed it swiftly in the next issue with a second one, Dying to Live, which focussed more acutely on suicide and the work of VESS. It featured a picture from the Pepsi advert and a caption: Life to the max: a right which should not be exclusive to Pepsi-drinkers and skydivers. The article explained that the option of suicide can serve as a safety net to those living with the virus, that planning your exit had more to do with living than with dying. "I know several people who have attempted suicide with paracetamol," said Clare. "One friend took 60 and survived." Paracetamol is not only very unreliable, but often causes terrible internal damage. Clare was full of praise for the work of VESS with Departing Drugs. "There is a great reassurance in knowing how to commit suicide. Often, of course, when the time comes, the person is physically incapable, and so friends make suicide pacts. They talk in the pub about assisting suicides, but they worry over the legalities." Without a change in the law, everything has to be very secret. No safeguards, dignity lessened, and the danger of failure through inadequate knowledge and backup and/or prosecution if caught. "The law failed Dr Cox big time. People like that shouldn't be prosecuted!" Many "voluntary" organisations are plagued by power struggles for key positions. Not so Positive Times and its companion The Pink Paper. Clare is about to step down as Editor and carry on as a medical science / health correspondent. Some people find that planning their suicide as a contingency plan can actually be a very life-enhancing experience, even if most people who consider it don't actually carry it out. Why? "Because I feel strongly that the editor should be an HIV positive man - after all, that's what Positive Times is about." Nice one, Clare! We salute your integrity. Hopefully AIDS/HIV support groups and right-to-die societies will learn how to learn from each other more as the campaign continues. The testimony of a man suffering from AIDS was instrumental in the recent Ninth Circuit decision (see cover story), and in Australia, where the first ever law on euthanasia seems set to come into force this year, AIDS support groups lobbied parliament and referred members to VESS to obtain drugs information. Some people find that planning their suicide as a contingency plan can actually be a very life-enhancing experience, even if most people who consider it don't actually carry it out. In the words of Positive Times: "Somebody once said that the thought of committing suicide had helped them through many a bad night. For most people with HIV or AIDS considering it, it will remain just that - a thought. Planning a suicide may have a lot more to do with living than with dying." Interview by Chris Docker. Dying to Live appears in Positive Times Issue 14, April 1996. Positive Times is at 72 Holloway Road, London N7 8NZ, Tel 0171-296-6000. © 1996 Chris Docker You are the 53rd person to browse through here since 26th May 1996 using the above URL WT02-B28-6IA007-000076-B034-171http://www.euthanasia.org:80/piano.html 194.88.132.128 19970222055611 text/html 7403HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 22 Feb 1997 06:04:19 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/html Don't kill the piano player Newsletter Don't kill the piano player! Chris Docker "Euthanasia means a good and easy death" - how many times do we here this recited like some mantra meant to convince our opponents? Okay, so that would be the translation if we followed the Greek roots of the word but it is not what the word means today in general usage. People generally think of one of two things when we say euthanasia: the active termination of life at the patient's request as it occurs in the Netherlands (or similar proposals in other countries); or the Nazi extermination program of murder. Some people take an extreme view, while many fall somewhere between the two camps. Dictionary definitions avail us little, as there will always be large groups of people that claim it means something else. (We see the unfortunate tendency to use dictionaries to define words rather than attempting to arrive at an understanding of what we truly mean.) The apparent derivation (from the Greek, eu - thanatos) hardly describes what we mean. Even extending the definition to include "bringing about of this, especially in the case of incurable and painful disease" hardly covers it - hospices often succeed in bringing about a peaceful death, but they don't perform euthanasia! Proponents often go on to stress the importance of the word "voluntary" and we end up with a sort of mini mission statement without getting any closer to defining what we mean. In fact, our "definition" is so poor that, rather than helping our cause, it provides easy meat for opponents. We complain that words like "killing" and "murder" are emotive, and then commit the same error. Emotive buzzwords will mean different things to different people and are often a stumbling block to civilised discourse. At a recent gathering of "pro-life" and "pro-choice" people of widely differing views (but sincerely committed to exploring them) we looked first at what terminology we could use to communicate. Case examples were useful for discussion, but phrases such as those used in the Netherlands proved the least troublesome, such as "Decisions that result in the ending of life with/without the request of the patient." Voluntary cannot be objectively determined, and opponents will always be concerned over whether the "request" was truly voluntary. The request itself, however, can be objectively observed as an event. It either existed or it didn't, and safeguards such as avoiding undue influence are ancilliary. A "decision that results in the ending of life" avoids needless divisions, for instance, over whether double-effect was involved. It avoids the moral opprobrium that some people connect with the "e" word. They are important decisions even when no request was involved, such as in the case of Tony Bland. A slightly broader heading might be "treatment decisions at the end of life." Conceptual terms vs popular language If the above holds true, then why retain such words in the name of the Society? There are many reasons. Changing the name would involve a lack of continuity, but there are also deeper reasons that have a sound historical, social reform basis. The history of reform shows the need for strong campaigning alongside clear reasoning. In analysing a situation we need clear conceptual arguments, but in conducting a campaign we need words that generate feeling and with which broad sections of the public can identify. Headlines are not made up of long sentences with words of many syllables - accuracy is sacrificed for attention-grab. We should be aware of the difference, and the different uses. Similarly, in part perhaps because of its very vagueness, voluntary euthanasia provides a focal point for all interest in that subject - from the public, the media, researchers - they all know to come to us. The same point applies to the word "living will" - vague, but the most popular term in the public's eye (we leave it to serious analysis to consider whether we mean, by that, an advance directive, an advance statement, an advance declaration, all of which have different shades of meaning.) The language of rights A similar and very serious problem occurs with the language of rights. Talk of "rights" produces a rapid public response, polarisation of feeling, public debate, an airing of the basic issues. The division is perhaps more problematic, as the use of the word "right" in the phrase "right-to-die" is, generally speaking, an abuse of the terminology. The ethicists and the courts will usually examine the issue in terms of an "interest" in dying. So when should we shout about "rights" and when should we be less confrontational in our choice of language? Sometimes, cultural differences may be important factors. The Australian euthanasia law is called "The Rights of the Terminally Ill Act" - and is in the Northern Territory where the issue of rights is a politically important subject in an area where there is a large Aboribinal population. The USA, with its written constitution, can analyse rights in terms of that constitution. Elsewhere, the logical flaws in the use of such language are more apparent and may serve to perpetuate conflict with "pro-life" groups. It is a difficult balancing act, and can only be accomplished if protagonists understand the difference rather than believing that the "buzz-words" are the language of serious discourse. There's no need to shoot the piano player - simply to realise that the rendering is hardly a symphony. © 1996 Chris Docker You are the 96th person to browse through here since 26th May 1996 using the above URL WT02-B28-7IA007-000076-B034-203http://www.euthanasia.org:80/jan96.html 194.88.132.128 19970222055624 text/html 3350HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 22 Feb 1997 06:04:30 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/html VESS Newsletter Jan 1996 Contents Newsletter VESS Newsletter Jan 1996 Contents WHY SELF DELIVERANCE? - SPECIAL INSERT FLATPACK COFFFINS IN THIS ISSUE: ADVANCE DIRECTIVES & END OF LIFE DECISIONS - Charles Hite WHAT'S HAPPENING... WHEN MEN GRIEVE - Tom Holden SHOULD WE RESUSCITATE? - John Saunders LIFE IS NOT A SENTENCE - Austin Bastable THE PLACE WHERE THE FAMOUS REST - Chris Docker LET'S GET POLITICAL! OFF THE BOOKSHELF QUIETLY AMONG THE SHADOWS - Chris James A DIGNIFIED DEATH - Annie Lindsell OUTREACH - GET THE NEWS FROM AROUND THE WORLD ARE ADVANCE INSTRUCTIONS HEEDED? POETRY READERS' LETTERS DEATH COMES OUT OF THE CLOSET - Russel Ogden MODERNITY, COMMUNITY, THE INDIVIDUAL & V.E. - Garry Stork THE DEATH & DYING QUIZ SHOW (+ 12 THINGS YOU SHOULD KNOW) TEN RULES ON BEING HUMAN! BOOKS AVAILABLE FROM VESS Quote/Unquote... You are the 56th person to browse through here since 6th Feb 1996 using the above URL WT02-B28-8IA007-000076-B034-279http://www.euthanasia.org:80/oct95.html 194.88.132.128 19970222055655 text/html 3195HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 22 Feb 1997 06:04:43 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/html VESS Newsletter Oct 1995 Contents Newsletter VESS Newsletter Oct 1995 Contents ALL ABOUT LIVING WILLS: SPECIAL INSERT. CHOOSING A RESIDENTIAL HOME: PAGE 14 IN THIS ISSUE: AT THE CUTTING EDGE - Dr Nick Pace WHAT'S HAPPENING HOW OLD IS OLD? - A QUICK LOOK AT LONGEVITY RECORDS HIPPOCRATES - WHAT WAS ALL THE FUSS ABOUT? THE VESS STAFF - WHAT DO THEY DO? 25 THINGS TO ASK ABOUT RESIDENTIAL HOMES LETTERS THE DUTCH CHANGE TACTICS SINGAPORE'S NEW LIVING WILL LAW THE WAY OF RELIGIOUS CONFLICT QUOTE/UNQUOTE Insert: WHAT'S IN A LIVING WILL ? - Quick-guide in a handy leaflet DEATH BY KEVORKIAN POETRY DEATHNET - John Hofsess OFF THE BOOKSHELF OUTREACH - WHAT'S HAPPENING AROUND THE WORLD SELF-DELIVERANCE BOOKS/QUERIES BOOKS AVAILABLE FROM VESS SUPPORT UPDATE You are the 37th person to browse through here since 5 Feb 1996 using the above URL WT02-B28-9IA007-000076-B035-221http://www.euthanasia.org:80/tort.html 194.88.132.128 19970222060031 text/html 53351HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 22 Feb 1997 06:08:05 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/html DyingIn Dignity Mensa Sig News Journal Vol 3 Issue 2 The Tort of Negligence at the End of this Century Chris Docker The law on negligence plays a great part in governing how patients'refusals of treatment are handled. Chris Docker suggests it is need ofoverhaul... (Note: this article has been slightly shortened from its originalformats. Comments are welcomed to the author at vess@euthanasia.org.) Introduction What I shall attempt to argue in this paper is that negligence has developedan overloaded framework that disguises bad law, and I will suggest that,if the evolution of the common law fails to mutate the tort of negligenceto accommodate changing needs within modern society, then statutory adjustmentmay be desirable. Would that statutory embodiment should prove unnecessarybut, unless the necessary reform can be achieved within the current system,some such shake up may be necessary. Antiquated law[1] is attempting to deal with the technology explosionof the last fifty years and the attendant need for information and ethicalawareness. Non-medical problems, that are more a question of ethics orresources, are being treated as if they were medical. The tests which thelaw attempts to apply (e.g. "Bolam"[2], best interests[3]) arecontroversial and in need of overhaul. I will argue that one of the bestways to tackle an accessible part of this problem would be to separateout ethical from purely medical concerns. Medical negligence occasions vast expenditure from the public purse,yet there is low confidence that it attains the degree of justice thatit should.[4] It is estimated that the sorely pressed NHS[5] spent upwardof £45m on medical negligence claims in 1990.[6] There is no doubtthat most of these claims were time-consuming, expensive and potentiallydestructive, many of them bettering neither patient or doctor.[7] The figurehad risen to £150m by 1995[8] and looks set for further increase.[9]These costs are a considerable drain on healthcare and, even though thereis still much debate over whether costs can be sensibly reduced, it isimportant that we also look at how those costs are distributed and whethersuch distribution can be achieved more fairly. Negligence does not simplycover applying medical technique badly, it includes failing to give appropriateinformation to a patient before obtaining consent,[10] and it is to thislatter category[11] that I particularly wish to turn.[12] It is differentfrom medical diagnosis and treatment inasmuch as it a more distinctly ethical,rather than medical, issue. With increasing technology[13], it is an areathat will assume increased importance, not less, as we approach the nextcentury. There may be little reason to suggest that a patient should notbenefit from more appropriate expertise in these matters, simply becauseit is not readily available under the present system. There have, of course been many proposals and attempts to overhaulingthe whole of the tort of medical negligence,[14] adopting a "no-fault"system, or implementing many less drastic changes across the board, suchus with the very recent paper of Lord Woolf.[15] Unfortunately, althougha tort of negligence may be an imperfect means of compensating for wrong,[16]other options may be even less desirable,[17] and some of the supposedadvantages of alternate systems have not been borne out by practice.[18]The debate is clouded by popular beliefs: although some claims are undoubtedlyill-advised[19] and patients are becoming more inclined to go to court,there is evidence, for instance, that too few, rather than too many, claimsresult in a successful action.[20] What needs to be done is to separateout the groups of wrongs currently handled as negligence and build moreappropriate procedures and standards to assess them. Recent steps to promotemediation,[21] for instance, or augment the powers of the General MedicalCouncil,[22] or modifying judicial procedures,[23] tackle specific aspectsin relative isolation and can be thought of as improvements to the presentsystem[24] that may reap lesser or greater rewards (and may themselvesalso need further refinement). These smaller, specific measures have thegreat advantage of being implementable rather than major, sweeping alterations,that not only might fail from using too large a brush but from the lackof parliamentary time needed for proper debate of such extensive bills.[25] It is one thing to acknowledge that doctors may lack ethical expertise,even if they are, with beneficent intentions, often capable of disguisingmoral decisions as clinical judgements; (this need not infer moral culpabilityon the doctor: someone whose training is overwhelmingly concerned withthe diagnosis and treatment of organic illness cannot easily acquire ordisplay the conceptual and interpersonal skills that a truly informed consent[26]demands.[27]) it is then quite another thing to demand that they suddenlyacquire that expertise,[28] and perhaps not even entirely reasonable: weencourage nurses to acquire proficiency in many areas of medicine for instance,but we don't expect them to double up as doctors. There are times whena doctor will practice better medicine from an awareness of medical ethics,but that does not make her an ethicist - in fact there might even be aconflict of interests between the two roles. I am thinking of a nurse orethicist particularly as a patient advocate[29], concentrating on patientvalues that may seem at odds with priorities of diagnosis, treatment andresource allocation. Of course, often the courts will encompass this role,but it could be argued that this could, in some instances, merely be exchangingmedical paternalism for legal paternalism. As these areas are non-medical ones, strictly speaking, we might arguethat in some instances, such as information-giving and withdrawal of treatmentdecisions, the tort of negligence should be patient-centred rather thanmedical team -centred. It is perhaps the point made by Lord Mustill when he ventured: ...I venture to feel some reservations about the application of theprinciple of civil liability in negligence laid down in Bolam v. FriernHospital Management Committee... I accept without difficulty that thisprinciple applies to the ascertainment of the medical raw material suchas diagnosis, prognosis and appraisal of the patient's cognitive functions.[30]Beyond this point, however, it may be said that the decision is ethical,not medical, and that there is no reason in logic why on such a decisionthe opinions of doctors should be decisive.[31] Yet the British courts have long retained the emphasis on doctors' dutyin questions of information disclosure, as Professor McLean pointed outin her seminal work on the subject,[32] and they have done so possiblyat the expense of emphasising what Lord Scarman in Sidaway[33] called"a basic human right" relating to the right to make one's owndecisions - and the fact that "the doctor's duty arises from his patient'srights" not vice versa. The courts' protection of human rights ismore basic and far-reaching than the handling of medical scenarios andso its significance is not to be underestimated.[34] A danger of medicalisation of the law becomes apparent, for instance,in the inconsistencies of judgements such as that of Lord Browne-Wilkinson,who, whilst advocating a prudent patient position in Sidaway[35] makesthe error of calling information "advice" when he lumps together"diagnosis, advice and treatment."[36] The typical bias is thusintroduced: doctors presenting information in the way that they would persuadethe patient. This further tips the scales in what is already an unevenbalance; as Freidson observed: It is my impression that clients are more often bullied than informedinto consent, their resistance weakened in part by their desire for thegeneral service if not the specific procedure, in part by the oppressivesetting they find themselves in, and in part by the calculated intimidation,restriction of information, and covert threats of rejection by the professionalstaff itself.[39] Bias, if any,[40] should actually, be that of the patient. Some attemptsto enhance this have met with little success against a backdrop of medicalpaternalism or bureaucratic lethargy. Much is talked about informed consent,but it remains, in practice, little more than a quasi-ethical platitude.[41]Not only is informed consent a concept that has no formal standing in Britishlaw,[42] but consent is frequently obtained, quite legally, without thedisclosure of information that is ethically required for such consent tobe valid. Lord Donaldson, in his historic judgement in Re T, suggestedthat forms[43] used for patient refusal and consent could enhance patientawareness[44] of possible consequences by "different and larger typeface,by underlining, the employment of colour print or otherwise.[45] Yet theDepartment of Health came up with little improvement other than windowdressing and "added verbiage".[46] In a more constructive vein,the Law Society in conjunction with the BMA more recently came up witharguments about 'enhancing capacity': "Doctors should be aware boththat medical disabilities can fluctuate and that there are many factorsextraneous to a person's medical disorder which may adversely influencecapacity. It is the duty of the assessing doctor to maximise capacity"[47]They suggest that capacity can be enhanced as much as possible by treatingsecondary symptoms, by carefully considering the time and place for vitalcommunication, third party considerations, and a suitable time scale andsupportive framework for digesting the information before a decision isrequired.[48] Competence to consent is as important as the informationon which to make a decision about consent or refusal. Some of these simple,very human approaches[49] can be seen in the better pre-natal clinics,particularly for pregnant women contemplating the possibility of a childwith Downs syndrome; but even in this area facilities vary widely acrossthe country and are sometimes non-existent.[50] The notion of informed consent probably grew out of the concern forresearch subjects and a perceived need to minimize the potential for harm,[51]but as it became reinforced with the growth of, and demand for, patients'"rights",[52] it may have taken on a mantle which it can ill-support. Without much exaggeration it can be said that all of medical ethicsis but a footnote to informed consent. It is the concept that first calledmedicine out of its paternalistic slumber and into the open light of publicscrutiny. Informed consent serves as the foundation upon which answersto new questions and problems are constructed. Informed consent is a kindof doctrine, that is, an amalgam of legal and philosophical reasoning witha conceptual framework and a number of specific prescriptions. This frameworkentails a few basic actions and presupposes certain conditions. At theheart of the doctrine is the legal principle that "the right of acompetent person to refuse medical treatment is virtually absolute."The exercise of this right presupposes that the patient must receive allinformation relevant to the decision to undergo or forgo a proposed treatmentand that he or she must comprehend the information. The legal principleindicates that the patient needs to be competent and it is relatively freelymade. Although influence is acceptable, all forms of coercion are beyondthe pale.[53] We can go on to look at the limitations of the doctrine with a viewto refining it, but that process cannot effectively start until we addressthe basic anomaly of the law in Bolam, that makes one person (the patient)the apparent decisionmaker, and another person (the doctor acting in accordancewith an accepted body of medical opinion) the ultimate arbiter of thatvery information needed to make the decision.[54] In other words, developmentalprogress for patient advocacy, or reconceiving the contextual basis ofautonomy (as examined by Hardwig[55] and Kuczewski[56] and others) willbe wasted effort until the fundamental loophole is corrected. One cannotimprove on, or enhance patient autonomy, if the very basis for that autonomyis effectively denied by simplistic application of common law. There has been some hope that the common law would gradually come torefine its use of the Bolam test, using it, quite reasonably it might beargued, as a benchmark for assessing negligence in matters of medical technique,and avoiding it for cases of information disclosure. Sadly the practicehas been dilatory to say the least. Bolam was cited, for instance to justify an action against asurgeon who failed to warn a patient that an operation to treat rectalprolapse might mean that the 28 year old man would be unable to have sexualintercourse. The fact that the case was won for the plaintiff, arguablyby such misappropriated case law, did little to establish patients' rightson a more secure footing.[57] One might suggest that emphasis on rights rather than duties is hair-splitting,but the practical implementation demonstrates a more marked difference.In many cases, effective assertion of patients' rights requires advocacy- someone to be there in the patient's corner. Many patients entering hospitalwill seem to be "capable", but the reality is that their effectiveassertiveness may be limited by disease or injury and the attendant stressand worry, not to mention the business-like atmosphere encouraging himto "do as he's told" as he lies helpless in a hospital bed. Psychologically,the dice are weighted against the patient. It seems no small coincidencethat in the currently popular vogue for "living wills" or "advancemedical directives" the only well known instances where these documentshave been or would have been followed are where there was a patient advocate- either in the form of a determined relative[58 ]or in the form of thecourts.[59] It would be too easy to say that the role of patient advocate shouldbe taken on more formally by nurses. Although there is a place for this,greater formalisation could lead to greater conflict between nursing andmedical professions, possibly within the same healthcare team.[61] Ad hocarrangements might work - we are generally looking at the careful applicationof basic human qualities of communication that may be overlooked or overstretchedin a professional setting. But the importance of informed consent is sogreat that more secure provision should perhaps be made. A statutory dutyon health care facilities to provide a surrogate patient advocate[62] wherenone was available would better serve this end. The level of skill requiredshould be commensurate with the dilemmas likely to be faced, but theremight be an increased role for a hospital ethicist, perhaps even with professionalliability.[63] Such a system, particularly in the current arrangement ofNHS trusts, might also go some way to standardising negligence claims,reducing costs both by easing the identification of liability and by reducingthe incidence of information-disclosure negligence. NHS Trusts might makesavings on the latter count, but even if ease of access to litigation resultedin the savings being absorbed, a more equitable system would have at leastseen national resources better spent. The basics of negligence should be retained - duty of care - breachof that duty - resultant damage. Merely the reliance on the Bolam testshould be changed. So, in Goorkani v. Tayside Health Board (O.H.) [1991]SLT 94, the result would probably be the same, as it seems Mr Goorkaniwould have chosen the same treatment, even if he had been informed aboutthe risk of infertility, in order to preserve his eyesight. However, inGold v. Haringey Health Authority [1987] 2 All ER,64 the resultwould probably have been the opposite, as the appeal court, relying heavilyon Bolam, overturned the lower court's decision to award damagesin negligence to a woman who had undergone a sterilisation to avoid furtherpregnancy, without sufficient warning from the physician of the failurerate of the operation, and without being given information about the alternativeof a vasectomy for her husband. In allowing the appeal, Brown LJ also drewselectively on Sidaway, agreeing with Lord Dipcock's rather simplisticview that the general duty of a doctor is "not subject to dissectioninto a number of component parts to which different criteria of what satisfythe duty of care apply." This decision is cognate with similar reasoningsin Blyth v. Bloomsbury Health Authority [1993] 4 Med LR 151 (CA) and,in Scotland, in Moyes v Lothian Health Board [1990] SLT 444 1 Med LR463. The legal change should be supported by social and other measures toenhance capacity and increase patient advocacy. Social changes that arenot supported by a fundamental shift in the law relating to standards ofinformation giving could result in forms, promises and guidelines thatare not worth the paper they are written on. As West expressed it: The entire process will be for naught if all we accomplish is to changethe old saw from "The operation was a success, but the patient died,"to "The patient died, but his physician stayed within the practiceguideline."65 Summary If there is not a reversal of common law trends to follow the Bolamprinciple in deciding claims for medical negligence where information disclosureis at issue, then statutory or declaratory guidance should be devised.When patient autonomy has been thus enabled by adequate information, itshould be enhanced and protected by such measures as availability of patientadvocates of various types to give varying categories of support, independentof the medical staff if necessary. References 1."Negligence derives from trespass by way of theaction of the case, and like all derivatives of case, it is actionableonly on proof of damage, i.e. not per se. However, the modern tort of negligence,arising from breach by the defendant of a legal duty of care owed by himto the plaintiff, takes its origin from the early nineteenth century. Sincethen it has developed in "disconnected slabs" - Candler v CraneChristmas & Co (1951) - so that even today it exhibits little generality."Tyas J.G.M., Law of Torts, 2nd edition, Macdonald and Evans 1973:58. Ibid:"It has also been said that negligence 'properly connotes the complexconcept of duty, breach and damage thereby suffered by the person to whomthe duty was owing': Lochgelly Iron Works & Coal Co. v. M'Mullan (1934),per Lord Wright. This is the modern definition." 2.The so-called "Bolam" test, based on the caseof Bolam v Friern Hospital Management Committee [1957] 1 WLR 582, indicatesthat a doctor is not negligent if he or she acts in accordance with a schoolof thought accepted at the time as reasonable by a responsible body ofmedical opinion, even though other doctors adopt a different practice.This has been the subject of common law debates in many jurisdictions (someof which have rejected it altogether) and also within the UK, for instance,when the judges in Sidaway v. Governers of the Bethlem Royal Hospital andMaudsley Hospital and Others [1985] 1 All ER 643 (HL) had considerabledifferences of opinion on it. A detailed discussion occurs in McLean S.,A Patient's Right to Know - Information Disclosure, the Doctor and theLaw. Hants: Dartmouth 1989:104-122. Classic alternative doctrine to theBolam test is presented in the District of Columbia Circuit Court of Appealscase of Canterbury v. Spence 464 F 2d 772 (DC, 1972); and the Canadiancase of Haughian v Paine [1987] 37 DLR (4th) 624 (Sask CA), for instance,illustrates that the doctor's duty should extend not only to disclosingall relevant risks but also, in principle, to alternative forms of treatment. 3.The concept of "best interests" was subjectto some overhaul by the Law Commission, but their proposals have not beenpassed into law (Law Com No 231, Mental Incapacity, London:HMSO 1995:44-48).Problems with the standard are discussed in Docker C., "Limitationsof the 'Best Interests' and 'Substituted Judgement' standards" DyingIn Dignity Mensa Sig News Journal 1996;3(1):9-15 (previously submittedin the Ethics Module for M.Phil 1996). A glimpse of the problem can beseen in Veatch: "For a clinician to guess at what is the best coursefor the patient, three assumptions must be true regarding a theory of thegood. First, the clinician must be expected to determine what will bestserve the patient's medical or health interest; second, the clinician mustbe expected to determine how to trade off health interests with other interests;and third, the clinician must be expected to determine how the patientshould relate the pursuit of her best interest to other moral goals andresponsibilities, including serving the interests of others and fulfillingany moral duties she may have that happen to conflict with her interest."Veatch R., "Abandoning Informed Consent" Hastings Center Report1995;25(2):5-12,p.7. A philosophical examination of current shortcomingscan be found in: Degrazia D., "Value Theory and the Best InterestStandard" Bioethics 1995;9(1):50-61. 4."The Legal Aid Board itself has said 'There isno incentive on the solicitor to act as a responsible filter for dubiouscases, as there is no effective sanction available for shoddy work or badcases being taken.'" Barton A., "Law: Making the system workfor patients" The Independent 14 Feb. 1996. 5."... an independent inquiry into the funding ofhealth care, headed by Sir Duncan Nicol, a former NHS chief executive...published on September 19th by Healthcare 2000, a cross-party health researchgroup, points to the widening gap between the demands for health care andthe resources available to pay for it. Growing expectations, advances inhigh-tech medicine, and an ageing population have made it impossible forthe NHS to fulfil its original mandate of providing a comprehensive freeservice for everyone." The Economist "Paying for the NHS"23 Sep. 1995, p.48. Also, ibid.: "Currently 80% of the £42 billion($65 billion) a year spent on health is provided by the state through generaltax revenues; 15% comes through private insurance, and only 5% from chargesfor drugs, equipment and other services. Britain's spending on health,at just over 7% of GDP, is among the lowest in Europe, largely becauseless is spent privately in Britain than in other European countries. Americaspends a hefty 14% of GDP on health." 6. "There is no shortage of evidence that claimsagainst doctors in the United Kingdom for professional negligence haveincreased markedly over the last decade. The cost of this is considerable:in 1990 the NHS spent approximately £45m on such claims, paying damagesof over £300,000 in some 35 cases." - Mason J., McCall SmithA., Law and Medical Ethics, 4th edition, Edinburgh: Butterworths 1994:191."Litigation for medical negligence was estimated to cost the UK NationalHealth Service more than £60 million in 1990/91 and the cost hasbeen rising steadily since." - Vincent C., Young M., Phillips A.,"Why do people sue doctors? A study of patients and relatives takinglegal action" Lancet 1994;343:1609-1613,p.1609. "Since our workwas completed a recent parliamentary answer by the secretary of state forhealth indicated that in England for 1990-1 and 1991-2 the number of claimssettled was 1618 and 1751 respectively, at a total cost of £53.2mand £51.3m respectively." - Fenn P., Hermans D., Dingwall R.,"Estimating the cost of compensating victims of medical negligence"British Medical Journal 1994;309:389-391,p.390, referring to Hansard 1994March 14:2398 (No 1648). 7."There is no doubt that actions by patients againstdoctors are unusually time-consuming, expensive and potentially destructive."Mason J., McCall Smith A., op. cit., supra, p.192. Also: "Feelingresponsible for injuring a patient appears to be one of the main sourcesof stress for over-worked juniors, and litigation can be a distressingand damaging experience." - Vincent C., Young M., Phillips A., op.cit., supra, p.1609. 8."The NHS paid out £150m last year, a sumset to rise fast..." - Toynbee P., "Legal leeches are bleedingthe NHS" The Independent 28 Feb. 1996. Also: "Payouts by hospitalshave risen... to £125m ($195m) in 1994-95. This is just the beginning:another £1 billion-worth of claims are in the pipeline." TheEconomist "Doctors in the dock" 19 Aug. 1995:51-52,p.51. 9."The 49 first wave trusts, established in 1991,have already accumulated potential liabilities of £10m each. Andafter 10 years, when the settlement of claims are expected to peak, sometrusts could face claims of £250m. There are now 412 NHS trusts establishedsince the NHS and Community Care Act 1990. ... And medical negligence claimscould soar because of a new 'conditional fee' scheme to be introduced bythe Government." - Waterhouse R., "Health trusts 'face huge claimsfor negligence'" The Independent 9 Mar. 1995. 10.As a concept, "consent" is already a loadedword, whether it be "informed" or not. It means approval or agreementwith the actions or opinions of another, and elicits synonyms such as "acquiesce"and "condone". For an examination of some radically differentapproaches, see Veatch R., "Abandoning Informed Consent" HastingsCenter Report 1995;25(2):5-12, pp.11 & 12. 11.For a breakdown of the categories of alleged acts ofnegligence, including failure to inform or educate, see: LaRae I., HuyckeR., Mark M., Huycke M., "Characteristics of Potential Plaintiffs inMalpractice Litigation" Annals of Internal Medicine 1994;120(9):792-798,p.794. 12.As a principle, the separating of ethical from medicaldecision-making also applies to such areas as end-of-life decisions (egabout withdrawing nutrition and hydration from patients in persistent vegetativestate). There is not room to go into this in the current paper, but seeMclean S., (ed) Death, Dying and the Law, Hants: Dartmouth 1996, especiallypages 49-66, 4-8, and p.149n18. 13."...partly because physicians can 'never say never,'partly because of the seduction of modern technology, and partly out ofmisplaced fear of litigation, physicians have increasingly shown a tendencyto undertake treatments that have no realistic expectation of success."Jecker N., Schneiderman L., "Medical Futility: The Duty Not to Treat"Cambridge Quarterly of Healthcare Ethics 1993, 2:151-159,p.151. 14.E.g. The National Health Service (Compensation) Bill,introduced by Mrs Rosie Barnes MP in 1991, which would have created a no-faultcompensation scheme (The Bill failed to get a second reading). For a historyand examination of some attempted reforms, see "Reforming the Lawof Malpractice" in: Kennedy I., Grubb A., Medical Law: Text with Materials2nd edition, London:Butterworths 1994;508-565. 15. Lord Woolf's interim report, Access to Justice, ispublished on the Internet at http://ltc.law.warwick.ac.uk/woolf/woolf.html. 16."The tort system does not differentially punishbad doctors but rather causes any doctor, whether she is at fault or not,a great deal of trouble, anxiety and inconvenience" Campbell A., GillettG., Jones G., Practical Medical Ethics, Oxford: Oxford University Press1992;150. 17."... the figures indicate that if a no fault schemewas introduced the cost might be four times that of the current system,depending on the type of scheme adopted." - Fenn P., Hermans D., DingwallR., "Estimating the cost of compensating victims of medical negligence"British Medical Journal 1994;309:389-391,p.389. 18."The experience of legal counsel to the MedicalProtection Society in New Zealand (where an Accident Compensation Schemehas been in operation since 1974) is that their workload on behalf of theSociety members has progressively increased." - Palmer R., "Legalaction and medical negligence" Lancet (Letters) 1994;343:484. 19. "The Lord Chancellor's Green Paper admits legalaid 'allows assisted parties to pursue cases which turn out to be unmeritorious,often at the expense of unassisted opponents." Barton A., "Law:Making the system work for patients" The Independent 14 Feb. 1996. 20."According to a Harvard Medical School study publishedin the New England Journal of Medicine in 1991, only one out of eight patientsinjured through a medical malpractice file a claim." May T., "TortReform: Is the System Broken?" The Daily Reporter Part 3 Dec 28, 1995;http://www.sddt.com/~columbus/Files2/9512281.html. 21. "In September, the first medical negligence caseto go to mediation here, under a pilot scheme to be evaluated by the Departmentof Health, was settled. It showed, if extended nationwide, potential savingsof millions to the NHS in legal costs." Donaldson L., "Law: Sometimesit's good to talk" The Independent 29 Nov. 1995. 22."The GMC has been given greater power to punishdoctors, but, less sensibly, its procedures are still conducted behindclosed doors" The Economist "Nasty medicine for British medics"19 Aug. 1995, p.16. 23. "'I am very anxious that the playing field forlitigation should be as level as possible,' he says. 'There are often cases,medical negligence for example, where the plaintiff cannot afford a trialinvolving multiple expert witnesses duplicating the same work. In thatsort of situation, the procedural judge would have a very significant decisionto make. He would have to decide whether the plaintiff is right and thecase could produce a reasonably just result in the way he proposes. Thealternative would be to do it in a much more elaborate way. The judge willsay to the defendant who has much more substantial means, "If youwant to do it in that more elaborate way, you've got to pay (even if youwin) the difference between doing it on an affordable basis and doing iton an unnaffordable basis."'" - Ward S., "Let the legalrevolution begin: Stephen Ward finds Lord Wolf confident that his listof proposed reforms will bring about a change of culture in the courtroomand will give the little man a fair chance" The Independent 6 Mar.1996. Also, ibid.: [The reform package is] "...published in July;the Lord Chancellor has already promised to implement it." 24."Mediation and arbitration do not purport to avoidconflict but are less adversarial and thus enhance the prospects of earlyresolution with preservation of the therapeutic relationship. They arenot alternatives to litigation but complement the present system."Barton A., "Legal action and medical negligence" The Lancet (Letters)1994;3433:674. 25.E.g. The National Health Service (Compensation) Bill,vide supra. 26.For an examination of the meaning and development ofthe doctrine of informed consent see, for instance, Robertson G., "InformedConsent to Medical Treatment" Law Quarterly Review 1981;97:102-126,or, historically as an ethical construct, see Beauchamp T., Childress J.,Principles of Biomedical Ethics 4th Edition, Oxford: OUP 1994,p.142-146.Its value in the present paper lies in the fact that it stems from a respectfor individual decision-making: whether we regard this from a rights-basedKantian argument of treating patients as ends in themselves rather thanas means to an end, or utilitarian arguments along the lines of JS Millof allowing individuality in order to maximise beneficial outcomes forthe overall good. 27.See also: Teff H., "Consent to Medical Procedures:Paternalism, Self-Determination or Therapeutic Alliance?" Law QuarterlyReview 1985;101:432-453,p.451-452, and p.441. 28.This is not to say that medical ethics is not beingincreasingly taught. "We wish, however, to correct the impressiongiven by Mary Kearns that doctors who pass through Edinburgh UniversityMedical School have not studied medical ethics. ... In the pre-clinicalyears, students are introduced to the principles underlying medical ethicsand these are related to issues of confidentiality and informed consent.The application of medical ethics then features formally as part of atleast four clinical attachments, and involves particular considerationof issues surrounding dying and euthanasia, human genetics, fertility,abortion and decision-making." - Boyd K., Thomson D., Porter M., WatsonG., Fleming S., "Medical ethics" The Scotsman (letters) 25 May1996. Yet in the history of medicine there can be observed, for instance,a bias against truth-telling both in the disclosure of information andin admitting fault, and that this is inconsistent with public moralityand that of other professions is apparent. Solicitors, for instance, are"obliged by the rules of professional conduct to inform a client ifthey have acted negligently or improperly in the performance of their work.This is not incumbent on ... the surgeon or physician who tends you inill health..." - Napley D., "The ethics of the professions"Law Society Gazette 1985;82:818-825, quoted in Gillon R., PhilosophicalMedical Ethics, Chichester: John Wiley & Sons 1995;pp.168-169. Sometimesthe law does not seem overly tolerant at this lack: "How much andwhat sort of information should be given to the patient? Where there hasbeen a mishap the patient must be told. Where in giving treatment by injectiona needle was broken, without negligence, and left in the patient's body,it was held to be negligent not to tell the patient of the presence ofthe broken needle (Gerber v Pines, 1933, 79 S.J.13...)" - CarrierJ., Kendall I., Medical Negligence: Complaints and Compensation, Gower1990. Truth-telling, as a basic principle (even one requiring exceptions),has generally been absent from medical codes even from the time of Hippocrates. 29."Suppose a nurse ... discovers that a patienthas been prescribed twice the normal dose of a drug. Although he is dubioushe gives it anyway, claiming that his only responsibility is to administerdrugs as prescribed by the doctor. If the dose is incorrect, this nurseconsiders that it is the doctor's fault and not his. this stance conflictswith the idea of a nurse as an autonomous practitioner and patient advocate.The UKCC encourages nurses to act as advocates for patients and definesadvocacy as being 'concerned with promoting the well-being and interestsof patients and clients'. ... The nurse remains morally and legally accountablefor his own actions and if he fails to clarify the situation, then it mustbe assumed that he has good reasons for giving the drug or has chosen todisregard the fact that he is accountable. He will have difficulty justifyingeither option." Fletcher N., Holt J., Brazier M., Harris J., Ethics,Law and Nursing, Manchester: Manchester University Press 1995;p.113. 30.The patient's "cognitive functions" shouldperhaps be left out of this list. See Re C [1994] 1 FLR 31, infra. 31.Airedale NHS Trust v. Bland [1993] A.C. 835,898. 32."In sum, therefore, British courts have made noreal pretence at setting anything other than a professional test for disclosure.The emphasis is on the doctor's duty and not on the patient's rights, thusmaking the evidence of fellow professionals of similar significance indisclosure cases as it is in cases involving the application of technicalskills." McLean S., A Patient's Right to Know - Information Disclosure,the Doctor and the Law, Hants: Dartmouth 1989;p.105. 33.Sidaway v. Governers of the Bethlem Royal Hospitaland Maudsley Hospital and Others [1985] 1 All ER 643 (HL),645. 34.Kennedy I. Treat Me Right - Essays in Medical Law andEthics. Oxford: Oxford University Press 1988;p.202. 35.Sidaway v. Governers of the Bethlem Royal Hospitaland Maudsley Hospital and Others [1984] 1 All ER 1018, 1033 (Court of Appeal). 36.It has been observed that Dunn LJ, in Sidaway, seemednot unreasonably led astray by this. "Thus, Dunn LJ's conclusion,that the standards of the medical profession are to be applied, begs thequestion by assuming that information giving is the same as advice giving.This mis-analysis is clear when Dunn LJ goes on to argue that 'in givingadvice the professional man will normally refer to the advantages and disadvantagesof the course which he recommends.' But this is precisely to misstate whatpatient self-determination is all about. Advantages and disadvantages areevaluations which only patients can make. What doctors must give is informationabout alternatives and consequences, including risks, thereby enablingthe patient to judge for him- or herself." Kennedy I. op. cit., supra,p.183. 37.This is not easily dismissed as speculatively taintedview of beneficent medical practice. For a concrete and graphical exampleof subtle coercion, "particularly common in surgery that will resultin ostomy of the bowel", see: Battin M., The Least Worse Death, NewYork: Oxford University Press 1994;pp.37-38. 38."...physicians are very well aware of their powerto influence patient choices - even while preserving the appearance ofobtaining informed consent. The Latinate obscurity of medical diagnosisand the overwhelming nature of too much medical information often contributeto this possibility. Thus, many physicians claim they can get patientsto agree to nearly anything they propose; it is simply a matter of howthe choice is framed." Battin M., op. cit., supra, p.169. 39.Beauchamp T., Childress J., Principles of BiomedicalEthics 4th Edition, Oxford: OUP 1994;p.165. [quoting Eliot Freidson, TheProfession of Medicine, New York:Dodd, Mead & Co 1970;376.] 40.Even arguments limiting such bias will mostly attemptto respect someone's "autonomy" other than that of the doctorinfringing the autonomy of someone else, as for instance, in the controversialcase of Re S (adult refusal of treatment) [1992] 4 All ER 671, (1992) 9BMLR 69, when the patient's autonomy in refusing a Caesarian was overruledin favour of respecting the hypothetical autonomy or will-to-live of theunborn foetus (referred to in the judgement as the "unborn child"). 41.The BMA, for instance, says: "Patients can onlymake valid choices on the basis of shared information about diagnoses,prognoses and realistic treatment options." (British Medical Association,Medical Ethics Today, London: BMA 1993;p.177) yet give little or no guidanceon how such information is to be shared. Some practical suggestions aremade in McNulty C., "Mentally Incapacitated Adults and Decision-making:a psychological perspective" Medicine, Science & the Law 1995;35(2):159-164,viz: "The phrases 'simple language' and 'broad terms' are ambiguous.To be of assistance, these phrases need to be operationalized in a waythat leaves no room for uncertainty." (p.161), and: "Other practicaltechniques for assisting a person to engage in decision-making includethe presentation of information in non-verbal formats: for example, Carson(1993) suggests breaking information down into discrete units and perhapsemploying flow charts and diagrams."(p.162). 42.For an overview of how an attempt to introduce thedoctrine into English law was rejected, see: Thomson J., Delictual Liability,Edinburgh: Butterworths 1994, p.13. 43. Consent forms are only one means of obtaining consent,but have their place if designed with consideration of the ethical dynamicsinvolved. They cannot, of themselves, be a substitute for interactive givingof information, no matter how much information is contained on them. Aconsent form does not take into account what facts might be most importantto that particular patient. Neither does it explain facts in the way thatthat patient might have reasonably have desired. "Truthfulness isnot the bald communication of facts: it is the kind of sensitivity to individualneed which knows that there is a time to speak and a time to remain silent."- Campbell A., Gillett G., Jones G. Practical Medical Ethics, Oxford UniversityPress 1992;p.27. 44.Why is "enhancing awareness" important ifa patient is presumed competent? One reason might be that: "An autonomousperson who signs a consent form without reading or understanding the formis qualified to act autonomously by giving an informed consent, but hasfailed to do so." Beauchamp T., Childress J., Principles of BiomedicalEthics 4th Edition, Oxford: OUP 1994;p.121. 45.In re T. (adult: refusal of treatment) WLR 6 [1992]782, 798, discussed in: Docker C., (1996) "Advance Directives/LivingWills" in McLean S. (ed.), Contemporary Issues in Law, Medicine andEthics, Hants: Dartmouth; p.189. .46.For a discussion of the 1991 revisions, see BrazierM., "Revised Consent Forms in the NHS" (1991) in Kennedy I.,Grubb A. Medical Law, Text With Materials, 2nd edition, London:Butterworths1994;pp.96-97, which also includes a copy of the Department of Health specimenform (alternatively for the latter, see Jones M., Morris A., Blackstone'sStatutes on Medical Law, London: Blackstone Press 1992;p.345.) 47.The British Medical Association and the Law Society,Assessment of Mental Capacity - Guidance for Doctors and Lawyers, London:BMA 1995;pp.95-96. 48.The adjunct of advocacy, and back-ups for assessingcompetency, is discussed in: Van McCrary S., Terry Walman A., "ProceduralPaternalism in Competency Determination" Law, Medicine & HealthCare 1990;18(1-2)108-113,which is concerned (p.108) with the danger that:"...once the... [competency evaluation process] has been initiated,the bureaucratic procedural forces, combined with the inconsistencies betweentheory and practice, in many cases gather sufficient momentum that theyare impossible to halt short of a determination of incompetence." 49.Anecdotal evidence suggests that sensitive proceduresfor pre-natal information-giving have been developed with good resultsin some clinics. Many emotional factors need to be considered, and a briefintroduction can be found in: Brazier M., Medicine, Patients and the Law,2nd edition, London: Penguin 1992;p.247:"Pre-Pregnancy Advice andGenetic Counselling". Also in: Goldworth A., "Informed Consentin the Human Genome Enterprise" Cambridge Quarterly of HealthcareEthics, 1995;4:296-303,p.298:"Adequate Informed Consent and PatientAutonomy". An introduction to some of the more complex questions raisedin such scenarios, including the responsibilities of autonomous individuals,can be found in: Steinbock B., McClamrock R., "When Is Birth Unfairto the Child?" Hastings Center Report 1994;24(6):15-21. And also in:Botkin J., "Fetal Privacy and Confidentiality" Hastings CenterReport 1995;25(5):32-39. 50.For a fuller discussion of capacity and competencysee especially: Drane J., "The Many Faces of Competency" HastingsCenter Report April 1985;17-21,p.19, which suggests a sliding scale modelfor competency and, for an examination of precise capacity to make decisionsabout medical treatment, see Re C [1994] 1 FLR 31,31 where it was decidedthat C, a chronic paranoid schizophrenic, had capacity to make refusal-of-treatmentdecisions. 51.Beauchamp T., Childress J., Principles of BiomedicalEthics 4th Edition, Oxford: OUP 1994;p.142; also Mason J., McCall SmithA., Law and Medical Ethics, 4th edition, Edinburgh: Butterworths 1994:237-238;also Randall F., Downie R., Palliative Care Ethics, Oxford: Oxford MedicalPublications 1996;p.5. 52. Beauchamp T., Childress J., ibid. 53.Kuczewski M., "Reconceiving the Family - The Processof Consent in Medical Decisionmaking" Hastings Center Report 1996;26(2):30-37,p.30. 54.Nor is there is sufficient incentive, with the lawas it stands, for the doctor to select information with the patient's viewpointuppermost: "...it is the physician who identifies the problem, framesany suggested solution to it, and controls how many alternative solutionsare proposed. The patient cannot know whether the problem could be seenin some other way or as some different sort of problem, whether other sortsof solutions could be proposed, whether in making the choice to give orwithhold consent he or she is making a choice among all the reasonablealternatives, and, sometimes, whether there really is any problem at all.The agenda is, so to speak, entirely in the control of the physician."Battin M., The Least Worse Death, New York: Oxford University Press 1994;p.170. 55.Hardwig J., "SUPPORT and the Invisible Family"Hastings Center Report 1995 July/August, Special Supplement: G22-G25. also:Hardwig J., "The Problems of Proxies with Interests of Their Own:Towards a Better Theory of Proxy Decisions" Journal of Clinical Ethics1993 Spring: 20-27. also: Hardwig J., "What About the Family"Hastings Center Report 1990 March/April:5-10. 56.Kuczewski M., supra, and also: Kuczewski M., "WhoseWill Is It, Anyway? A Discussion of Advance Directives, Personal Identity,and Consensus in Medical Ethics" Bioethics 1994;8(1):27-48. 57.Smith v. Tunbridge Wells Health Authority [1994] 5Med L.R.334, discussed in Keown J., "Easing the burdens on medicalplaintiffs?" Cambridge Law Journal 1995;54(1):30-32,pp.30-32. Keowngoes on to note: "Smith can be one of the very rare cases in whicha doctor had been held liable in negligence even though acting in accordancewith a practice accepted as proper by other competent colleagues." 58."When a Living Will Worked! - The Story of AlbertGoodheir" Voluntary Euthanasia Society of Scotland Newsletter 1996;16(2):10. 59. In the UK, these instances have largely been casesof when a living will would - or could - have worked, had one been written.E.g. Airedale NHS Trust v. Bland [1993] A.C. 789,894 per Lord Mustill (Obiter). 60. The need is for greater communication, not for whistleblowing,as seen, for instance in R. v. Cox [1994] 12 BMLR 38,45. (Staff Nurse recognisedthat a doctor had administered "a lethal dose of potassium chloride"to a woman dying in unrelievable pain and reported the fact, regrettablyif quite correctly, to her superiors.) 61.For an example of how life and death differences becomeapparent in decision-making from different information bases, see: WalkerR., Schonwetter R., Kramer D., Robinson B., "Living Wills and ResuscitationPreferences in an Elderly Population" Archives of Internal Medicine1995;155:171-175:- "The group with living wills desired less CPR inscenarios involving functional impairment and cognitive impairment, butnot in scenarios involving current health, severe illness, and terminalillness. After receiving CPR information, both groups changed their preferencessuch that intergroup differences were no longer seen. ... Cardiopulmonaryresuscitation information can influence preferences even among personswith living wills, implying that preferences are neither fixed nor alwaysbased on adequate information." 62."To make decisions with your doctor you need toknow as much as possible about your health care. Ask your doctor aboutwhat you don't understand. Your other health care providers, such as yournurses, social workers, therapists, and chaplains, are also very good sourcesof information." VA Medical Center, "Advance Directives - MakingDecisions About Your Health Care" 1993 VA Medical Center, Seattle,p.1. 63.Another possibility might be a person trained in law:"As people with AIDS lie dying, they do not only need physicians,medical technicians, nurses, and social workers. They often also need theservices of professionals who provide legal care." - Herb A., "TheHospital-Based Attorney as Patient Advocate" Hastings Center Report1995;25(2):13-19,p.13. The Times points out that "an increasing numberof nurses and other health workers are retraining to become lawyers"and the UK now has a Nurses in the Law Association (Nila), one of whosemain aims is to recognise and promote the additional skills which formernurses bring to the law (Bawdon F., "Lawyers with a bedside manner"The Times 12 Dec. 1995) 64.An excellent discussion of the lamentable decisionin this case can be found in Kennedy I., Treat Me Right, Oxford: ClarendonPress 1988, p210-211. 65.West J., "Risk Management and Medical PracticeGuidelines: What Is Risk Management's Proper Role?" Journal of HealthcareRisk Management 1994;14(3), reproduced at http://www.wp.com/hcla/summer1.htm. [ DIDMSNJ][ DIWT02-B28-10IA007-000076-B035-257http://www.euthanasia.org:80/sutton.html 194.88.132.128 19970222060047 text/html 22041HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 22 Feb 1997 06:08:49 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/html DyingIn Dignity Mensa Sig News Journal Vol 3 Issue 2 Euthanasia, withholding and withdrawing treatment andliving wills Agneta Sutton The word euthanasia, from ancient Greek, means 'good death'. Today,the advocates of euthanasia, who speak of death with dignity, also meana good death. And of c ourse we all want a good death or a death with dignity. Yet, differentpeople would seem to mean very different things when they speak of a gooddeath or of a death with dignity. If I propose legislation to give old people, or severely ill people,approaching the end of their earthly journey, the right to a good deathor a death with dignity, most people would probably not object. But ifI suggest that old people or severely ill people who are approaching theirend should be killed, then my suggestion would probably meet with lessapproval. The word 'kill' has a negative and threatening ring. What thisshows is how important it is to be clear about how we use different terms,especially when we discuss serious matters such as euthanasia. By euthanasia one might mean the intentional killing by a doctor ofa patient by an act or omission. However, this was not the definition offeredby the Walton Committee, the House of Lords' Select Committee on MedicalEthics, which was set up in 1993 after the famous Tony Bland case. Whenthe Committee reported in February 1994, it described euthanasia as a 'deliberateintervention' rather than as a 'deliberate omission intended to terminatelife'. This is noteworthy, for it is also possible for a doctor or a nurseto intentionally kill a patient in his or her care by means of an omission,such as a deliberate failure to give insulin to a diabetic patient. I shall discuss omissions later, but first let us talk about euthanasiain the sense of active euthanasia, that is giving a drug such as potassiumchloride to end a patient's life. Now, the Voluntary Euthanasia Societyand the World Federation of Right to Die Societies are asking for activeeuthanasia and assisted suicide by patient request. But they are carefulto point out that they do not wish to introduce anything like the Nazieuthanasia programme. That is to say, they insist that they do not wishto see non-voluntary euthanasia introduced; they do not wish to see patientsbeing 'helped to die' unless they have asked for it. However, they arguethat autonomous moral agents should be free to make end-of life decisionsfor themselves, including euthanasia. Patient autonomy and patient self-determinationis what they are asking for. And one reason why they think it is so importantfor people today to be able to choose to have help to die is that theyfear over-interventionist medicine and a prolonged death attached to tubesand gadgets. They fear pain and they fear being reduced to a state of utterdependence. And, of course, we can all sympathise with this fear. But atthe same time, it is important to consider carefully whether the reasonsthe advocates of euthanasia give for legalising voluntary euthanasia reallyare good reasons. First, as concerns the fear of pain, with modern pain-relief and palliativecare, it would seem that most - though not all - pain can be successfullyrelieved. Secondly, as regards the fear of dependence, even if nobody wantsto be dependent on others for the most intimate of tasks, and even if manyof us might consider such a situation undignified, is it not true thateach one of us, every human being, possesses an inherent dignity whichcan never be taken away however undignified his or her situation is? Wemust distinguish between undignified human beings and undignified or embarrassingcircumstances. A person does not become undignified because his or hercircumstances are. To take an extreme example, it is very undignified tobe raped, but the rape victim does not therefore lose her human dignity. We must also ask ourselves the question: What are the risks attachedto introducing voluntary euthanasia? One of the dangers in introducingvoluntary euthanasia lies in the fact that in some situations it mightbe hard to distinguish between voluntary and non-voluntary euthanasia.The elderly or disabled may come under pressure from society or from theirown relatives to ask for 'help to die'. They may be made to feel that theyought to die because they are a burden. And so they may ask for 'help todie'. But should a request made under such pressure be considered voluntary? And this is not the only problem; voluntary euthanasia may lead to whatis without a doubt nonvoluntary euthanasia. The advocates for euthanasiasay that there is no reason why this should happen. But there is. No doctorwould grant a patient's request for euthanasia, unless he or she believedthat the patient's life was of poor quality and not worth living. For ifthe doctor helps a cancer patient who asks for it to die because he thinksthe patient's quality of life is so poor that he would be better off dead,would it not then also be reasonable for the doctor to help another cancerpatient in a similar state to die, even if that patient has not asked forit? If the doctor feels that he is acting out of mercy in the case of thepatient who asks for euthanasia, why should he not also wish to be mercifulto the other patient who has not asked for it? You can see the problem. If you allow mercy killing on request, it mayseem cruel not to allow mercy killing which has not been requested. Andyet would it not be rather dangerous if doctors and nurses were allowedto kill patients because they felt pity for them? In other words, it wouldsurely be wrong to allow some members of society, say doctors, to killother members of society, say patients, out of pity or because they thoughtsome patients had lives not worth living. Surely, if we allowed this tohappen, we would end up with a situation not unlike Nazi Germany. And,do you not think that many people would stop using the health servicesor refuse going to hospital, if doctors were allowed to end the lives ofpatients whose lives they considered to be of a poor quality? Is it nottrue that, if we allowed doctors to kill, doctors might no longer be trusted? The fact that voluntary euthanasia seems to lead to non-voluntary euthanasiabecomes even clearer if one looks at the situation in the Netherlands,where the law for a number of years has allowed voluntary euthanasia, evenif strictly speaking the practice is not legal. That is to say, providedcertain conditions are fulfilled, a Dutch doctor who performs euthanasiawill not be prosecuted and penalised. One requirement, at least until recently,was that the patient must be terminally ill and dying. Another requirement- at least until recently - has been the free, explicit and repeated requestthe patient. But let us look at the famous Remmelink Report, published in September1990. This report on end-of-life decisions in the Netherlands, definedeuthanasia as an active intervention to terminate another person's life,performed upon the latter's request. However, as the Report showed, thelives of thousands of patients were actively ended without their request.Should we be surprised? No, for, as I explained, once you introduce voluntarymercy killing, it will seem natural to administer mercy killing even ifpatients have not asked for it. Of course, doctors should do what they can to alleviate suffering. Andit is a well-known and widely accepted practice to provide high doses ofpain-killers to, for example, cancer patients. In some cases, this mayapparently shorten the patient's life. But if this happened, would it beeuthanasia? The answer is that it depends upon the doctor's intention.It depends on the intention with which the doctor gives or prescribes thepain-killer. If the intention is simply to relieve pain and if no othermeans exist, then it can be argued that it is not death but pain-reliefthat is intended and that the death, if it follows, as to be regarded asan unintended side-effect of giving pain relief. Arguing against this distinction, advocates of euthanasia might saythat the doctor's intention could be mixed. However, to meet this objection,it should be pointed out that there is a difference between providing adequatepain-relief with drugs such as opiates which are analgesics, and givingdrugs such as potassium chloride which are not analgesics. If the doctorgives analgesics, then this is an indication that his intention is notto kill. If, on the other hand, he uses potassium chloride, it would beobvious that his intention was to kill. In other words, it seems good sensiblepractice to distinguish between pain-relieving and life-relieving drugs,when discussing euthanasia. To return to the Dutch law, which allows euthanasia with life-relievingdrugs, it is in fact becoming more and more elastic. Patients used to haveto be terminally ill, before being granted a request to receive 'help todie'. But a couple of years ago a doctor was cleared of legal charges afterhaving helped a depressed, but not otherwise ill, woman to die. The womanwas a widow who had lost her two sons one after the other, and who feltshe no longer had anything to live for. Of course, we can all sympathisewith her plight. Yet we also know that people can live through grief andcome out of depression and again be grateful for living, despite theirpast. A law which allows euthanasia on request in the case of depressionrisks depriving lots of people of worthwhile futures. To turn to withholding and withdrawing treatment, as opposed to activeprovision of drugs to endlife. Let us start with 'living wills' or advancedirectives as they are also called. Such directives concern non-treatment.They state that under certain specified conditions, the patient does notwish to be resuscitated, and wishes to forego treatment aimed at prolongingor sustaining life. That is to say, they state that the patient declaresnow, while of sound mind, that if he were to become mentally incapacitatedand unable to express his wishes, he would not wish to be resuscitatedor to receive life-sustaining treatment under such and such conditions.Are such documents helpful and would it be a good idea to make them legallybinding? It is partly because people might change their minds that many peopleargue that such advance directives would not be a good idea. Earlier thisyear the Government decided not to introduce the Law Commission's Billon Mental Incapacity, which would have made advance directives legallybinding. The decision went against the recommendations stated in the BritishMedical Association's Code of Practice of April 1995, which suggested thatadvance directives are legally binding according to common law. That isto say, the BMA pointed out that patients of sixteen years or over andof sound mind have a common law right to refuse treatment. And so theyargued that, if people refused certain future treatment options while ofsound mind, then their request should be respected when they were no longercapable of making an informed decision about their treatment. However,as the law stands today, it seems unclear whether advance directives arelegally binding. Leaving the legal status of advance directives to the side, let us discusstheir advantages and disadvantages. Those who argue for advance directivesargue for patient autonomy and against medical paternalism. Moreover, itis often pointed out that such documents might be helpful for doctors andnurses when a mentally incapacitated patient is suffering from malignantdisease or AIDS or from an advanced degenerative disease of the nervoussystem, or severe and lasting brain damage, or severe senile or pre-seniledementia. If he or she has made an advance statement, it might make iteasier for the doctor to decide how to treat the patient. Against these arguments, others point out that individuals who drawup advance directives are not making informed decisions, because they cannotknow in advance precisely what situations they may face. Hence, they argue,an advance directive could actually amount to a blank cheque for the doctor,which would be contrary to what would have been intended by signing anadvance directive. That is, some people hold that advance statements couldprotect doctors from legal suits and make it easier for them to decideon non-treatment. In other words, there are those that argue that advancedirectives would actually protect the doctor rather than the patient. As I also said, people's attitudes may change. The thought of a lingeringdeath or a few months of slowly dying might seem futile to a healthy person.And so many a healthy person might think it is a good idea to sign an advancedirective to the effect that in the case of a degenerative illness suchas senile dementia, he or she would not want to receive even, for example,antibiotics. Yet, it is probably true to say that many people with suchconditions are quite happy to be living. Another objection to advance directives is that the put the onus onthe patient to demand a certain type of care. But are doctors and nursesnot under a professional obligation to provide the most intelligent andcompassionate care they can give? And if so, surely doctors and nursesought to seek to avoid administering futile treatment or prolonging sufferingwhen there is no real hope of recovery. However, this does of course raise the question of where to draw theline between euthanasia by omission and other omissions, as well as thequestion of whether tube-feeding should be regarded as medical treatmentor as basic nursing care which can never be withheld. In the famous case of Tony Bland, who had been in a persistent vegetativestate for three years, the High Court and the Law Lords seemed to arguethat artificial nutrition and hydration is to be regarded as treatmentrather than as nursing care, and ruled that it was in the patient's bestintereststhat fluid and nutrition be withdrawn in order not to prolong his life.The case was not intended to set a precedent. And some of the judges whohad been involved in the case were worried about the fact that matterssuch as these were decided in the courts and recommended that it was forParliament to debate and decide these issues. The establishment of theHouse of Lords' Select Committee was a move in this direction. As you know,the Select Committee opposed the legalisation of active euthanasia andassisted suicide, but did not pronounce on deliberate death-causing omissions. So we are still left with the problem of drawing a line between euthanasiaomissions and non-euthanasia omissions. Well, it seems reasonable to suggest- and it seems to be the practice in hospices - not to provide medicaltreatment which no longer corresponds to the real situation of the patient,either because it is disproportionate to any expected results or becauseit imposes an excessive burden on the patient. For example, when deathis clearly imminent and inevitable, it seems reasonable to forego treatmentthat would only secure a precarious and burdensome prolongation of life. Indeed, if the patient is dying, even food and fluids could be justifiablywithheld if giving such sustenance was futile and burdensome. That is tosay, according to hospice ethics, it is justifiable to forego medical procedureswhich are disproportionate to any expected results, and it is justifiableto forego medical treatment and even food and fluids to avoid imposingan excessive burden on the patient. Take the example of a terminally ill cancer patient whose painful deathis being prolonged by artificial feeding. The patient's life might be prolongedby weeks. If the patient expresses the wish no longer to be artificiallyfed, then his request would be granted. For the feeding will not prolonghis life for very long anyway, and what would be the point in prolongingthe process of dying? In this situation, provision of food and fluids couldbe described as both futile and too burdensome. Of course, in some situations it may be difficult to say whether a treatmentis too burdensome. In this respect the suicidal person poses a specialproblem. For he or she might describe just about any treatment as too burdensome.Here I think that wisdom, experience and compassion are required to decidewhether a certain treatment is or is not too burdensome. What is requiredis care based on shared understanding of the sick person's suffering -and this understanding only comes with experience. In November 1995, my centre, the Centre for Bioethics and Public Policy,organised a conference in Brussels. The theme was euthanasia and therewere a number of British experts on palliative care in attendance. Interestingly,they all testified to the fact that good palliative care is the best answerto a demand for euthanasia. The request for euthanasia is usually a requestfor help,they said. When receiving good palliative care, even depressedterminally ill patients seem to regain a taste for life. However, if the patient cannot speak for himself, the situation is quitedifferent. How is one to decide what constitutes disproportionate treatmentin those circumstances? Here there is no question of the treatment beingtoo burdensome. What matters here is whether it is proportional to expectedresults. If a certain treatment gives hope of recovery, it should obviouslybe given, but otherwise their is little point in it. In other words, ifa dying patient gets pneumonia, there is clearly no point in giving himantibiotics. And to take the difficult situation of a PVS patient, if onecan be sure that there is no misdiagnosis, then even in this case it mightbe argued that giving antibiotics to overcome pneumonia would be pointless,for it would not help the patient to get over the main irreversible andsevere condition from which ne is suffering. But could the same argument be applied to food and fluids? Is the provisionof food and fluids more basic than the proivision of antibiotics and indeedso basic that we cannot deprive a person of food and fluids unless he isdying and has asked for it? If the food and fluid were to make the patientmore comfortable there would certainly be a point in it. But if it obviousthat feeding him is futile and will only prolong the process of dying,then it cannot be in the patient's best interest to pump food or fluidsinto him only to prolong the inevitable. A PVS patient, however, is not actually dying, though he will foreverremain in a state of unawareness of the world around him. So the questionis whether in this situation tube-feeding should be regarded as obligatorycare. The answer is that the kind or level of care that should be providedmust be decided by considering a number of circumstances. Those who arein the caring professions know that experience is the only teacher of goodjudgement in the concrete situation. And to argue that withholding or withdrawalof food and fluid from PVS patients might in some circumstances be justified,would not be the same as advocating euthanasia by omission. Take the case of a patient who has been in a PVS for five years. Isit right to keep him in such a state of suspended animation for years andyears to come? Is it right towards the patient, and is it right towardsthe relatives? And is it right to provide nursing care indefinitely fora person in that state if there is a shortage of staff or other resources?These are big questions - and it is not for me to provide all the answers. But let me repeat, what matters here is experience coupled with a caringattitude. Without experience, which can only be gained by practice, itis impossible to understand what treatment might improve or ease a patient'scondition and what is futile treatment, or to understand what is medicallypossible and what is not. As to the attitude required in caring for thegravely ill and those who suffer, it is that of the Good Samaritan. TheGood Samaritan was moved by compassion and recognized the injured man bythe wayside as his neighbour, as a fellow human being, and treated himas he would have wanted to be treated himself. [ DIDMSNJ][ DIDSIG][ VESS FastAccess][ Pro-lifeEncyclopaedia ][ DeathNET][ LifeNET] [ British Mensa ][ InternationalMensa ] WT02-B28-11IA007-000076-B035-299http://www.euthanasia.org:80/resume2.html 194.88.132.128 19970222060108 text/html 10588HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 22 Feb 1997 06:09:06 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/html Resume Like to make cool graphics for your webpage like the menu items above? Or original backgrounds? JavaScript Enabled Selection Menu - Try some of my pages: - Choose PageVESS Fast AccessVESS HomepageVESS Online WebguideMensa LinksMovie Links Welcome to my homepage. Now if this were my home you would perhaps be carrying a bottle of good red wine, a pack of Marlboro and at least a couple of interesting or amusing stories, so if you enjoy these pages, why not drop me a line with some interesting ideas? > Resume Chris Docker 17 Hart Street Edinburgh, EH1 3RN, Scotland UK didmsnj@easynet.co.uk +44 (0)-131-556-4404 Employment Objective To work hard and have fun, and to make some contribution to humanity. Current Employment Executive Secretary VESS. Directing the work of the Voluntary Euthanasia Society of Scotland. (Full time salaried position.) A week's work is described in an article from VESS Newsletter. A biographical article has appeared in Mensa Magazine. Experience Webmaster for VESS - December 1995 to Present (Extensive website) Writing & publishing - Contributing chapters: Living Wills/Advance Directives in: Contemporary Issues in Law, Medicine & Ethics (ed. Prof Sheila McLean) The Way Forward? in: Death, Dying & the Law. (ed. Prof Sheila McLean) Books: Departing Drugs (co-author) Beyond Final Exit (co-author) Collected Living Wills (editor) Journals: VESS Newsletter (assistant editor, compilation & production) DIDMS News Journal Booklets, brochures & leaflets: for VESS Public speaking Wide range of talks, seminars and conference presentations Media appearances, including news programmes and interviews, radio and television Guest lectures at medical law honours level and post-graduate level Management and organisation Management of staff (30+) and training Conference managemen Press releases Day-to-day Director of VESS Information technology Camera ready copy dtp production using Corel Ventura Programming in OPL & HTML Conversant with Corel Ventura, DOS, Windows, Word, Lotus, PaintShop Pro, Arts & Letters. Research Methods of self-deliverance Living wills Research conducted to academic and international, peer review publication standards Teamwork responsibilities VESS Executive Committee 1986 to present VESS Treasurer 1987 to 1992 DIDSIG Secretary 1994 to present Scottish Mensa Committee Vice-Chairman 1996- Liaison & Networking Submission to the House of Lords Select Committee on Medical Ethics 1993 Written & oral submissions to the British Medical Association Working Party on Advance Statements 1994 Personal liaison for living will research with the Law Commission, Law Society, BMA, Official Solicitor, Department of Health, and the World Federation of Right to Die Societies. Initiatives Founded International Drugs Consensus Working Party 1993 Founded Living Will & Values History Project 1994 Founded Dying In Dignity MSIG 1994 Spearheaded �40,000 grant for PAS research (Glasgow University) 1995 Developed VESS Newsletter from 4 page unformatted to international 24 page dtp 1992 to present Pioneered VESS online (2nd largest Death & Dying site in the world) 1995 Research Literature search research projects and international liaison leading to leading living will documents and publications, and the first scientifically documented self-deliverance works in the world Education Currently completing (part-time) a Master of Philosophy Degree in Law & Ethics in Medicine (Glasgow University) 1994 to present Personal Interests include Applied ethics, Mensa, etymology, travel References: Work (current): Kay Carmichael, Vice-Convener VESS Academic & work: Professor Sheila A.M. McLean, International Bar Association Professor of Law & Ethics in Medicine; Director, Institute of Law & Ethics in Medicine, Glasgow University. email: guba10@udcf.gla.ac.uk WT02-B28-12IA007-000076-B042-116http://www.euthanasia.org:80/melbourne.html 194.88.132.128 19970222062636 text/html 9509HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 22 Feb 1997 06:34:40 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/html VOLUNTARY EUTHANASIA: SECURING THE CHOICE - Conference details BOOK NOW for the PUBLIC FORUMTHURSDAY 17 OCTOBER 1996, 9am-5pm VOLUNTARY EUTHANASIA: SECURING THE CHOICE This Forum is held as part of the 11th International Conference of the World Federation ofRight to Die Societies.[cost] [venue] [speakers] [enquiries] [booking] [links] COST: (includes light lunch plus morning and afternoon refreshments)AU$28 For Members of the Voluntary Euthanasia Society of Victoria (and for members of anyother Voluntary Euthanasia Society)AU$48 For non-membersVENUE:The ROYAL AUSTRALIAN COLLEGE OF SURGEONS BUILDING,CNR SPRING AND LONSDALE STREETS, MELBOURNESPEAKERS:From Australia:Professor DOROTHY ANGELLProfessor PETER BAUMEDr ROGER MAGNUSSON & Dr HARRY BALLISMr MARSHALL PERRONFrom the United States:Dr FAYE GIRSHFrom the United Kingdom:Dr MICHAEL IRWINFrom the Netherlands:Mr A.N.A. JOSEPHUS JITTAFrom Switzerland:Professor Dr MEINRAD SCHARMODERATOR:Dr FRANCIS MACNAB, Executive Director of the Cairnmillar Institute Melbourne, andExecutive Minister of St Michael's Church, Melbourne. Dr Macnab is also Chief of Training inPsychotherapy and Trauma Therapy and the author of 17 books including "Life after Loss".CLICK HERE FOR DETAILS ABOUT THE SPEAKERS For enquiries contact the Voluntary Euthanasia Society of Victoria. Tel: +61 -3-9521-3297 orFax: +61 -3-9521-3302 BOOKING FORM (Please print and return this section to VESV with your payment)VOLUNTARY EUTHANASIA: SECURING THE CHOICE - 17 OCTOBER 1996I WISH TO ORDER TICKET(S ) FOR THE FOLLOWING PERSON/PEOPLE:(Please print name/s)_________________________________________________________________________________________ _________________________________________________________________________________________ _________________________________________________________________________________________ _________________________________________________________________________________________ TOTAL ENCLOSED AU$____________PLEASE SEND THE TICKETS TO:(Name:)_________________________________________________________________________________________(Address:)_________________________________________________________________________________________ _________________________________________________________________________________________ _________________________________________________________________________________________ Zip/Postcode____________PLEASE MAKE CHEQUE OR MONEY ORDER PAYABLE TO VESV AND SEND IT WITHTHIS SECTION TO:VOLUNTARY EUTHANASIA SOCIETYOF VICTORIA INC.,70 Greville Street, Prahran, Victoria 3181, Australia.Tickets will be issued within two weeks of receipt of payment.VOLUNTARY EUTHANASIA: SECURING THE CHOICE Information about the speakers DOROTHY ANGELL Professor of Nursing and Head of the Caroline Chisholm School of Nursing at MonashUniversity in Melbourne. PETER BAUME Professor of Community Medicine at the University of New South Wales, Chancellor of ttheAustralian National University, a Commissioner of the Australian Law Reform Commission andPatron of the VE Society of New South Wales. ROGER MAGNUSSON & Dr HARRY BALLIS Dr Magnusson is a postdoctoral research fellow in the Faculty of Law at the University ofMelbourne and Dr Ballis is a lecturer in sociology at Monash University Gippsland. DrsMagnusson and Ballis are currently undertaking research into AIDS sufferers and assisteddying. MARSHALL PERRON Former Chief Minister of Northern Territory and the person responsible for the Rights of theTerminally Ill Act, the first legislation in the world to permit active voluntary euthanasia. MrPerron is Patron of the NT VE Society. FAYE GIRSH A clinical and forensic psychologist who is Executive Director of the Hemlock Society USA, DrGirsh is a member of the American Psychological Association and has published articles inmedical, legal and psychological journals on the right to die. MICHAEL IRWIN A retired physician who was medical director at the United Nations from 1982 to 1991 andUNICEF's representative in Bangladesh, Dr Irwin has been UNICEF's senior advisor onchildhood disabilities and the UN's senior consultant during the 1981 International Year ofDisabled Persons. Dr Irwin is chairman of the VE Society in London. A.N.A. JOSEPHUS JITTA Head of Public Prosecution Office at one of the district courts in the Netherlands and a publicprosecutor for over 25 years. Mr Josephus Jitta is also a board member of the Dutch VESociety, and co-author of a recent bill to legalise voluntary euthanasia. MEINRAD SCHAR President of EXIT, the Swiss Association for Human Dying, Dr Schar was, prior to this, aprofessor of social and preventive medicine at the University of Zurich for more than twentyyears and Vice-Director of the Swiss Federal Office of Public Health. Related Links: Scottish VE Society VE Society of Victoria Northern Territory Rights of the Terminally Ill Act 1995 Visit the new VESS Hotlinks Utility, with hot links to Computers/Internet, Ethics, Language, Law, Leisure,Medicine, News, Politics, Religion, Scotland, Sociology, and Travel. Use the super new frames to get the best from search engines check out the special sections on Abortion, Animal Rights, Euthanasia, Genetics, IVF, Sex Education, Surrogacy Get travel phrases and quick translation in any language... Supreme Courts access... Send 3D postcards or find the paths to astrological seduction! Find out how to assert your health rights... All the best news services in one easy-to-use page... Civil liberties and political parties pages - get campaigning! Pictures and info on the best country in the world (that's Scotland for all you Sassenachs!)... And much more... Conference document contained in this page circulated by Chris Docker, Scottish Voluntary Euthanasia Society, on behalf ofKay Koetsier, Voluntary Euthanasia Society of Victoria. distribute freely [What else is new] [Fast Access to VE info] [VESS 3Mb website on VE] [VESV] [Feedback to WebmasterWT02-B28-13IA007-000076-B042-146http://www.euthanasia.org:80/mclean.html 194.88.132.128 19970222062646 text/html 2849HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 22 Feb 1997 06:34:55 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/html Research findings - Physician assisted suicide Research findings - Physician assisted suicide In a survey published 23rd May, the first of its kind in Britain, it is revealed that a majority of doctors in Britain believe they should be allowed to help suffering patients to end their lives. Professor Sheila McLean, who is Professor of Law & Ethics in Medicine at Glasgow University, has conducted Britain's first ever research into the issue, the aim of which, she says, is to draft a bill which would legalise physician-assisted suicide. The controversial step would require the support of the medical profession. Her survey results indicate that she has the majority of the medical profession on her side. Under the law in Britain at the moment, prescribing lethal drugs to help someone to die can be punished as culpable homicide in Scotland or as assted suicide/manslaughter in England. 54% of the doctors who responded to the confidential questionnaire said they would support a change in the law that would allow them to help patients to die. 16% said they would help in terminal cases, 11% in cases of physical suffering, and 7% simply if the patient wished it. A considerable proportion said they been asked by a patient to assist in suicide, and 3% admitted that they had in the past helped patients to die, and privately the figure is thought to be higher. The Scottish Voluntary Euthanasia Society commented: This ground-breaking research is most encouraging - it seems to confirm what we suspected, that a majority of doctors are caring people who want to respect their patients' wishes - even when doing so would mean prescribing drugs that would enable a suffering patient to choose quality over quantity of life. Until now, patients have not had the support of the medical profession or the law when taking these difficult decisions - this is one of the reasons why the Scottish Voluntary Euthanasia Society issues, under certain conditions, literature on "self-deliverance." We hope now that parliament will recognise the wishes of the public, the medical profession, and the humaneness of allowing death with dignity at a time of a patient's own choosing. We know there will be problems with any such legislation, but such problems are not insurmoutable - by doing nothing we would simply allow a heartless sentence to run its course for individuals whose indignity and suffering cannot be relieved - people deserve the key to the door marked "Exit" if that is what they want. VESS made a grant of �42,000 available to Glasgow University to perform the research. WT02-B28-14IA008-000077-B005-72http://www.euthanasia.org:80/antartic.html 194.88.132.128 19970222062920 text/html 2075HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 22 Feb 1997 06:37:23 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/html RIGHT TO DIE ORGANISATIONS WORLDWIDE RIGHT TO DIE ORGANISATIONS WORLDWIDE Antartica? - You must be kidding! [Back to the Map][Back to the VESS Homepage][Back to the VESS FastAccess Page] You are the 39th person to browse through here since 26 Dec 1995 using the above URL. WT02-B28-15IA008-000077-B008-242http://www.euthanasia.org:80/ethben.html 194.88.132.128 19970222063934 text/html 1674HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 22 Feb 1997 06:47:43 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/html Benefits of a Code of Ethics Benefits of a Code of Ethics A code of ethics developed from the basic principles ofMensa's Constitution would be acceptable whether defended from altruisticor self-improvement motives. 1. To be a socially responsible organisation 2. To provide Employees and Official with guidelines 3. To establish a better corporate culture 4. To improve Mensa's public image 5. To improve management 6. To minimize the risk of white collar crime Whilst the development of a Business Code of Ethics is a highly skilledand specialised task, implementation of conflict-avoiding ethical procedurescan often be achieved by calling on the experience and free assistanceof bodies such as the Scottish Council for Voluntary Organisations. Externalstandards, of themselves, tend to reduce friction from internal factions. Excerpted from "A Question of Ethics" by Chris Docker, published in British Mensa Magazine, October 1996. Return to the Intelligence Page WT02-B28-16IA008-000077-B008-281http://www.euthanasia.org:80/ethact.html 194.88.132.128 19970222064004 text/html 1581HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 22 Feb 1997 06:48:12 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/html Action Points for Mensa - Ethics Action Points for Mensa as an Organisation All growing organisations are beset with internal political problemsat a certain stage of their development. A scientific approach is calledfor to minimize conflict. Commission an independent business ethicist to develop a Code ofEthics, in conjunction with the BMC and Mensa staff. Develop a Members' Charter to give weight to members' duties touphold the good name of Mensa. Develop leadership by training Mensa key figures in business ethicsso as to implement corporate strategy. Identify best practice in all areas of activity so as to encourageminimum standards. Employ outside expertise, where necessary, to optimise conflictmanagement. Excerpted from "A Question of Ethics" by Chris Docker, published in British Mensa Magazine, October 1996. Return to the Intelligence Page WT02-B28-17IA045-000814-B023-133http://www.newyorklife.com:80/ 207.121.184.160 19970119005502 text/html 4467HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 00:54:16 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 09-Jan-97 16:31:33 GMTContent-length: 4282Content-type: text/html New York Life Insurance Company - Life Insurance and Financial Information "If people only understood what life insurance is and does and how it works,we wouldn't need to 'sell' it. People would come knocking on our door." Ben Feldman "The Greatest Agent of All" For economic updates, please take a look at our Economic Commentary. The mutual funds and variable insurance products referred to in the New York Life Insurance Company Web site may be offered or sold only to persons in the United States. Securities products are offered by NYLIFE Securities Inc., Member NASD. Please call 1-800-522-4022 for a free prospectus which contains more complete information on applicable fees, charges and expenses and share classes for each mutual fund and variable insurance product. Please read it carefully before investing. Distributed by NYLIFE Distributors Inc., Member NASD. Copyright © 1996 New York Life Insurance Company. All Rights Reserved. Site Navigation Tips Welcome · The Company You Keep· Business Issues· Consumer Issues· Products & Services Personal Folder· Joining The Team· What's New WT02-B28-18IA045-000814-B023-164http://www.newyorklife.com:80/nyl/images/index.map 207.121.184.160 19970119005520 text/html 315HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 00:54:29 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 180 Imagemap Error Imagemap Error Your client did not send any coordinates. Either your client doesn't support imagemap or the map file was not accessed as a map.WT02-B28-19IA045-000814-B023-191http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/index.html 207.121.184.160 19970119005539 text/html 3785HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 00:54:50 GMTContent-type: text/html New York Life Insurance Company - Life Insurance and Financial Information "If people only understood what life insurance is and does and how it works,we wouldn't need to 'sell' it. People would come knocking on our door." Ben Feldman "The Greatest Agent of All" For economic updates, please take a look at our Economic Commentary. The mutual funds and variable insurance products referred to in the New York Life Insurance Company Web site may be offered or sold only to persons in the United States. Securities products are offered by NYLIFE Securities Inc., Member NASD. Please call 1-800-522-4022 for a free prospectus which contains more complete information on applicable fees, charges and expenses and share classes for each mutual fund and variable insurance product. Please read it carefully before investing. Distributed by NYLIFE Distributors Inc., Member NASD. Copyright © 1996 New York Life Insurance Company. All Rights Reserved. Site Navigation Tips Welcome· The Company You Keep· Business Issues· Consumer Issues· Products & Services Personal Folder· Joining The Team· What's New WT02-B28-20IA045-000814-B023-298http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/sy.html 207.121.184.160 19970119005703 text/html 4923HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 00:56:05 GMTContent-type: text/html Site Search The New York Life Web site is fully integrated with two other Web sites: MainStay Mutual Funds and NYLCare Health Plans, Inc. You may choose to search just one - or all three - sites using the Keyword Search. Keyword Search Enter your search string below and click on search: Search All SitesSearch New York LifeSearch MainStay FundsSearch NYLCare Maximum Number of Hits: 5102030405075100 You may also search the New York Life Web site in one of the following two ways: View Site Map To see a graphical representation of the New York Life Web site, click here. Alphabetical Index You can also browse through the New York Life Web site index alphabetized by page title. Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-21IA045-000814-B023-334http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/ly.html 207.121.184.160 19970119005716 text/html 5807HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 00:56:30 GMTContent-type: text/html Legal Copyright © 1996 New York Life Insurance Company While New York Life Insurance Company and its affiliates provide the information on thisserver to anyone, we retain copyright on all text and graphic images. This means thatyou may not: distribute the text or graphics to others or "mirror" thisinformation on your own server without the prior express written permission of New York LifeInsurance Company or modify or re-use the text or graphics on this system. YouMAY: print copies of the information or store the files on your own computer foryour personal use only or reference this server from your own documents. New York Life Insurance Company reserves all other rights. The logo and the logo and the logo and The Company You Keep and New York Life and MainStay andNYLCare and NYLIFE and New York Life Asset Management areregistered trademarks or servicemarks of New York Life Insurance Company. SpectraLife is a trademark of New York Life Insurance Company. Products andservice names profiled herein are marks of New York Life Insurance Company. Othermanufacturers' products profiled herein are trademarks of their respective companies. Please Read This Disclaimer The information, text, graphics and links provided herein are provided by New York LifeInsurance Company as a convenience to its customers. New York Life Insurance Company does not warrant the accuracy or completeness of theinformation, text, graphics, links, and other items contained on this server or any otherserver. New York Life Insurance Company makes no representation about the suitability of thisdocumentation for any purpose. It is provided as is without express or implied warranty. Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-22IA045-000814-B023-363http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/cphsag.html 207.121.184.160 19970119005728 text/html 6086HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 00:56:40 GMTContent-type: text/html The Greatest Agent of All The Greatest Agent of All The most successful agent of all time, Ben Feldman, fit no mold. When he was about toenter to thebusiness of selling individual insurance, he thought of himself as "a hayseed, a hick fromthe sticks -how could I sell life insurance? They told me I didn't look the part ..." Knocking on the door of a New York Life manager in Youngstown, Ben sat down and took anaptitudetest. He failed to fit the formula. A vice president emphatically said, "This ordinarybusiness isn't foryou. You'll fall flat on your face." Ben kept returning, the essence of persistence. "Youtoss me out thisdoor," he would say to the people in Youngstown, "and I'll come back in that one." When hefinallyjoined the company, on February 15, 1942, he was 29. He quietly made people conscious that his company controlled more money than many of theflashier establishments and that it had paid dividends and kept all its promises forgenerations. Withthose credentials out of the way, he presented himself as a high-level specialist who stoodoutside thetraditional business hierarchy. If he needed to get a skeptic's attention, he wrapped five$100 bills in anote reading, "I'll swap these for five minutes." Every sales agent has a unique sales strategy, but none were as successful as BenFeldman. Benwas Top Club president in 1955 and led the company in sales every year thereafter until thelate 1970s,when he asked that his name be removed from all sales results lists. During the 1970s, Benannuallyoutsold 1,500 of the industry's 1,800 companies. In 1992, New York Life ran a sales contesttocommemorate Ben's 50th year with the company. The winner? Eighty-year-old Ben Feldman. The Birth of a Company|Growing Up|A Century of Triumph|The Greatest Agent of All Creating the Blue Chip|Cross Currents|The World Changed|Into the Twenty-First Century Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-23IA045-000814-B023-404http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/bfmc.html 207.121.184.160 19970119005759 text/html 4187HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 00:56:59 GMTContent-type: text/html Economic Commentary Quarterly Economic Update November 1996 Weekly Economic Commentary December 2, 1996 Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-24IA045-000814-B024-16http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/went.html 207.121.184.160 19970119005813 text/html 5307HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 00:57:24 GMTContent-type: text/html Site Navigation Tips Site Navigation Tips We have incorporated several features to make is easy for you to make your way around this site. Relative Location Within the Site At the top of this page, you can see a header entitled "Welcome". Other pages in this site have similar headers and, in some cases, subheaders. A subheader will be located directly beneath the header (this page has no subheader). The header and subheader indicate your relative location in the site. Returning to the Top of a Section or Subsection If the headers or subheader is bright blue it is an active "hyperlink".If you click on a blue header title, the top level page for that section will be displayed.If you click on a smaller blue subheader title, the top level page for that particular subsection will be displayed. Navigating Within a Section or Subsection At the bottom of most pages within a section, you will also see lateral links to other pages within that section. The page you are on will be displayed in bold type, but will not be active. For example, at the bottom of this page, you can see that you are on the "Site Navigation Tips" page. Any other pages listed are active links. For example, you can click on the "Welcome" link below to connect to that page. Try it now! Welcome | Site Navigation Tips Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-25IA045-000814-B024-50http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/we.html 207.121.184.160 19970119005829 text/html 5893HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 00:57:41 GMTContent-type: text/html Welcome Welcome to New York Life! This World Wide Web site has been developed as a comprehensive information resource on theNewYork Life Insurance Company. The site is in constant development and will grow and evolve over time. If there isinformation you arelooking for that is not included here at present, it will likely be added at some point inthe future. If thereis something you would like to see included at this site, please send us a message. Click onthe"Contact NYL" button above to get in touch with us. Here's a guide to the links from this page: A Snapshot of New York Life A brief introduction to who we are, where we came from, and what we do. How to Use This Site A guideline to navigating through this comprehensive World Wide Web site. Open Your Personal Folder The Personal Folder is a special tool that organizes content on this site based on yourpersonal profile. Youcan customize your Personal Folder by adding or deleting links from it. It's your ownpersonal "HomePage" on this Web site! Click on the link above or below to set up your own Personal Foldernow! Welcome | Site Navigation Tips Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-26IA045-000814-B024-74http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/cp.html 207.121.184.160 19970119005851 text/html 8978HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 00:57:56 GMTContent-type: text/html The Company You Keep The New York Life Insurance Company is one of largest full-serviceinsurance companies in the UnitedStates. New York Life, in concert with its subsidiaries,offers a fullrange of integrated productsand services to meet your needs. A wide selection of lifeinsurance,financial, and health benefitproducts and services are available through New York Lifeand its subsidiaries. A few facts about New York Life: Founded on April 12, 1845 with initial assets of $17,000. Fourth largest life insurer, by assets, in the United States. Consolidated assets stood at over $74 billion on Feb. 16, 1996. Has had more agents in the Million Dollar Round Table (themost prestigious internationalorganization for life insurance agents) than any other lifeinsurancecompany in the world for overforty consecutive years. General offices in all fifty states, including Alaska andHawaii, andinternational operations inEurope, Asia, South America, and Mexico. This Web site provides a significant amount of information on ourproducts and services. If you need additional information on anyof the products orservicesoffered by New York Life and its subsidiaries,please drop us a line! Just click on the "Contact NYL" button toget intouch with us. This site will grow and expand to meet your needs. If there isanythingthat you feel needsto be added, please let us know. We have strived to provide information that will help you makedecisionsabout yourfinancial or insurance needs. However, itisalways important tospeak to a financial, tax or insurance professional before youmakeany financial orinsurance decision. A New York Life agent will be pleased tocontact youto discuss yourneeds and personal situation in greater detail. Click on the"ContactNYL" button to send us a message. Here's a guide to help you navigate through thissectionof the site: News Find out what's new at New York Life, and on this Web site. Background The full story on the New York Life Insurance Company. Introducesyouto the Company, and answers any questions you might have about theorganization. Employment Look into career opportunities with one of the most respectedcompaniesin the United States. New York Life is an equal opportunity employer. We are committed to recruiting,hiring, training, and promoting our employees solely on the basis of merit andqualification withoutregard to a person's age, alienage, color, marital status, national origin, physical ormental disability,race, religion, sex, sexual preference or orientation, or status as a disabled veteranor veteran of theVietnam Era. History Go back in time with New York Life. Find out how we began. Learnabout the role we played in major historical events - and ourplans for thefuture. Reports This link includes the 1995 Annual Report on the Company, as wellas other related reports of interest to investors. Worldwide Information on New York Life operations around the globe. Your New York Life Agent Information on what your New York Life insurance agent can do for you. Brokerage Insurance professionals can find information on how to contact the New York Life Brokerage in Kansas City,Missouri with this link. Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-27IA045-000814-B024-110http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/bf.html 207.121.184.160 19970119005931 text/html 7592HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 00:58:29 GMTContent-type: text/html Business Issues Welcome to the New York Life Business Issues! This section of the New York LifeWeb sitehas been designed to help you find information that is important to you and yourbusiness. To get the most out of the New York Life Web site, you should open up your ownpersonalPersonal Folder. The Personal Folder is your own personal "Homepage" that will make it easy for you to organizeinformationrelevant to you and your business. Just click on the "Open Your Personal Folder"button above to setoneup! If you need more information on any of the products or services you find inthissection,please drop us a line. Just click on the "Contact NYL" button to get in touchwithus. This site will grow and expand to meet your needs. If there is anything that youfeelneedsto be added to the Business Issues, please let us know. Just click on the"ContactNYL"button above to send us a message. We have strived to provide information that will help you make decisions aboutyourinsurance or financial products through this Web site. However, it is alwaysimportant tospeak to a financial, tax or insurance professional before you make anyfinancial orinsurance decisions. A New York Life agent will be pleased to contact you todiscussyourbusiness needs and situation in greater detail. Click on the "Contact NYL" buttontoget intouch with us. Here's a guide to help you navigate through this section of thesite: Open Your Personal Folder Click here to open your own personal "Home Page" on the New York Life Website! Helping Your BusinessGrow Whether your business is small, large, or a non-profit organization, this sectionpresents tips andinformation that may help it prosper. Economic Commentary Click here for information of immediate interest to business owners. Highlights ofsignificant business issues and trends are discussed. Pension Plan Issues This link connects you to the MainStay Funds Web site. MainStay isa registered investment company. Health BenefitsIssues This link connects you to the "For Employers" section of the NYLCare Health Plans Inc. Web site. NYLCare is awholly-owned subsidiary of New York Life that offers health benefit services toemployers in all 50 states and the District of Columbia. Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-28IA045-000814-B024-144http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/pf.html 207.121.184.160 19970119005946 text/html 9259HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 00:58:57 GMTContent-type: text/html Consumer Issues Welcome to the New York Life Consumer Issues! This section of the New York LifeWeb sitehas been designed to help you find information that is important to you in yourpersonallife. To get the most out of the New York Life Web site, you should open up your ownpersonalPersonal Folder. The Personal Folder is your own personal "Homepage" that will make it easy for you to organizeinformationimportant to you. Just click on the "Personal Folder" button above to setoneup! If you need more information on any of the products or services you find inthis section,please drop us a line. Just click on the "Contact NYL" button to get in touchwith us. This site will grow and expand to meet your needs. If there is anything that youfeel needsto be added to the Consumer Issues, please let us know. Just click on the"Contact NYL"button above to send us a message. We have strived to provide information that will help you make decisions aboutyourinsurance or financial product needs through this Web site. However, it is alwaysimportant tospeak to a financial, tax or insurance professional before you make anyfinancial orinsurance decision. A New York Life agent will be pleased to contact you todiscuss yourneeds and personal situation in greater detail. Click on the "Contact NYL" buttonto get intouch with us. Here's a guide to help you navigate through this section of thesite: Personal Folder Click here to open your own personal "Home Page" on the New York Life Web site! Starting Out This section presents information of interest to people just starting out. If youare young,either single or in a relationship, the information in this section has beenorganized to meetyour needs. We're a Family If you have a family of your own, and your children still live with you, theinformation in thissection will help you with your financial and insurance planning. Personal Investing Investing to meet personal goals is an important objective for many people. Bythe sametoken, many people don't know how to get started. There are a multitude offinancial products available today, and a number of issues to consider. This section of thesite willhelp you make sense of them all. Retirement Planning You're never too young - or too old - to begin saving for your retirement. Thissection of thesite has been designed to help you establish, and refine, your retirementinvestmentstrategy. Estate Planning Many people think that estate planning is only for rich people. The truth is thatestateplanning is important for anyone that holds assets. These assets might include ahome,retirement accounts, or other physical assets. Click here to find out how tomanage yourown estate. Owning a Business As a business owner, you have special concerns when it comes to insurance, investing and healthcare. This section of the site has been designed to meet yourinformation needs. What About Life Insurance? Life insurance is important for anyone, whether just starting out, raising afamily, or retired. This section will help you determine your life insurance needs, and introduce youto someof the life insurance products that New York Life offers. What About Health Benefits? Benefits for health care are an important concern for many people. If you arecovered by a health benefits plan, this section of the site will help you make some health carebenefits decisionsthat are right for you. Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-29IA045-000814-B024-191http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/ps.html 207.121.184.160 19970119010004 text/html 7161HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 00:59:13 GMTContent-type: text/html Products and Services Individual Life Insurance Annuities Mutual Funds1 Funding for 401(k) IRA Rollover Business Life Insurance The Executive Bonus Plan Buy - Sell Insurance Key Employee Protection Which Retirement Plan is Right for YourOrganization? Under 500 Employees 500+ Employees Group Benefit Programs For Employers NYLCare Products & Services The New York Life Insurance Company and its subsidiaries offer a wide rangeof products andservices to meet the special needs of bothindividual and businesscustomers. This section of the New York Life site introduces many of our products andservices. 1 Offered through NYLIFE Securities, Inc. (Member NASD), 51 Madison Ave., New York, NY, 10010. New York Life and its subsidiaries' products and services can be tailored to your particular needs. The links from this page introduce you to life insurance products, mutual funds through NYLIFE Securities, Inc., Member NASD, 51 Madison Ave., New York, NY, 10010, and group benefit programs (through NYLCare). This is for informational purposes only and will cover a variety oftopics examining the role insurance and other financial products may playin your financial decisions. Although many of the topics presented mayalso involve tax, legal, accounting or other issues, neither New York Lifenor any of its agents are in the business of offering such advice. Youshould consult with your own professional advisors to examine the tax,legal, or accounting aspects of any topics presented. The mutual funds and variable insurance products referred to in the NewYork Life Insurance Company Web site may be offered or sold only to personsin the United States. Securities products are offered by NYLIFE SecuritiesInc., Member NASD. Please call 1-800-522-4022 for a free prospectus whichcontains more complete information on applicable fees, charges and expensesand share classes for each mutual fund and variable insurance product. Please read it carefully before investing. Distributed by NYLIFEDistributors Inc., Member NASD. Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-30IA045-000814-B024-232http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/jt.html 207.121.184.160 19970119010031 text/html 6350HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 00:59:37 GMTContent-type: text/html Joining the Team Selecting a career, or changing your career, is one of the most important choices you will evermake. Your career can be more than just a means of earning a living; it can be a means of self-expressionand a crucial part of your identity. If you're like most people, you want to take pride in what you do andthe company you're associated with. That's one important reason you should consider a career withNew York Life. As a leading insurance company and a major force in the insurance and financial servicesindustry,New York Life offers outstanding opportunities, products and support. In fact, thousands of people havebuilt solid careers and a strong financial foundation for themselves and their families through New YorkLife. In today's world, it's important to create opportunities for yourself - opportunities where you can useyour skills and talents to build your success. A sales career with New York Life offers the best of bothworlds for the motivated individual: the independence to shape your own career and the benefits ofworking for a large company. Here's a guide to help you navigate through this section of the site: The Successful New York Life Agent Find out what it takes to be a successful New York Life Agent - and why you should consider becoming one. About New York Life Why New York Life is the type of company you would want to work for. What You Will Do An outline of your responsibilities as a New York Life agent. Training & Career Development An introduction to the New York Life Insurance Company University. Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-31IA045-000814-B024-274http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/wn.html 207.121.184.160 19970119010055 text/html 4943HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 01:00:04 GMTContent-type: text/html What's New Economic Commentary We're pleased to announce the inaugeration of a new feature, our Quarterly Economic Update. Now, in addition to our Latest Financial Statistics, you'll have access to updated quarterly information. Press Releases November 21, 1996 New York Life Names Frederick J. Sievert Vice Chairman September 18, 1996 New York Life Elects Sy Sternberg as its Next Chairman and Chief Executive Officer (CEO Harry Hohn to Retire on April 1 After 40 Years of Service) August 21, 1996 New York Life Reaches Out to Young Families with New Insurance Package Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-32IA045-000814-B024-305http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/sysm.html 207.121.184.160 19970119010121 text/html 4605HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 01:00:22 GMTContent-type: text/html Site Map Below is a graphical representation of the sections in the New York Life site. You can usethissite map to quickly navigate to a section of the site you are interested in. Just move yourmouse over a section and click. MainStay Funds NYLCare Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-33IA045-000814-B024-343http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/syin.html 207.121.184.160 19970119010135 text/html 15683HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 01:00:47 GMTContent-type: text/html Index Here's an alphbetical listing, by title, of the NYL Site. 5 Year Term Insurance A Century of Triumph A Company of Firsts A Game Plan For Meeting College Costs A Snapshot of New York Life About New York Life An Equal Opportunity Employer Annuities Annuity Considerations Are Pension Plans Too Complicated For Small Businesses? Are There Any Risks With Annuities? Asset Management Background Board of Directors Brokerage Business Issues Buy-Sell: Insuring the Life of Your Business CD vs. Deferred Annuity Career Opportunities Charitable Adjustable Life Ideas Choosing The Right Products Choosing the Right Insurance Mix Consolidated Financial Highlights Consolidated Financials Consolidated Operations Consolidated Statement of Financial Position Consolidated Summary of Operations & Surplus Consumer Issues Contact NYL Corporate Cost of Education Calculator Creating the Blue Chip Cross Currents Deferred Annuities Developing Our Talent Dollar Cost Averaging Economic Commentary Economic Update Employee's Adjustable Life Insurance Employee's Whole Life Insurance Employment - About New York Life Enjoy Your Vacation While You Plan for Your Kid's Education Estate Planning Estate Planning Calculator Estate Planning: it's a fact of life FAQ about NYL Feathering a Nest of Your Own Financing Your Children's Education Fixed Deferred Annuities Fixed Rate Annuities Fulfilling Your Retirement Goals Growing Up Helping Your Business Grow History How Do I Start? How To Use This Site How Younger Consumers Can Benefit From Whole Life Insurance IRAs: still one of the best ways to save Immediate Annuities Increasing Premium Term Insurance Index Individual Individual Life Insurance Individual Life Insurance Background Individual Operations Inflation Into the Twenty-First Century Introduction Investing For Your Family's Future Investing for Your Future Investment Issues Investment Tips Investments Joining the Team Keeping Your Business in the Family Key Employee Protection: Preserving the Life of Your Business Legal Life Insurance For Retirement Planning Life Insurance Needs Calculator LifeStages LifeStages Long-Term Care: What You Need To Know Message to Policyowners Modified Premium Whole Life NYL Good Corporate Citizen NYLCare Health Plans, Inc. NYLIAC Variable Annuity NYLIAC Variable Annuity And LifeStages: Aggressive Investment Options NYLIAC Variable Annuity And LifeStages: Conservative Investment Options NYLIAC Variable Annuity And LifeStages: Moderate Investment Options NYLIAC's Variable Universal Life Insurance Ideas NYLife Office Finder New York Life Elects Sy Sternberg as its Next Chairman and Chief Executive Officer New York Life Insurance Company - Life Insurance and Financial Information New York Life Names Frederick J. Sievert Vice Chairman New York Life Reaches Out to Young Families with New Insurance Package New York Life Worldwide Holding, Inc. News Notes to Financial Statements Office Finder Results Outsourcing Your Employee Benefits: Pension and Health Care Owning A Business Permanent Life Insurance Personal Folder Personal Folder Login Personal Folder Profiler Personal Investing Personal Investing - Choosing the Right Investment Product Products and Services Reports Retirement Issues Retirement Planning Retirement Planning Calculator Retiring Parents: Are they prepared? Risk & Return Save Page Confirmation Save Page Confirmation Single Premium Immediate Annuity (SPIA) Single Premium Life Insurance: One Payment, Many Benefits Single Premium Retirement Annuity (SPRA-2) Site Map Site Navigation Tips Site Search Six Myths That Can Rob You Of Your Retirement Plans Sooner Than You Think Special Markets Spectra 1 Spectra 2 Spectra 3 Spectra Life Overview Starting Out Starting Out - Choosing the Right Investment Product Starting Out - Choosing the Right Life Insurance Starting Out - How Much Life Insurance Do You Need? Starting Out - Life Insurance Issues Survivorship Whole Life Insurance Ideas Taking Care of Business with Split-Dollar Life Insurance Tax Deferral - What it can do for You Tax Deferral Calculator Taxes Term Insurance Ideas From New York Life Term vs. Permanent Life Insurance The Advantages of a Bundled 401(k) Plan The Birth of a Company The Company You Keep The Cost Of Waiting The Executive Bonus Plan: Insurance Benefits for Valued Executives The Greatest Agent of All The Importance of a Will The Ins and Outs of Annuities The Successful New York Life Agent The World Changed The Zero Estate Tax Plan These Five Insurance and Financial Mistakes Can Cost You Dearly These Five Insurance and Financial Mistakes Can Cost You Dearly Tips on Purchasing Life Insurance Tips on Purchasing Life Insurance Training & Career Development Turning Retirement Dreams into Reality Understanding Insurance Company Ratings Universal Life Ideas Variable Annuities Variable Deferred Annuities Variable Universal Life Variable Universal Life: Aggressive Investment Options Variable Universal Life: Conservative Investment Options Variable Universal Life: Moderate Investment Options We're a Family We're a Family - Choosing the Right Investment Product We're a Family - Choosing the Right Life Insurance We're a Family - How Much Life Insurance Do You Need? We're a Family - Life Insurance Issues Weekly Economic Commentary Welcome What About Health Care? What About Life Insurance? What Are Your Goals? What Are the Obstacles? What Exactly is an Annuity? What We Are Looking For What You Will Do What Your Agent Does for You What is Your Business Worth? What the Rating Agencies Say What to Do When Someone Dies What's New What's New at NYL What's New at this Site Who, Me? Sell Insurance and Financial Products? Why? Whole Life Whole Life Insurance Why Is Time So Important When It Comes To Saving? Why Life Insurance in Your Tax Qualified Plan? Why Retirement Planning is So Important Work and Life Worldwide Your Children's Education Your Spouse And Your Pension Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-34IA045-000814-B024-375http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/cphs.html 207.121.184.160 19970119010150 text/html 5514HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 01:01:03 GMTContent-type: text/html History The Birth of a Company Growing Up A Century of Triumph The Greatest Agent of All Creating the Blue Chip Cross Currents The World Changed Into the Twenty-First Century No one has ever called insurance a glamorous profession. And yet you will findfascinating lore onthese Web pages, the stories of legendary men and women who were part not only of our company'shistorybut also of our nation's. The New York Life story unfolds from the links on this page. Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-35IA045-000814-B024-404http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/cphsbr.html 207.121.184.160 19970119010222 text/html 6265HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 01:01:30 GMTContent-type: text/html The Birth of a Company The Birth of a Company On April 12, 1845, twenty public-spirited men arrived at fifty-seven Wall Street onhorseback and infine carriages for a brisk meeting that established the purpose of the company that wouldsoon benamed New York Life. It was time, they felt, for a bold experiment. Their mission was tofocus theenergies of the young company on the mutual life insurance business so it could capitalize ontheopportunities they saw ahead. The benefits of membership in a mutual society were spelled out in one of new YorkLife's firstadvertisements. "One of the peculiar advantages attending insurance with this company isthat all theassureds share annually in its profits and are interested in its success." The trustees ofthe companypledged that company funds would "be invested for the benefit and security of all the partiesinvolved." Underwriting American lives in the perilous mid-nineteenth century was a new game thathad to beinvented. By today's standards, it was an era of unusual risks and uncertainties. Thehazards ofpioneer life took a heavy toll, as did wars on the frontier, outbreaks of disease, poor waterand sewagesystems, and cities and towns made of wood that often burned to the ground, causing largelosses of life. Life insurance companies and agents in the nineteenth century faced a challenging task: creatingconsumer demand for a product that was largely unknown. Assigning a dollar value to humanlifeseemed irreligious to some. Others associated life insurance with gambling. Despite thepublic's lackof awareness regarding the need for life insurance and the difficulties of estimating thehazards ofhuman life, New York Life accumulated assets of $1 million during its first decade. Buildingandmaintaining a strong financial foundation allowed it to pay out another $1 million to policyholders andbeneficiaries during that decade. The Birth of a Company|Growing Up|A Century of Triumph|The Greatest Agent of All Creating the Blue Chip|Cross Currents|The World Changed|Into the Twenty-First Century Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-36IA045-000814-B024-438http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/cphsgr.html 207.121.184.160 19970119010237 text/html 7755HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 01:01:46 GMTContent-type: text/html Growing Up Growing Up "While nothing is more uncertain than the durationof asingle life, nothing is more certain than the average duration of a thousand lives," said thegreat lifeinsurance authority himself, actuary Elizur Wright. The broader the coverage of thepopulation, the morefavorable the averages. In an age of primitive medicine and harsh everyday risks rangingfromcontaminated food to unsafe buildings, New York Life managed the risks by cultivating anin-houseability to assess risks that was second to none. In 1892, the era of "scientific" management was just beginning, and the trio of GeorgePerkins,Darwin Kingsley, and Thomas A. Buckner would lead the company in it. Perkins was given the daunting job of reorganizing the entire sales operation. Heupgraded thecompany's sales force and replaced the general agency system with a new marketing structure. Of all Perkins' innovations, creating a corps of professionally trained, full-time agents didthe most toadvance the reputation of the life insurance industry as a business on the same footing asbanking. Toimprove the quality of service to policy owners, to stem the widespread turnover in thebusiness and toeliminate the erratic sales performance of the less-dedicated agents, the company created anewmethod of compensation called "Nylic for Agents." Under this plan, an agent received a guaranteed lifetime monthly income after twentyyears ofservice, provided he did not enter the service of another life insurance company. Hislifetime monthlyincome was based on his sales production during those twenty years. The plan's deferredcompensation and old-age security elements were rare for any industry in 1895. With Chairman McCall's full encouragement, Perkins proceeded to select thebranchmanagers, who in turn recruited and supervised the activities of individual agents whosecontracts weremade directly with the company rather than with the intermediary general agent. McCall and Perkins took their inventiveness to other departments as well. In 1892, thecompanyastonished the industry by offering a policy that swept away all restrictions except theinsured'sobligation to pay the premium on time. Standard policies were then riddled with restrictiveclauses andexceptions, often to the dismay of hard-selling agents. The policy introduced by New York Life in 1892 removed all previous restrictions withrespect tooccupation, residence, travel lifestyles or manner of death. Also for the first time in1892, a lifeinsurance policy included a policy loan feature. To cement New York Life's intention toprovidecoverage, regardless of the circumstances, the company determined that after one year thepolicy wasincontestable. " . . . What may be called the Life Insurance Era began about 1845; what may be calledthe'Crusades' began about 1890." The results, said Kingsley, dwarfed any other businessundertaking. In1898, "The Great International Life Insurance Company" appeared on the company's letterheadand onits policies. New York Life had by then extended operations far beyond U.S. boundaries toeighty-threecountries, and on May 23, 1899, it reached $1 billion in policies in force. For almost halfa century, thecompany worked hard to create and broaden a global market for life insurance until war on anunprecedented scale in 1914 brought the crusade to an end. The Birth of a Company|Growing Up|A Century of Triumph|The Greatest Agent of All Creating the Blue Chip|Cross Currents|The World Changed|Into the Twenty-First Century Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-37IA045-000814-B025-30http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/cphstr.html 207.121.184.160 19970119010321 text/html 7653HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 01:02:21 GMTContent-type: text/html A Century of Triumph A Century of Triumph During the first third of the twentieth century, punch-card machines based on Dr. HermanHollerith's electrical tabulatory equipmentwere sped up and modified. New and faster equipment was designed to handle payroll,accounting,billing, sales analysis and other areas. By World War II, the leap was made into electronic equipment. ENIAC (ElectronicNumericalIntegrator and Calculator) was developed at the University of Pennsylvania's Moore School ofElectricalEngineering by J. Presper Eckert and physicist Dr. John W. Mauchly. They eliminated the needformoving parts by adapting electronic circuits and using electronic pulses to flip vacuum tubeson and offlike switches, with the "on" and "off" states representing zeroes and ones, the roots ofcomputers'binary language. New York Life took delivery of its first modern computers in the 1950s - one from RCA andone fromIBM. Paternal management made everyone feel like a member of a big extended family. As aperquisite,the company acquired two employee vacation properties, located in the rural Bear Mountainregion ofNew York State about an hour's drive north of New York City. Camp Nylic, for male employeesandtheir families, offered cabins named after company officers. Women employees were housedseparately at Elm Valley Farm, twenty-five miles away. The rate charged for full room andboard was $1a day. Anyone sent to the camps for convalescence by the medical department got in free. One of the most conspicuous results of the company's prudent management was unveiled in1928 when the company moved into its new Manhattan Home Office at 51 Madison Avenue. In 1889, the first Madison Square Garden occupied the site. New Yorkers for the nextthirty yearsturned to the Garden for championship fights, operatic recitals, six-day bicycle races, horseshows anda potpourri of live entertainment. The cornerstone of New York Life's new Home Office was laid with appropriate ceremony onJune17, 1927. Architect Cass Gilbert, famous at the time for many structures - including theWoolworthBuilding, once New York's tallest and the U.S. Supreme Court Building - had prepared plans tobuild "aCathedral of Life Insurance," using the Salisbury Cathedral in England as the inspiration. In November1928, the entire office force from 346 Broadway moved into the new quarters, requiringpractically everypiece of moving equipment in the city for all the files and furniture. An opening-day speech by New York Life President Darwin P. Kingsley was broadcastnationwideover NBC. President Calvin Coolidge pressed a button in the White House that unfurled theUnitedStates flag in the lobby of the new building. For the life insurance industry, the downward plunge in the thirties was just asspectacular as theboom of the twenties. Yet New York Life, without taking elaborate preventive measures,preserved theassets of its policy owners. With no equities in its portfolio, it was able to exercisetight control over itsown destiny. Unlike many other life insurers, New York Life's receipts continued to exceeddisbursements. In 1933, the deepest year of the depression, the company met obligations of$366million and still managed to increase assets to over $2 billion. The Birth of a Company|Growing Up|A Century of Triumph|The Greatest Agent of All Creating the Blue Chip|Cross Currents|The World Changed|Into the Twenty-First Century Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-38IA045-000814-B025-63http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/cphsbc.html 207.121.184.160 19970119010348 text/html 7431HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 01:02:58 GMTContent-type: text/html Creating the Blue Chip Creating the Blue Chip Just prior to the war's outbreak, New York Life had begun to give serious considerationand intensivestudy to housing as a medium for direct equity investments. By 1946, the company was readytoproceed with a long-range program of investing in owned and managed housing developments. In October 1949, the last of 3,000 families moved into Fresh Meadows, a 173-acre,self-containedcommunity of 10,000 people in Queens, New York. Built on a former golf course, Fresh Meadowscontained a department store, banks, a theater, doctors' offices, restaurants, fiftyspecialty shops, abowling center, a post office, and a school. All told, the housing effort was enormous. The company estimated that it had provided,in the fiveyears between 1946 and 1950, enough apartments and small homes for 300,000 people. Besidesproviding owned and managed housing in New York, New Jersey, and housing on a former slum siteinChicago, some $778 million was invested in more than 79,000 residential mortgage loans aroundthecountry, most of them for less than $10,000 each. New York Life also led the way in recognizing the need for new methods to financethousands ofmiles of superhighways, parkways, thruways, turnpikes, bridges, and tunnels as auto and trucktrafficincreased. The company proposed revenue bonds as an alternative to government borrowing,whichwould increase federal, state, and local taxes. For over a century, New York Life had confined its business to "ordinary" whole lifeinsurance for theindividual. In 1951, it was the world's largest in this category, with over 4 millionpolicies in force. During World War II, however, the inclusion of fringe benefits in labor contracts stimulatedthe growth ofgroup insurance. After the war, management-labor bargaining led to an almost universal useof grouplife and health insurance in multi-year contract packages. In the mid-1950s, the company positioned itself to become more of a financial servicescompanythan a life insurer. The notion of cradle to grave private insurance was revolutionary, andNew York Lifeprepared to meet the ever-growing needs of the expanding nation. While new products and services were being developed, the Home Office decided itstraditionalbusiness needed a thorough shaking-up as well. Assumptions, policy language, and premiumswerenot keeping pace with the rapid changes of the national economy and demographics; thecontractscustomers were signing as the company entered the 1950s were nearly the same as those theirgrandfathers had signed decades ago. When President Devereaux C. Josephs implemented a new product line, every other biginsurer triedto follow New York Life's lead. But New York Life agents had the pioneering advantage. Theywere firstin the market with products specifically designed for an insurance-buying public that wasbecomingmore value and cost-conscious. Everyone seemed to be going up a notch or two on the economicladder in one of the swiftest and most thoroughgoing changes in history. The Birth of a Company|Growing Up|A Century of Triumph|The Greatest Agent of All Creating the Blue Chip|Cross Currents|The World Changed|Into the Twenty-First Century Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-39IA045-000814-B025-102http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/cphscc.html 207.121.184.160 19970119010410 text/html 6775HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 01:03:24 GMTContent-type: text/html Cross Currents Cross Currents The 1957-79 period encompasses a considerable amount of the company's history. Yet thepoint isworth making that the series of episodes recounted here, the people, the product developmentand theevolution of sales, management and electronic systems, took place in an environment ofunalloyedAmerican optimism. While the United States had diverse view points on almost everything fromeducation to entertainment, practically everyone felt that the unique American democraticsystem wouldprovide a better and better standard of living for all. The great American boom became astandard partof life, no more surprising than Detroit's ads plugging the two-car family, or each family'sdream of thethree-bedroom suburban home. The Keogh plan, named after a U.S. congressman from Brooklyn, was enacted in 1962,makingtax-free private pension funding almost universal in the United States. In the expandingworld ofsavings, "investing for growth" had become as legitimate and desirable as "investing forincome." Thenew mindset created increased competition between different sectors of the financial servicesindustry. In the midst of an increasingly competitive climate, the life insurance industry seemedto be thriving. The number of life insurance companies grew by the hundreds in the 1960s and 1970s. TheInstituteof Life Insurance's surveys showed that 85 percent of American families had some sort of lifeinsurance coverage; in more than half the families, all members of the household wereinsured. Butthe percentage of disposable income spent on life insurance was declining every year, andthereseemed to no way to stop it. A strategic move into an expanding market like equities seemedinevitable. The exciting actuarial breakthrough made by Charles Sternhell, John Fraser, and WalterMiller in 1969opened the door to the move into equities. Their discovery that the premium basis for avariable policycould be the same as for a fixed-dollar policy brought them industry-wide acclaim. The rest of the industry created products from the New York Life formula, but thecompany did notenter the business until 1983, when it became possible to pay regular commissions on variablelife. Inretrospect, it was the best possible decision, and not just for the protection of the agencyforce. Equities- and the new variable life policies - did not perform well in the seventies. The Birth of a Company|Growing Up|A Century of Triumph|The Greatest Agent of All Creating the Blue Chip|Cross Currents|The World Changed|Into the Twenty-First Century Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-40IA045-000814-B025-135http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/cphswc.html 207.121.184.160 19970119010427 text/html 6625HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 01:03:36 GMTContent-type: text/html The World Changed The World Changed To maintain its top ratings, which became more important as the 1980s rolled on, New YorkLifemoved cautiously into making some major investment portfolio adjustments. In 1982, thecompanysmoothly completed a $1.6 billion restructuring of its pension fund portfolio, whichmeasurablyincreased the quality of its security holdings. This immense transaction, achieved with thehelp oftrading experts at Salomon Brothers, involved the sale of 104 issues and the purchase of 57others. Computer simulation prior to the actual event made the transaction go through without aglitch. The stock market crash of 1987 prompted another major shift in investment strategy. InOctober1987, the stock market lost twenty-two percent of its value in a day after five fat yearsduring which theDow Jones industrial average roared from below 1000 to 2700. New York Life saw the value ofits bondportfolio rise sharply as the stock market tumbled. Competition for consumers' dollars brought intense challenges to New York Life'sindividualinsurance operations. More and more Americans were making a distinction between theprotectionafforded by insurance and the investment potential of permanent, cash value insurance, whichtheyviewed as inferior to CDs and other investments. The logic of this comparison seemed todictate "buyterm and invest the difference." Anyone combing through the $8 trillion financial-services world in the late 1980s for ablue-chip firmwith the ability to tailor products to the needs of all sorts of individuals and groups wouldfind the searchdaunting. Credit ratings systems were so lax, by design or otherwise, the resultinginformation couldreally turn out to be misinformation. Some straight talk was needed about the value of safety, security and conservatism inthe investmentfield. "The Company You Keep" slogan was first seen by American consumers September 17,1989, ina New York Life TV commercial. Plenty of investors had been burned in the biggest stock market crash of all time justtwo yearsearlier. In a culture of seemingly permanent change, when beliefs as well as institutionswerecrumbling everywhere, a simple message had appeal: good, old, reliable New York Life was assoundas ever. The Birth of a Company|Growing Up|A Century of Triumph|The Greatest Agent of All Creating the Blue Chip|Cross Currents|The World Changed|Into the Twenty-First Century Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-41IA045-000814-B025-177http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/cphscn.html 207.121.184.160 19970119010445 text/html 8547HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 01:03:50 GMTContent-type: text/html Into the Twenty-First Century Into the Twenty-First Century When Chairman Harry Hohn was asked in 1994 to describe New York Life's most difficult long-termproblem, hesummed up the answer in a single word: "demographics." The official demographic measurement of household income in 1990 provided by the U.S.government was a bit shocking. Not all boats had risen in the 1980s. In 1990, according tothe IRS,some ten percent of U.S. households had incomes over $75,000. That was the good news. Buttheremaining 90 percent were hardly awash in wealth. The majority of households, three-quartersof thetotal, had incomes under $50,000. And a remarkable forty-two percent were living by the skinof theirteeth. Just as the government had plunged into deficit financing, so had individuals. In a drive to find new avenues of distribution, New York Life created the BrokerageDepartment in1992. Its focus is and has been independent producers who serve customers in the top one totwopercent of the wealthiest households in the United States and large corporate clients. The experience with the brokerage business encouraged New York Life to seek otherdistributionopportunities. In a departure from the way it traditionally sells products, the companyannounced aunique 10-year direct marketing opportunity in April 1994. The American Association ofRetiredPersons (AARP), a 33-million-member organization dedicated to addressing the needs of personsaged 50 and older, selected New York Life Insurance Company from numerous competitors tounderwrite, market and administer a newly designed life insurance program for its members. In 1984, New York Life expanded its investments focus to include the independent activemanagement of stocks and bonds by purchasing MacKay-Shields Financial Corporation, ablue-chip, active moneymanagerbased in Manhattan. In 1987, Monitor Capital Advisors was created as an independentsubsidiary ofNew York Life focusing on the passive, quantitative strategies of stocks and bonds. In 1988,GreystoneRealty Corporation, based in Greenwich, Connecticut, was founded to provide independentprofessional management of equity real estate. In order to compete effectively in the ever-expanding defined contribution market, thecompany madea major acquisition that year, buying a Boston-based benefits consulting and administrativefirm, nowrenamed New York Life Benefit Services. New York Life now has the capabilities to compete as a"full-service"provider in the 401(k) market. The company had reentered the international life insurance market in 1988 with theacquisition of alife insurance company in Hong Kong. That year, it formed New York Life Worldwide. Theinternationalre-entry continued in 1989 with the acquisition of Windsor Group, a life insurance firm basedinEngland. Three years later, the Gresham Group, another British life insurer, was acquired. Ever since its founding, New York Life managers and agents have been conscious that theactions ofthe company are often far reaching. The character, and perhaps the stability, of Americansociety havebeen affected by organizations that try to look beyond the statistics to act as goodcorporate citizens. "[I describe] life insurance using the Latin sui generis." Hohn continues, "Sui generismeans 'uniqueunto itself.' And life insurance is unique unto itself. It's the only way that you can havea person whojust gets married and has the first baby or two and provide for them right then and there bypaying apremium on a life insurance policy. That's invaluable. That's unique. And that's one ofthe reasonswhy we are in business - to provide those benefits. "Suppose there weren't life insurance - how would you arrange for your own family? Weprovide avery basic tenet that we all rely upon. We do a lot of other things but that's our corecompetency, and wedo it, I think, very well. And so we're going to be around for another 150 years - and more. You can count on it." New York Life Benefit Services Click here to go to the New York Life Benefit Services web site. The Birth of a Company|Growing Up|A Century of Triumph|The Greatest Agent of All Creating the Blue Chip|Cross Currents|The World Changed|Into the Twenty-First Century Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-42IA045-000814-B025-216http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/bfmcqc001.html 207.121.184.160 19970119010458 text/html 8999HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 01:04:10 GMTContent-type: text/html Economic Update Quarterly Economic Update November 1996 Back to above trend growth in 1997 After surging to 4.7 percent in the second quarter, real GDP growth slowed to an annual rate of 2.2 percent in the third quarter. Stagnating consumer spending, along with sharp declines in housing, government purchases, and net exports were offset by a surge in business investment and inventory accumulation. In the fourth quarter, growth should remain sluggish due to a slower rate of inventory accumulation, but final demand is set to pick up again. With real disposable income up about 3.0 percent from a year ago and the unemployment rate down to 5.2 percent from 5.6 percent, consumer confidence is near a seven-year high. Under these conditions, the recent decline in bond yields and the surging stock market should encourage a revival in housing as well as a good Christmas shopping season. For the second half of the year, real GDP growth is expected to average about 2.1 percent -- well below the first half average of 3.3 percent and slightly below the economy's long-term non-inflationary growth potential. Once the inventory correction is over, however, the economy should have the momentum to maintain above trend growth until it is slowed by the Federal Reserve. For the year as a whole, economic activity should be up a moderate 2.3 percent, and 1997 is expected to show a stronger 2.9 percent increase, with help from strengthening economies in Europe, Japan, Canada, and Mexico. Inflation still subdued, but set for upward creep After six years of economic expansion, there are still few signs of accelerating inflation. However, the unemployment rate has fallen well below levels previously associated with rising inflation, and wage rates have begun to accelerate again. So far, decelerating benefit costs have offset most of the wage acceleration, but this cannot continue indefinitely. The current slowdown has been just in time to relieve these emerging inflationary pressures, but as the economy picks up speed again next year, they are likely to reemerge. Any slack created by the slowdown will be quickly eliminated as growth picks up again, and more definitive inflationary pressures will emerge. After rising 2.8 percent in 1995, the Consumer Price Index (CPI) should be up 3.0 percent this year and 3.2 percent in 1997. Fed tightening postponed Following three easing moves, the Federal Reserve has left monetary policy unchanged since February and is not likely to begin tightening credit conditions again until some time next year. There appears to be increasing political pressure to wait and see how long the economic slowdown lasts or how low unemployment can fall before inflation picks up again. It may be that the rate of unemployment that sparks inflation has indeed shifted downward somewhat in recent years due to demographics and other factors, but as it becomes clear that the unemployment rate has resumed its downward movement, the Fed is likely to begin a series of tightening moves. Bond yield up-trend to resume Long-term bond yields have declined from their recent highs in response to the Federal Reserve's decisions not to tighten monetary policy at its September and November FOMC meetings and economic statistics that appear to have justified these decisions. Post-election promises to continue budget deficit reduction efforts also have helped. As the economy picks up again next year, however, the up-trend in interest rates, both short- and long-term, should resume and continue until the Fed has succeeded in slowing the economy again. This is likely to require a flattening of the yield curve, with short-term interest rates rising faster than long-term rates. Ideal equity market conditions not likely to continue When the economy is near full employment, too much growth is just as bad for the stock market as too little. So far this year, the economy has been just right. The bull market for equities has been driven by the continuation of moderate growth, strong earnings gains, and low inflation. These ideal conditions are likely to change next year. While earnings should remain relatively good, economic growth may look a little too strong, inflation will be creeping up again, bond yields will be rising, and the Federal Reserve will be tightening. As the economic expansion continues into its seventh year, there will be increasing concerns about the emergence of late business cycle pressures on profitability and the arrival of the next recession. SELECTED ECONOMIC INDICATORS The materials presented herein are for informational purposes only and are not intended as legal, tax, or other professional advice. Viewers should consult their personal professional advisors for guidance concerning their personal financial situations. Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-43IA045-000814-B025-238http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/bfmcwc001.html 207.121.184.160 19970119010534 text/html 7169HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 01:04:27 GMTContent-type: text/html Weekly Economic Commentary Weekly Economic Commentary For the week of December 2, 1996 Bond yields fell and stock prices rose in response to mixed evidenceon economic growth, accompanied by continued good news on inflation.Third quarter growth was revised downward, but with less inventoryaccumulation going into the fourth quarter. Personal income wasunchanged in October, but consumer spending was stronger thanexpected. Construction expenditures also rose strongly in October,as strength in government and private nonresidential categoriesmore than offset weakness in residential. October new home saleswere down more than expected. The Purchasing Managers' Index reboundedin November, showing a pick-up in the manufacturing sector, butthe prices paid index declined, indicating no build up of inflationpressures. Downward revision in 3rd quarter growth Real GDP growth for the third quarter was revised downward to2.0 percent from a previously estimated 2.2 percent. The sharpestdownward revisions, however, were in net exports and the rateof inventory accumulation -- a positive sign for the fourth quarter.Consumer spending, capital investment, and government purchaseswere revised upward. Personal income flat, consumer spending stronger Personal income was unchanged in October after rising 0.6 percentin both August and September. Wage and salary income declinedas a decline in average weekly hours more than offset an increasein employment. However, personal consumption expenditures rosea stronger than expected 0.5 percent after an increase of only0.1 percent the month before. Consumer confidence unchanged in November The Conference Board's Index of Consumer Confidence was 107.3in November, the same relatively high level as in October. Thisis good news for the holiday shopping season. Construction spending up sharply Total construction spending was up a stronger than expected 1.8percent in October, following a rise of 1.2 percent the monthbefore. The increase was led by government and private nonresidentialspending. The residential construction category showed a decline. New home sales down again Sales of new single family homes fell a steeper than expected8.7 percent in October. This follows a 4.5 percent decline inSeptember and leaves new home sales at their lowest level sinceMarch. Purchasing managers report rebound in manufacturing growth The Purchasing Managers' Index (PMI) rose to a higher than expected52.7 percent in November after falling to 50.2 percent the monthbefore. Production, employment, new orders, vendor deliveries,and inventories all contributed to the rise. Nevertheless, theprices paid index declined from 47.1 percent to 45.9 percent,indicating a faster rate of decline in prices. The materials presented herein are for informational purposes only and are not intended as legal, tax, or other professional advice. Viewers should consult their personal professional advisors for guidance concerning their personal financial situations. Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-44IA045-000814-B025-279http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/wesn.html 207.121.184.160 19970119010610 text/html 5268HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 01:05:19 GMTContent-type: text/html A Snapshot of New York Life A Snapshot of New York Life New York Life Insurance Company, a Fortune 100 company, is one of the largestfinancialinstitutions inthe United States and the world. Founded in 1845 and headquartered in New YorkCity,New York Lifeconcentrates on insurance and financial services. On the insurance side, NewYork Lifeanditsaffiliates offer traditional life and group insurance, annuities, and, throughits subsidiary,NYLCare,managed health care. On the investment side, New York Life and its affiliatesprovideinstitutionalinvestment management, trust and 401(k) services. One of its subsidiaries,NYLIFESecurities Inc.,offers an array of securities products and services, such as the MainStay Funds forretail and institutional investors. Inaddition, the Company has international affiliations and offices in Argentina,Indonesia,Taiwan, SouthKorea, Mexico, Hong Kong, Bermuda, the United Kingdom, and mainland China. Frequently Asked Questions About NYL Click here for more information about New York Life. NYLCare Click here to go to the NYLCare web site. MainStay Funds Click here to go to the MainStay Funds web site. Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-45IA045-000814-B025-305http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/weho.html 207.121.184.160 19970119010642 text/html 5710HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 01:05:48 GMTContent-type: text/html How To Use This Site This World Wide Web site is one of the largest in the life insurance industry. Informationcan be found on every product and service offered by New York Life and its subsidiaries. New York Life recognizes that your financial needs include more than just life insurance.Links frompages may connect you to a subsidiary of New York Life, such as NYLCare Health Plans Inc. orNYLIFE Securities Inc.NYLCare offers health benefit programs andproducts to employers in all 50 states and the District of Columbia. NYLIFE Securities Inc. is also an indirect,wholly-owned subsidiary of New York Life offering financial products and services, includingtheMainStay mutual funds, to individuals and businesses. Links to other New York Lifesubsidiaries andrelated organizations are also included throughout this Web site, where appropriate. Start your journey on our home page. From there, the first pages of major sections provideshort descriptions of the links on those pages. Remember, you can always click on the "Home"button to return to the New York Life home page. If you have a question about New York Life, or comments about this Web site, send us amessage! Click on the "Contact NYL" button above to do so. MainStay Mutual Funds Click here to go to the MainStay Mutual Funds web site. NYLCare Click here to go to the NYLCare web site. Site Navigation Tips Click here to find more information on site navigation. Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-46IA045-000814-B026-5http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/cpnw.html 207.121.184.160 19970119010658 text/html 4925HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 01:06:06 GMTContent-type: text/html News What's New at New YorkLife What's New at ThisSite New York Life is a company that continues to evolve and change. Links from this page areupdated asnew information becomes available. Find out what's new at the Company, and at this Website. Here's a guide to the links from this page: What's New at New York Life Press releases from New York Life. What's New at This Site Find out what has been added to the New York Life Web site. Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-47IA045-000814-B026-33http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/cpbg.html 207.121.184.160 19970119010723 text/html 6660HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 01:06:24 GMTContent-type: text/html Background Introduction Frequently Asked Questions AboutNYL A Company of"Firsts" What the Ratings AgenciesSay Understanding InsuranceCompany Ratings NYL: Good CorporateCitizen Everything you ever wanted to know about the background of New York Life InsuranceCompany can be found in this section. Links from this page introduceyou to different aspects of New York Life. Here's a guide to help you navigate through this section of thesite: Introduction Introduces you to the Company and its dedication to service. Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs) AboutNYL Frequently asked questions about the New York Life Insurance Company. If you have aquestion that is not answered here, drop us a line! Just click on the "Contact NYL" buttonabove to send us a message. This section of the site will grow and evolve as we receiveyour questions. A Company of "Firsts" Find out why we are one of the pre-eminent financial services companies in the country -- and theworld. What the Ratings AgenciesSay Ratings accorded to an insurance company by the major ratings agencies indicate muchabout the strength of the Company. To find out what the ratings agencies say about New YorkLife, select this link. Understanding Insurance CompanyRatings Click on this link to see what the ratings mean. NYL: Good CorporateCitizen Find out more about the New York Life Foundation. The Foundation makes importantcontributions to charitable causes throughout the United States. Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-48IA045-000814-B026-59http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/cpem.html 207.121.184.160 19970119010745 text/html 5418HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 01:06:54 GMTContent-type: text/html Career Opportunities Career Opportunities About New York Life Developing Our Talent Work and Life What We Are Looking For An Equal Opportunity Employer Agent Opportunities Joining the Team If you've also wanted a challenging career - and you have the initiative anddrive that ittakes to succeed, you may be the kind of person we're looking for. New York Life is constantly searching for talented individuals to join ourworld-class team. If you want to find out more, check out the links from this page. Here's a guide to help you navigate through this section of thesite: Career Opportunites These links indicate what we look for - and what you can expect - as a staffmember withNew York Life. Agent Opportunities If you are interested in developing your own life insurance business as part ofthe NewYork Life network, select this link for more information on joining the agentteam. Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-49IA045-000814-B026-92http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/cpre.html 207.121.184.160 19970119010813 text/html 5845HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 01:07:17 GMTContent-type: text/html Reports Individual Operations Asset Management Investment NYLCare Health Plans, Inc. Special Markets New York Life Worldwide Holding, Inc. 1995 Annual Report Message to Policyowners Board of Directors Consolidated Financials Business Unit Reports New York Life and its subsidiaries comprise the fourth largest life insurance company in the nation,measured by assets and revenues. In 1995, we continued to extend our reach in a number ofimportant product lines, including individual annuities and managed health care. We also extendedour reach geographically, opening a second representative office in mainland China. This year, changes within New York Life created six primary business units as opposed to ourprevious five. Our Group indemnity and Sanus HMO operations were reorganized to form NYLCareHealth Plans, Inc. The remaining Group lines of business were consolidated into a new one, SpecialMarkets. Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-50IA045-000814-B026-129http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/cpww.html 207.121.184.160 19970119010836 text/html 8073HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 01:07:43 GMTContent-type: text/html Worldwide New York Life Worldwide Holding, Inc., formed in 1988 and located in New York City, is an indirect,wholly-owned subsidiary of New York Life Insurance Company, which was the fourth largest lifeinsurance company by assets in the United States in 1995. Through Worldwide Holding, NewYork Life and its affiliates conduct business internationally in Argentina, Bermuda, HongKong, Indonesia, Korea, Mexico, Taiwan, and the United Kingdom. In China, Worldwide Holdingalso has representative offices in Guangzhou and Shanghai. Hong Kong - (1988) New York Life Insurance Worldwide Ltd., located in HongKong, was the first company that Worldwide Holding incorporated to re-enter* theinternational marketplace. This Company has experienced dynamic growth and in the past yearhas doubled its agency force. Worldwide Holding also has a regional office in Hong Kong tosupport operations in the Pacific Rim. (* New York Life Insurance Company had a globalpresence more than 100 years ago and had business operations in some 50 to 60 countries priorto World War I.) United Kingdom - (1989) Worldwide Holding began in the U.K. by acquiringthe Windsor group of insurance companies. It then moved to capitalize on this expertise byjoining with the St. James Place Capital and other investors from the Life Assurance HoldingCorporation, Ltd., which acquires and manages existing insurance companies and theirportfolios. Indonesia - (1991) P.T. Asuransi Jiwa Sewu New York Life, with headquartersin Jakarta, has in just four years moved to number five in market share. SEWU New YorkLife's field force of over 1,500 agents, many of whom are Million Dollar Round Tablequalifiers, includes the top producing agent in all of Indonesia. Worldwide Holding'spartner in this joint venture is a respected Indonesian company, P.T. Gunung Sewu Kencana. Taiwan - (1992) Worldwide Holding's insurance business in Taiwan ismanagedas a branch of New York Life Insurance & Annuity Corporation. It has succeeded in a highlycompetitive market, and in 1996 it became the only insurance company to have won threeprestigious industry awards in the same year: "Company of the Year," "Product of the Year,"and "Man of the Year". Mexico - (1993) New York Life Worldwide Holding acquired an interest in theOLMECA Group's life insurance business, which is located in Mexico City. The new company,GEO New York Life, opened for business in the Fall of 1993. In spite of the challengingmarket conditions in Mexico, GEO has consistently made its market goals through aggressiverecruiting and excellent training for its field force. South Korea - (1993) In South Korea, Worldwide Holding joined with KOHAP,alarge textile conglomerate, to establish a joint venture company, KOHAP New York LifeInsurance Ltd. As a newly established company in a very competitive environment, KOHAP NYLhas succeeded by distinguishing itself in its excellent training and development of its fieldforce. As a result of this and strong recruiting efforts, the field force has nearly doubledin the past year. Argentina - (1994) When Argentina's social security system was privatized,Worldwide Holding moved aggressively to gain a strategic position in the marketplace. Itpurchased interests in three Argentinean financial services companies,including La Buenos Aires New York Life Vida and La Buenos Aires New York Life Retiro, a lifeinsurance and an annuity company respectively. By year end 1995, La Buenos Aires New YorkLife Vida ranked number two in life insurance sales in Argentina. Bermuda - (1995) To meet the demands of another global marketopportunity, Worldwide Holding formed New York Life Worldwide (Bermuda) Ltd., an offshorecompany, to serve international high net worth individuals and the corporate-owned lifeinsurance market. Its products and services are distributed through a select group ofbrokers and private banking sponsors. Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-51IA045-000814-B026-162http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/cpag.html 207.121.184.160 19970119010852 text/html 8927HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 01:08:00 GMTContent-type: text/html What Your Agent Does for You What Your Agent Does for You The key to achieving long-term objectives is planning. Your goal may be to fund your children's college educations, to protect your family during your working years, or to guarantee your own retirement security. These things won't happen by accident. You must plan. You need to know what you want to achieve and then map out a strategy that will help you achieve it. The good news: You don't have to do it alone. Your New York Life insurance agent does more than just sell insurance policies. He or she is a professional problem solver who can help you identify the most cost-effective products to help you meet your financial objectives. Your New York Life agent provides a full range of services. These include working with you to: Review your individual situation and personal objectives. Perhaps your needs are so clear that life and health insurance can be determined after a few minutes of conversation. Or it may quickly become apparent that nothing short of a full-blown, detailed "fact finding" session is required, going beyond such basic vital statistics as birth dates, income assets, etc. Why is it important to probe and ask questions? Three reasons: First, your situation and needs are different from those of your neighbors. Your agent needs to understand those differences. Second, money is not a goal in and of itself; it is merely the means to an end. (Your goal may be a comfortable, secure retirement. However, the means to achieve that, for example, might be a retirement nest egg of $600,000.) Finally, the more your agent knows about you, the more precise and on-target will be the recommendations you receive. As a result, your agent may take some time to discuss - and even appear to be a bit nosy about - your hopes, dreams and objectives ... the things that really matter to you. By the way, all information will remain strictly confidential. Analyze and review your needs. As needed, your agent will work with you to identify and prioritize your objectives, then help establish benchmark goals. This is important because we live in a world in which there are unlimited resources. People often fail to achieve objectives because they try to accomplish too much at once, or they don't attach specific deadlines to their goals. For instance, you may have a desire to retire in comfort, make sure your children are able to graduate from college debt-free, plus vacation in the Caribbean every winter. But your resources may say that you cannot do it all. Your New York Life agent can work with you and help you focus on what's most important to you. Together, you may find it helpful to break down these goals into quantifiable objectives: accumulate $600,000 by age 65; have a college fund of $40,000 in 15 years; set aside $10,000 each year for vacationing. Then you can look at available resources and decide which goals are realistic, which need to be adjusted and scaled down, and which simply must be abandoned. Develop and implement a strategy to help you achieve your goals. Based on the information you share and the goals and means you establish, you'll receive specific recommendations on where life and health insurance products can help. Coordinate your financial activities. If desired by you, your agent can also serve as a quarterback for you and the other members of your team of advisors. Monitor progress, provide ongoing service as your needs and situation change over time. This is crucial. Planning is not a one-shot deal. Strategies need to be adjusted periodically. Your agent will work with you over the years to help keep your program on track with your changing needs. By the way, there is no charge for advice, planning or ongoing service provided by your New York Life agent. Your Role: It's a crucial one. Your agent cannot do it alone. It's a two-way street. The key to getting maximum value from your relationship with your agent is communication and candor. Do the following: Get acquainted. It's recommended that you contact your agent and arrange a meeting to discuss the full extent of available services, and to review your situation. Educate your agent. Don't expect a mind reader. Your agent may anticipate many of your needs, but will not assume anything. That's why it's so important that you be candid in providing information. Educate yourself. At the same time, you too should be sure to ask a lot of questions. Be nosy. Ask for details and explanations about recommendations and how certain plans may work. Remember, the only dumb question is the one that isn't asked. Make it a team effort. Work together. Listen carefully to the recommendations, but remember - all decisions are yours. Make sure you're comfortable with the outcome. Recommendation: Contact your New York Life insurance agent today. Arrange an appointment. There's no cost or obligation. Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-52IA045-000814-B026-187http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/cpbk.html 207.121.184.160 19970119010901 text/html 4519HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 01:08:12 GMTContent-type: text/html Brokerage New York Life Brokerage Kansas City, Missouri New York Life Brokerage operates exclusively through producers and Brokerage General Agentssellingin the upscale wealth transfer and executive benefits marketplace. We understand theirbusinessneeds and strive to deliver the kind of superior service they deserve. If this describes your market, and you are interested in a contract with one of thefinancially strongest lifeinsurance companies, send us an e-mail or callNYL-IS-4-U, (888/695-4748). Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-53IA045-000814-B026-219http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/bfgw.html 207.121.184.160 19970119010914 text/html 4832HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 01:08:24 GMTContent-type: text/html Helping Your Business Grow For your business to grow, you need to establish and support strategies that complementand protect your investment. Links from this page will connect you with information andtools that can help you achieve your business goals. Are Pension Plans Too Complicated For SmallBusinesses? This article provides tips on setting up a pension plan for your small business. A SimplifiedEmployee Pension (SEP) plan allows you to establish a competitive, cost-effective plan,without all the hassle and taxes. The Advantages of a Bundled 401(k) Plan If you want to simplify the way you manage your company's 401(k) plan, this article providessome helpful hints. Outsourcing Your Employee Benefits: Pension and HealthCare Outsourcing your benefits adminstration might make a lot of sense for your organization. Tolearn more about outsourcing, read this article. Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-54IA045-000814-B026-244http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/mainstay/rbpp.html 207.121.184.160 19970119010927 text/html 4609HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 01:08:35 GMTContent-type: text/html Pension Plan Issues Which MainStay Retirement Program May be Right for You? The Role of Employee Benefits in Today's Economy Home · Contact MainStay · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-55IA045-000814-B026-257http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nylcare/em.html 207.121.184.160 19970119010949 text/html 5267HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 01:08:52 GMTContent-type: text/html For Employers About ThisSection Home · Contact NYLCare · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal · Provider List WT02-B28-56IA045-000814-B026-287http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/pfst.html 207.121.184.160 19970119011016 text/html 6614HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 01:09:20 GMTContent-type: text/html Starting Out Choosing the Right Life Insurance Investing for Your Future After years of education and training you're ready to make your mark on this world. But where do you go from here? When you're young and starting out, there are seemingly a myriad of insurance and financial product choices available. You need to determine what your needs are, and what combination of products and services will meet your needs. In this section of the New York Life site, we have presented various products and services that will meet the needs of someone starting out. If you require further information on any product or service offered by New York Life and its subsidiaries, please send us a message! This section will evolve and expand in the months and years to come. If you need information on life insurance or other financial products that you cannot find at this site, it will likely be added at some point in the future. To help us provide you with information that is meaningful to you, please send us a message and let us know what you would like to see. Don't forget to save any information you find valuable into your Personal Folder for future reference as your personal needs evolve over time. This is for information purposes only and will cover a variety of topics examining the roleinsurance and other financial products may play in your fincancial decisions. Although many of thetopics presented may also involve tax, legal, accounting or other issues, neither New York Life norany of its agents are in the business of offering such advice. You should consult with your ownprofessional advisors to examine the tax, legal, or accounting aspects of any topics presented. Here's a guide to help you navigate through this section of the site: Choosing the Right Life Insurance Click here to find out why you need to consider buying life insurance - even if you're young and healthy. We'll let you know what you should consider when selecting life insurance for yourself. Investing for Your Future You're now making money and probably setting some financial goals for yourself. Select this category for information to help you choose investments that may help you meet these goals. Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-57IA045-000814-B027-8http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/pffm.html 207.121.184.160 19970119011040 text/html 6968HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 01:09:47 GMTContent-type: text/html We're a Family Choosing the Right LifeInsurance Investing For Your Family'sFuture Your Children'sEducation With a family of your own, you have special considerations when it comes toinvesting and life insurance. You want to ensure that your family is providedfor,should you pass away. However, you may also have several investmentobjectives. You may want to invest in your children's education, or meet otherfinancial goals. In this section of the New YorkLife site, we have presented various products and services that may meet theneeds ofpeople with families. If you require further information on any product orservice offered byNew York Life and its subsidiaries, please send us a message! This section will evolve and expand in the months and years to come. If you needinformation on life insurance or financial products that you cannot find at this site, itwill likely beadded at some point in the future. To help us provide you with information thatismeaningful to you, please send us a message and let us know what you would like tosee. Don't forget to save information you find valuable in your Personal Folder forfuture referenceas your family needs evolve over time. Remember, before making any life insurance or investment decision, it's importantfor youto consult with a professional. Speak with your accountant, tax advisor, attorneyorfinancial advisor, where applicable, for their expert advice. Here's a guide to help you navigate through this section of thesite: Choosing the Right LifeInsurance The life insurance you select will have a fundamental affect on the lives ofyourdependents if you pass away. Click on this category to find out how to chooselifeinsurance that will help meet the needs of your family. Investing for Your Family'sFuture Select this category for information on investments that may help you meet thefinancial needs of your family. Whether you have a long term investment horizon,or shortterm goals - we may be able to help you establish a plan that works for you and your family. Your Children's Education The education of your children is an important investment goal. There are manyconsiderations in establishing an investment plan that will help finance yourchildren'seducation. Click on this link to find out more. Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-58IA045-000814-B027-34http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/pfpi.html 207.121.184.160 19970119011053 text/html 6702HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 01:10:05 GMTContent-type: text/html Personal Investing InvestmentTips InvestmentIssues Choosing the RightInvestmentProduct Investing can help you meet your personal financial goals. There are awide variety offinancial products and services available on the market today. New York Life and its subsidiaries canhelp you make senseof them all. Use this section to help you design - or refine - an investment planthat is right for you. This is for informational purposes only and will cover a variety oftopics examining the role insurance and other financial products may playin your financial decisions. Although many of the topics presented mayalso involve tax, legal, accounting or other issues, neither New York Lifenor any of its agents are in the business of offering such advice. Youshould consult with your own professional advisors to examine the tax,legal, or accounting aspects of any topics presented. Contact us is you would like a NYLIFESecurities Registered Representative to get in touch withyou. Just click on the "Contact NYL" button above to send us a message! This section of the site will grow over time. As it grows, more investment tips will beadded, and otherinvestment issues will be discussed. If there is anything you feel would bevaluable to include in thissection, please send us a message by clicking on the "Contact NYL" buttonabove. Don't forget to save investment information you find valuable into your NYLifeFolder for quick reference. Here's a guide to help you navigate through this section of thesite: Investment Tips Tips on investing that may help you define your goals, and weigh the various optionsand risks of investing. Investment Issues Some of the issues any investor may want to consider can be accessed throughthis link. Choosing the Right InvestmentProduct Perhaps one of the more difficult parts of investing is selecting your investmentvehicles. This link introduces different types of financial products availablethrough the New York Life Insurance Company, and its subsidiaries. Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-59IA045-000814-B027-52http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/pfrp.html 207.121.184.160 19970119011104 text/html 8046HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 01:10:14 GMTContent-type: text/html Retirement Planning Why Retirement Planning isSoImportant Fulfilling Your RetirementGoals RetirementIssues Choosing the RightProducts RetirementPlanning Calculator Personal RetirementStrategies Whether your retirement is right around the corner, or still many years off,it's never toolate to startplanning for your retirement. Retirement planning is something each of usshouldstart doing as soonas we enter the work force. But why is retirement planning so important? What will ittake to turnretirement dreams into reality? There are many tools and investment vehiclesavailable that can helpyou meet your retirement needs. New York Life can help you make sense ofthemall. In this section of the New York Life site, we have presented various productsandservices that will meet the needs of anyone planning for a financially secureretirement. If you requirefurther information on any product or service offered by New York Life and it'ssubsidiaries,please send usa message! Like your retirement planning needs, this section will evolve and expand inthemonths and years to come. If you need information on lifeinsurance or retirement funding that you cannot find at this site, it willlikely be addedat some point inthe future. To help us provide you with information that is meaningful toyou, pleasesend us a messageand let us know what you would like to see. Don't forget to save information you find interesting into your Personal Folderfor futurereference. This is for information purposes only and will cover a variety of topics examining theroleinsurance and other financial products may play in your fincancial decisions. Althoughmany of thetopics presented may also involve tax, legal, accounting or other issues, neither NewYork Life norany of its agents are in the business of offering such advice. You should consult withyour ownprofessional advisors to examine the tax, legal, or accounting aspects of any topicspresented. Here's a guide to help you navigate through this section of thesite: Why Retirement Planning is SoImportant Click on this category to find out why you need to plan for your retirementtoday -even if you'reyoung . We'll present some myths about financial security at retirement. Fulfilling Your Retirement Goals You can turn your retirement dreams into reality. Click on this link tofind out howNew York Lifecan help make it happen. Retirement Issues As you plan for your retirement, there are several issues that you may wanttoconsider. Factorsyou may want to include in your retirement planning are life insurance, longterm care,and the needs ofyour spouse, among others. Choosing the RightProducts Choosing the right mix of life insurance and financial products isimportant asyou plan for yourretirement. Click on this link to learn more about the services and productsavailablethrough New YorkLife and its subsidiaries that can help you meet your retirement goals. Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-60IA045-000814-B027-89http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/pfep.html 207.121.184.160 19970119011119 text/html 7558HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 01:10:28 GMTContent-type: text/html Estate Planning Estate Planning: It's A Fact of Life The Importance of a Will The Zero Estate Tax Plan Estate Planning Calculator Estate planning is an important consideration for most of us. If you have any assets, evenif you'reyoung, you should have a will. A will ensures that your probate assets will bedistributed accordingto your wishes after you pass away. Proper estate planning can also prevent much of yourestate frombeing taxed. This section of the New York Life site provides information to help youunderstand estateplanning. New York Life is one of the nation's largest companies offering integrated financial productsandservicesthat can help you conserve your estate. New York Life is committed to helping you determinethecombination ofproducts and servicesthat is right for you. If you require further information on anyproduct or service offered by New York Life, please send us a message! This section will evolve and expand in the months and years to come. If you need informationon estate conservation that you cannot find at this site, it will likely be added at somepoint inthe future. To help us provide you with information that is meaningful to you, please send us a messageand let usknow what you would like to see. This is for information purposes only and will cover a variety oftopics examining the role insurance and other financial products may playin your fincancial decisions. Although many of the topics presented mayalso involve tax, legal, accounting or other issues, neither New York Lifenor any of its agents are in the business of offering such advice. Youshould consult with your own professional advisors to examine the tax,legal, or accounting aspects of any topics presented. Here's a guide to help you navigate through this section of the site: Estate Planning: It's a Fact of Life Find out why estate planning is important, no matter how much - or how little - you thinkyou areworth. Everyone should include estate planning as part of their financial planning process. The Importance of a Will A will is an important document that everyone should have. Maintaining an up to datewillcanprevent bitter disputes between family members when you are gone. It also ensures that yourassets aredistributed according to your wishes - not the state's discretion. The Zero Estate Tax Plan The zero estate tax plan is a complex strategy that - when structured properly - mayprovide you andyour spouse with an income in retirement, yet minimize the taxes assessed on your state whenyou die. Click on this link to find out more. Estate Planning Calculator The Estate Planning Calculator helps you assess your estate planning needs. Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-61IA045-000814-B027-120http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/pfob.html 207.121.184.160 19970119011131 text/html 9053HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 01:10:41 GMTContent-type: text/html Owning A Business What is Your Business Worth? Keeping Your Business in theFamily Taking Care of Business with Split-Dollar LifeInsurance Outsourcing Your EmployeeBenefits:Pension and Health Care The Advantages of a Bundled401(k)Plan Can YouAfford Not to Have a Health Care Plan for Your Business? ThreeDemographic Trends Reshaping The Workforce If you are like the majority of independent business owners, most of yournetworthis tied up inyourcompany. Just as important, the business is the engine that fuels your family'sstandardof living. Itprovides their lifestyle and ongoing financial security. Your business is also your greatest liability for those very same reasons. Shouldanything happentoyour business, your family's future would be jeopardized. You are the key, the linchpin that holds it all together. Your continuedmanagementknow-how andexpertise are crucial to the ongoing success of the business and, in turn, yourfamily'ssecurity. Keeping your business profitable is a full-time job - and then some. Every daycan be achallenge -staying ahead of the competition, juggling accounts receivable and accountspayable,finding ever newand exciting ways to cut expenses while boosting income, and so on. It's noteasy, but aslong as you're at the helm and in charge, your business works. Because yourbusinessis sodependent on your presence, you must try to find ways to protect your businessin casecircumstancesforce you to change your routine. The series of articles included in this section are designed for independentbusinessowners. Store those you find interesting in your Personal Folder for futurereference. Update the articles in your personal folder, as this section evolves with yourbusinessneeds over time. What is Your BusinessWorth? Knowing what the value of your business is will help you develop strategiestoprotect it. This article outlines how you can assess the worth of yourbusiness. Keeping Your Business In theFamily You've worked hard to establish your own business. Many business ownerswouldlike to see their business remain in the family when they retire. There aremanychallenges to accomplishing this goal. This article outlines some of thesechallenges,and what you can do to overcome them. Taking Care of Business with Split-Dollar LifeInsurance Split-dollar life insurance is a special way to purchase life insurance. Thecorporation purchases insurance on the life of the owner, or a key employee inthecompany. The individual owns the policy and can name a beneficiary. Thecorporationis reimbursed for its premiums out of any death benefit paid to the insured'sbeneficiary. Click on this link for all the details. Outsourcing Your Employee Benefits: PensionandHealth Care Administering a pension and health benefits program for your employees canbequite laborious. It might make sense to oursource these functions. Click hereto find outwhy and how. The Advantages of a Bundled 401(k)Plan Administering a pension and health benefits program for your employees canbequite laborious. It might make sense to oursource these functions. Click hereto find outwhy and how. Can YouAfford Not to Have a Health Care Plan for Your Business? Many business owners think of providing a health benefits plan as anexpenses.Itshould really be regarded as an investment that you can't afford to dowithout. Three Demographic TrendsReshaping The Workforce Three important trends are reshaping our workforce. These trends have animportant impact on the types of employee benefit plans we're seeing today. Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-62IA045-000814-B027-157http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/pfwh.html 207.121.184.160 19970119011143 text/html 7365HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 01:10:55 GMTContent-type: text/html What About Life Insurance? Life Insurance Needs Calculator Permanent Life Insurance Term vs. Permanent Life Insurance What To Do When Someone Dies Life insurance is something none of us should be without. If you have afamily,youwant to ensure that your family is protected financially if you pass away. Ifyou do nothave a family, you still need life insurance to protect those who careabout youfromexperiencing a financial burden if you should die. Life insurance can payforthe support of dependents following your death. It also helps pay down your debts,obligations, andfinal expenses. This section of the New York Life site can help you assess your lifeinsuranceneeds. Italso provides helpful information on the topic of life insurance, and thedifferencesbetween different types of coverage. Before you make any decisions about purchasing life insurance, it isimportantto consultan insurance agent. Contact us if you would like a New York Life agent toget in touchwith you. Just click on the "Contact NYL" button above to send us amessage! This section of the site will grow over time. As it grows, moreinformationwill be added,and other issues will be discussed. If there is anything you feel would bevaluable toinclude in this section, please send us a message by clicking on the"ContactNYL" buttonabove. Don't forget to save and update life insurance information that is relevanttoyour currentsituation in your Personal Folder. Here's a guide to help you navigate through this section of thesite: Life Insurance Needs Calculator Use this calculator to help you determine your life insurance needs. Permanent Life Insurance Permanent life insurance may be right for you if you want the security oflifeinsurancecoverage for the duration of your lifetime. Click on this link to learnmoreabout thistraditional form of life insurance. Term vs. Permanent Life Insurance Term life insurance is another type of life insurance that may be right foryou. This isespecially true if you are young, or do not have a lot of money to spend onlifeinsurance. There's much more to term life insurance, however. Select this section tolearnabout thekey differences between term and permanent insurance. What To Do When Someone Dies The loss of a loved one is a very traumatic experience. New York Life canhelpyou takethe necessary steps to prepare the many financial and legal decisions thatneedto bemade. Click on this link to learn how you can prepare yourself. Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-63IA045-000814-B027-188http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/pfhc.html 207.121.184.160 19970119011200 text/html 7448HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 01:11:07 GMTContent-type: text/html What About Health Care? NYLCare ProviderList Making an InformedHealth Care Decision NYLCare ResearchReports Glossary of Health CareTerms Frequently AskedQuestions (FAQ) Helpful Health CareLinks Health care benefits play a large role in providing for your individual � and yourdependents' � routineand emergency needs. A significant number of employers across the United States haveselectedNYLCare, a wholly owned subsidiary of New York Life, as their health benefits serviceprovider. "Members" - people just like you - are the employees of these organizations that are coveredby aNYLCare health benefits plan. Currently, there are over 3.5 million NYLCare members acrosstheUnited States. Members: If you are a NYLCare member, these links willprovide you with information to help you get the most from the NYLCare network. Consumers: If you are not a NYLCare member, these links can provide youwithvaluable information concerning health benefits, in general. Although the site is designedprimarily for our members, non-members will find much of the information useful andinteresting. NYLCare ProviderList A comprehensive listing of NYLCare health service providers in the United States. Making an Informed HealthCare Decision Guidelines to making an informed decision about the type of health benefits coverage that isright for you and your family. NYLCare ResearchReports Abstracts of health care research reports commissioned by NYLCare. The full text ofresearch reports is also available Glossary of Health CareTerms This glossary of health care terms will grow as the site evolves. Frequently Asked Questions(FAQ) If a question you have is not listed here, ask us! We will add to this list as we receiveyour questions. Helpful Health CareLinks For your convenience, we have provided some useful links to other interesting and informativehealth care sites. The number of links provided here will also expand as this site - and theWeb - expands. Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-64IA045-000814-B027-224http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/psinil.html 207.121.184.160 19970119011215 text/html 5294HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 01:11:24 GMTContent-type: text/html Individual Life Insurance Individual Life Insurance Individual Life Insurance products comprise the core business of New York Life. There are amyriad ofchoices available to meet a variety of individual needs. Introduction to Individual Life Insurance Individual Life Insurance Background If you're not sure where to begin, this link is a good place to start. It explains thedifferences between themajor types of life insurance. Individual Life Insurance Products Whole Life Modified Premium Whole Life 5 Year Term Insurance Increasing Premium Term Insurance Single Premium Life Survivorship Whole Life Employee's Whole Life Employee's Adjustable Life Universal Life* Charitable Adjustable Life Spectra Life Variable Universal Life* ** * Issued by New York Life Insurance and Annuity Corporation (A DelawareCorporation) ** Offered through NYLIFE Securities Inc. (member NASD) 51 Madison Avenue,New York, NY 10010. Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-65IA045-000814-B027-255http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/psinan.html 207.121.184.160 19970119011257 text/html 4786HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 01:12:01 GMTContent-type: text/html Annuities Annuities What Exactly is an Annuity? A general introduction to annuities, and how you can use one to help provide yourself with aretirement income,or meetother savings needs. Fixed Rate Annuities 1 An introduction to two different fixed rate annuities. Variable Annuities 1 2 An introduction to variable annuities. 1 Issued byNew York Life Insurance and AnnuityCorporation (a Delaware Corporation). 2 Offered byNYLIFE Securities Inc. (Member NASD) 51 Madison Ave., NY, NY 10010. Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-66IA045-000814-B027-294http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/mainstay/mf.html 207.121.184.160 19970119011350 text/html 6517HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 01:13:01 GMTContent-type: text/html MainStay Funds for Individuals MainStay offers a wide range of mutual funds to meet a variety ofinvestment objectives. Regardless of your particular needs, MainStaycan help you determine the fund that may be appropriate for you. The mutual funds referred to may beoffered and sold only topersons in the United States. Securities products are offered by NYLIFESecurities Inc., memberNASD. Please call 1-800-MAINSTAY for a free prospectus, or download it now. The prospectuscontainsmore complete information on applicable fees, charges and expenses andshare classes for eachmutual fund. Please read it carefully before you invest or send money. These products are notfederally insured orguaranteed by the U.S. Government, the Federal Deposit InsuranceCorporation or similar agency. Distributed by NYLIFE Distributors Inc., Member NASD. Home · Contact MainStay · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-67IA045-000814-B027-306http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/mainstay/prkr.html 207.121.184.160 19970119011415 text/html 5538HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 01:13:10 GMTContent-type: text/html Rollover IRA Take an in-depth look at New York Life's Rollover IRA services. Overview Deciding What to Do With Your RetirementMoney Basic Investing Concepts Annuity - Your Guaranteed Income Option Keeping More of What You've WorkedFor The mutual funds referred to may be offered and sold only topersons in the United States. Securities products are offered by NYLIFE Securities Inc., memberNASD. Please call 1-800-MAINSTAY for a free MainStay Funds prospectus and/or a MainStay Institutional Funds prospectus, or download either or both now. The prospectuses containmore complete information on applicable fees, charges and expenses and share classes for each mutual fund. Please read it carefully before you invest or send money. These products are not federally insured or guaranteed by the U.S. Government, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation or similar agency. Distributed by NYLIFE Distributors Inc., Member NASD. Home · Contact MainStay · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-68IA045-000814-B027-348http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/pscp.html 207.121.184.160 19970119011432 text/html 5233HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 01:13:43 GMTContent-type: text/html Corporate Business Life Insurance The Executive Bonus Plan Buy - Sell Insurance Key Employee Protection Which Retirement Plan is Right for YourOrganization? Under500 Employees 500+Employees Group Benefit Programs ForEmployers NYLCareProducts & Services New York Life and its subsidiaries' products and services for business can betailored to your particular needs. The links from this page introduce you to our business life insurance products,mutual funds through NYLIFE Securities Inc., member NASD, 51 Madison Ave., NewYork, NY, 10010, and group benefit programs (through NYLCare). Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-69IA045-000814-B028-35http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/pscpbp.html 207.121.184.160 19970119011447 text/html 6727HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 01:13:57 GMTContent-type: text/html The Executive Bonus Plan: Insurance Benefits for Valued Executives The Executive Bonus Plan: Insurance Benefits for Valued Executives Executive Bonus Plan: What Is It? Every successful business has at least one executive and, often, more than oneindividual whosecontribution tothe business is invaluable. Naturally, you value their contribution and want toprovide these employeeswith anadded incentive package that can help tie them to your business. One such incentiveis an ExecutiveBonus Plan.An Executive Bonus Plan, also known as a Section 162 plan, is a tax deductible wayfor you, theemployer, toselectively provide life insurance and supplemental retirement benefits to yourvalued executives. Benefits to the Employer An Executive Bonus Plan offers an employer the following features and benefits: Tax deductible. Covers select executives. Does not require IRS approval. Simple to create. By funding with life insurance, the executive has an added incentive to staywith the company, oftenreferred toas "Golden Handcuffs." The amount of life insurance coverage on select executives can vary. Benefits to the Owner/Employee As owner, you also have the right to apply for and own a life insurance policy onyour life. You own the policy. If the corporation's tax bracket is higher than the owner/employee, moreafter-tax dollars will beavailable topay the premium. Death benefit proceeds provide a source of income to your family upon death. IF SELECT EXECUTIVE DIES Benefits to the Employee The select executive will receive many valuable benefits from this type of plan: Executive owns the life insurance and any cash values. Personal insurance needs are met with business dollars. The policy's cash value can be used to supplement retirement income. Death benefit proceeds may be income tax free. Death benefit proceeds can be used for estate settlement costs or as a sourceof funds for a buy-sellagreement. How Does an Executive Bonus Plan Work? In this arrangement, an executive applies for and owns a personal life insurancepolicy. The employerpays the keyexecutive's life insurance premiums, either directly to the insurance company or asa bonus to theexecutive. Inmost cases, the premiums are deductible to the company as a business expense. Note: Although the premiums are included in the executive's currentincome, the deathbenefitmay be income taxfree. Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-70IA045-000814-B028-66http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/pscpbs.html 207.121.184.160 19970119011513 text/html 10324HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 01:14:18 GMTContent-type: text/html Buy-Sell: Insuring the Life of Your Business Buy-Sell: Insuring the Life of Your Business Protect Your Most Valuable Asset As a successful business owner, you have worked hard to reach your goals and it ispossiblethat yourbusiness has become one of your most valuable assets. But, have you considered whatwouldhappento your business and family should you unexpectedly die or become disabled? Do your heirs have experience operating the business on a day-to-day basis? Would your heirs be forced to sell the business? Would your heirs receive a fair price? Would the IRS seek a higher valuation for your business? These are difficult questions to answer. You owe it to yourself and your family toprotectyour years ofhard work. At New York Life, we are dedicated to meeting your personal andfinancial goals.Throughproper planning, you can secure the continuation of your business and the financialsecurityof yourheirs. How Can You Protect Your Business and Family? The Buy-Sell Agreement When examining different strategies, it is important to select one that insures asmoothtransition ofownership and protects your family's financial future. A buy-sell agreement canhelp youaccomplishthis goal. A buy-sell agreement is a contract among business owners. At the loss of an owner,thebusinessinterest is transferred according to the terms of this contract. The other owner(s)areobligated topurchase the deceased's business interest and the deceased's heirs are obligated tosell. Just lookat what a buy-sell agreement can do: Your Heirs: Are free of business worries and guaranteed to receive a fair price for thesale of thebusinessinterest. May help avoid some of the delays associated with probate. Surviving Owners: Will not have to worry about new and possibly unwanted partners. Know the purchase price of the business beforehand. Remain in good standing with clients and creditors through a smooth transitionofownership.Simply put, a properly funded buy-sell agreement will benefit your family,surviving ownersandcreditors. Methods of Funding Available Option 1: Wait and Pay Cash In this option, surviving owner(s) use cash at the death of a co-owner to fund thebuy-sellagreement.But, several drawbacks to this method exist. At death, funds may not be readily available for payment. A savings plan accumulates funds over time. What if funds are needed tomorrow? Will a savings plan be depleted to pay for unforeseen expenses? Accumulation of cash may cause an accumulated earnings tax problem. Option 2: Wait and Borrow Funds In this option, surviving owner(s) borrow funds, usually bank loans, at the deathof aco-owner to fundthe buy-sell agreement. But, much like the first option, this method has drawbacks. Future growth may be slowed due to an increase in expenses (repayment of loan). Death of an owner may cause sales to decline, compounding the problem. Death of an owner may make it difficult to receive a loan. A surviving owner may have to sign for funds, exposing personal assets. Surviving owners pay dollar for dollar plus interest for the deceased'soutstanding shareof thebusiness. Option 3: Insurance: The Smart Choice Purchasing insurance can be the most cost effective funding option for a buy-sellagreement.Usinginsurance as a funding vehicle will provide the following benefits: Immediate availability of proceeds when death or disability occurs. The funds used to buy the deceased's share are purchased for pennies on thedollar. Death benefit proceeds are generally income tax free. Premiums may be significantly lower than the cost of repaying the loaninterest. The Types of Buy-Sell Plans Available What Will A Buy-Sell Agreement Accomplish? Creates a market for the stock. Sets a predetermined price at which owners agree to buy and sell their shares. Provides money to fund the plan. Cross Purchase Plan In this plan, owners enter into an agreement with one another. To fund this plan,each ownerappliesfor, owns, and pays the life insurance premiums on the other owners. When an owner dies: Life insurance proceeds are paid to the surviving owner(s) income tax free. Proceeds are used to purchase the heirs' business interest. Heirs receive an agreed-upon payment for their business interest. Surviving owner(s) receive an increased cost basis for the acquired businessinterest. Entity Plan In this plan, owners enter into an agreement with the business. The businessapplies for,owns, andpays the life insurance premiums on each owner. When an owner dies: The business will receive the life insurance proceeds. The business uses the proceeds to purchase the deceased's business interest. Heirs receive an agreed-upon price for their business interest. Stock Redemption Plan A stock redemption plan is an agreement between the business and its shareholders.Thecorporationapplies for, owns, and pays the life insurance premiums on each shareholder. When a shareholder dies: The corporation will receive the life insurance proceeds. The corporation will use the proceeds to purchase the shareholder's outstandingstock. Heirs receive an agreed-upon price for the shareholder's outstanding stock. Wait and See Plan This buy-sell agreement provides an added level of flexibility, providing theadvantages ofthe crosspurchase and entity plans. The owner and the company form an agreement. The surviving owners/company have the option to purchase the deceased'sbusinessinterest. If the option is not exercised, the other party is obligated to purchase theinterest. Funding the agreement is usually the obligation of the party who has the firstoption. If necessary, loans between the two can be used to help a party who isunderfunded. Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-71IA045-000814-B028-96http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/pscpep.html 207.121.184.160 19970119011529 text/html 7423HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 01:14:39 GMTContent-type: text/html Key Employee Protection: Preserving the Life of Your Business Key Employee Protection: Preserving the Life of YourBusiness Plan Today for the Future As a business owner, you recognize the importance of insuring your building,inventory andequipment.These assets are vital to the success of your company. But have you considered whatwouldhappen ifyour key employees died unexpectedlyor became disabled? Key employees are the foundation of a successful business. They are businessowners, salesdirectors, CFOs or any other individuals who are sources of leadership,profitability, andwould beextremely difficult to replace. Unless the proper steps are taken, the death ordisability ofyour keyemployees can be devastating to the financial well-being of your company. The Solution: Key Employee Protection New York Life can provide you with strategies that will help continue your businessin theevent of a keyemployee's death or disability. Funding a plan to protect key employees will giveyourbusiness theadditional funds it needs at a difficult time to: Hire and train replacements. Replace an employee's contribution to profits. Maintain the confidence of clients and creditors. Funding Options Option 1: Cash or Sinking Fund In this option, a business establishes a savings plan, much like a bank account, toprotectitself fromthe death or disability of its key employees. At death, the cash in the savingsplan is usedas a sourceof funding. Unfortunately, this method has several drawbacks: A savings plan accumulates funds over time. What if funds are needed tomorrow? A savings plan may be depleted to pay for other expenses. Accumulated cash could cause an accumulated earnings problem. The business owner(s) will pay dollar for dollar, thus depleting the amount ofcash thatcould be used elsewhere. Option 2: Borrowing Funds In this option, funds are borrowed, usually a bank loan, to replace the financialloss causedby a keyemployee's death or disability. Drawbacks of this option include: A potential slow-down in business growth due to additional loan repayments. A reduction in future profits may occur because of the loan repayment. The business owner(s) will pay dollar for dollar plus interest. The company's credit may be adversely affected due to greater debt. Option 3: Insurance: The Cost Effective Alternative Purchasing life and/or disability insurance on your key employees is a costeffective way tosafeguardyour business and minimize the impact of a key employee's death or disability.It will provide your business with the following advantages: Funding with insurance is easy to administer. Funding costs pennies on the dollar. Funds are available even if death or disability occurs tomorrow. Although the premiums are not deductible, the insurance proceeds at death aregenerallyreceivedincome tax free to the business. SETTING UP THE PLAN The business applies for a life insurance policy on the life of a key employee. Thebusinessis theowner and beneficiary of the policy. AT KEY EMPLOYEE'S DEATH Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-72IA045-000814-B028-136http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/mainstay/rborun.html 207.121.184.160 19970119011545 text/html 4895HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 01:14:52 GMTContent-type: text/html MainStay Retirement Services for Organizations With Fewer Than 500 Employees Welcome to MainStay RetirementServices For Organizations With Fewer Than 500 Employees Overview &Options Making Your PlanWork Frequently AskedQuestions Home · Contact MainStay · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-73IA046-000816-B010-305http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/mainstay/rborov.html 207.121.184.160 19970119011602 text/html 5189HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 01:15:10 GMTContent-type: text/html Welcome to MainStay Retirement Funds For Organizations With More Than 500 Employees Welcome to MainStay RetirementServices For Organizations With More Than 500 Employees Overview &Options Making Your PlanWork Frequently AskedQuestions New York Life Benefit Services,Inc. To find out more about retirement plans for organizations with over 500employees, visit our affiliate NYLBS' Web site. Don't forgetto bookmark this page and return. Home · Contact MainStay · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-74IA046-000816-B010-350http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nylcare/pd.html 207.121.184.160 19970119011627 text/html 5409HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 01:15:33 GMTContent-type: text/html Products and Services NYLCare offers a range of products and services to meet your needs. We can help you assemble apackage of health benefits to meet your particular objectives. Click on the "Contact NYLCare" button above to request more information about the products and services that may be right for you. NYLCare provides a number of products and services in each of the following categories: Home · Contact NYLCare · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal · Provider List WT02-B28-75IA046-000816-B010-377http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/jtsc.html 207.121.184.160 19970119011646 text/html 4992HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 01:15:51 GMTContent-type: text/html The Successful New York Life Agent Since 1896, full-time New York Life agents have built successful careers through providing the kindof service that consistently distinguishes New York Life as a leader in its industry. The Company hasalways provided its agents with an outstanding opportunity to help their clients achieve their financialgoals. Combining remarkable products with a company-wide dedication to their agents' success, NewYork Life proudly states that we provide our agents with "the strength to succeed". Who Me? Sell Insurance and Financial Products? Why? The Successful New York Life Agent|About New York Life|What You Will Do|Training & Career Development Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-76IA046-000816-B011-31http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/jtab.html 207.121.184.160 19970119011701 text/html 5099HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 01:16:10 GMTContent-type: text/html About New York Life The tradition of conservative management practices and the ability to meet customer need hasbuilt acompany that people can trust with their finances and their futures. For these, and many morereasons, New York Life was named one of the most admired companies in America in FortuneMagazine's 1995 survey. New York Life is completely dedicated to maintaining its position as both a leader amonginsurancecompanies and a major force in the financial services industry. By staying true to the principles ofprudent expansion, conservative growth, full-service and, above all, a strong field force, New York Lifewill maintain and enhance its reputation as "The Company You Keep". The Successful New York Life Agent|About New York Life|What You Will Do|Training & Career Development Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-77IA046-000816-B011-61http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/jtdo.html 207.121.184.160 19970119011728 text/html 5317HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 01:16:24 GMTContent-type: text/html What You Will Do In considering any career change, many questions may arise, such as: What will be myresponsibilities? How will I be trained? How will I be compensated? The answers to these questionsdepend on many factors. When you sell insurance or financial services, you're not merely sellingproducts, you're developing relationships. Your relationship with your customers, as well as the trustthey place both in you and in the products you offer, are critical components to your ultimate success. Agents provide very intimate services in the insurance and financial services marketplace. They meetwith and know their clients on a personal level. The responsibilities of an agent include: contactingnew people, meeting with them and fact-finding to gather necessary information regarding their presentsituation, providing analysis of situations and, ultimately, presenting solutions that help meet objectives. The Successful New York Life Agent|About New York Life|What You Will Do|Training & Career Development Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-78IA046-000816-B011-91http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/jttc.html 207.121.184.160 19970119011806 text/html 5872HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 01:17:08 GMTContent-type: text/html Training & Career Development If you are selected to join New York Life, you'll make a commitment to the Company, but theCompanywill also make a commitment to you. With New York Life, you embark on a lifetime of learning andprofessional development through comprehensive training in insurance and financial services. Professional development occurs through New York Life Insurance Company (NYLIC) University. It's a program designed to train anddevelop agents throughout their careers. The first phase is Career Development School, during whichyou'll begin the process of getting your insurance licenses. You'll receive a full introduction to productsand selling skills, including how to develop your client base. After an initial six months of training, you'll spend two weeks in the Associate Program, an intensiveexperience that's focused on life insurance marketing, product selling, and technical knowledge. Uponcompletion, you'll be on your way to developing expertise in a selected area in the workplace or in thepersonal market, addressing individual needs. The next level of NYLIC University is the School of Professional Development, which offersspecialized courses combining class instruction with self-study. New York Life strongly encourages itsagents to make a commitment to lifetime learning. For this reason the Company provides tuitionreimbursement to Agents and Registered Representatives upon completion of certain industrycourses. As your career develops, you may wish to move into management. the Company is structured tosupport you in reaching this goal. Many of today's senior executives began their careers as agents inthe field. The Successful New York Life Agent|About New York Life|What You Will Do|Training & Career Development Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-79IA046-000816-B011-123http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/wnsi.html 207.121.184.160 19970119011831 text/html 4274HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 01:17:43 GMTContent-type: text/html What's New at this Site What's New at this Site We're pleased to announce the inaugeration of a new feature, our Quarterly Economic Update. Now, in addition to our Weekly Economic Commentary, you'll have access to updated quarterly information. Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-80IA046-000816-B011-150http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/cpnwwn.html 207.121.184.160 19970119011842 text/html 4412HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 01:17:52 GMTContent-type: text/html What's New at NYL Press Releases November 21, 1996 New York Life Names Frederick J. Sievert Vice Chairman September 18, 1996 New York Life Elects Sy Sternberg as its Next Chairman and Chief Executive Officer (CEO Harry Hohn to Retire on April 1 After 40 Years of Service) August 21, 1996 New York Life Reaches Out to Young Families with New Insurance Package Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-81IA046-000816-B011-183http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/cpnwwn03.html 207.121.184.160 19970119011901 text/html 9042HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 01:18:10 GMTContent-type: text/html New York Life Names Frederick J. Sievert Vice Chairman New York Life Names Frederick J. Sievert Vice Chairman November 21, 1996, New York--(BUSINESS WIRE) via Individual Inc. --Sievert and Richard M. Kernan Jr. elected to board of directors Frederick J. Sievert has been elected vice chairman and a member of the Boardof Directors of New York Life Insurance Company and Richard M. Kernan Jr. hasbeen elected a member of the board, New York Life's chairman and chiefexecutive officer, Harry G. Hohn, announced today. Both men continue as members of the company's executive management committee,which is responsible for establishing management policies in all areas of NewYork Life's business and affairs, and they will continue to report tochairman-elect Sy Sternberg. The elections bring to 18 the number of seats on New York Life's board. Sievert, 48, an executive vice president at New York Life since 1995, willnow oversee all of the individual insurance activities of the nation's fourthlargest life insurance company, including the Individual Life, IndividualAnnuity, Individual Policyholder Services, Financial Management and Sales and Marketing Departments. Kernan, 55, has served as executive vice president and chief investmentofficer of New York Life since 1995. He will continue as the insurer's topinvestment executive with overall responsibility for coordinating itscorporate investment policies. "Fred Sievert and Dick Kernan have both played pivotal roles in New YorkLife's growth and success in recent years as we transformed ourselves into afully diversified life insurance company," Hohn said. "Their unparalleledtalent and expertise will continue to be instrumental as New York Life entersthe challenging waters of the next century." Prior to joining New York Life in 1992 as senior vice president and chieffinancial officer for individual operations, Sievert was senior vicepresident in charge of individual insurance operations and a member of theBoard of Directors of Royal Maccabees Life Insurance Company. He currentlyserves as chairman of New York Life of Arizona and a member of the board ofNew York Life Insurance and Annuity Corp., NYLCare Health Plans Inc., andExpress Scripts Inc., New York Life's publicly traded pharmacy benefitmanagement subsidiary. A Fellow of the Society of Actuaries and a member of the American Academy ofActuaries, Sievert has served on a number of industry committees and taskforces, including the Life Insurance Committee of the Actuarial StandardsBoard and The Conference Board's Council of Financial Services CFOs. Sievert holds a BA degree from Amherst College and an MA from Wayne StateUniversity. He lives in New Canaan, Conn., with his wife Susan, and theirfive children. Kernan joined New York Life as an investment analyst in 1968. After a seriesof promotions, he was named vice president in charge of the investmentdepartment in 1983 and senior vice president a year later. In 1989 he gainedadditional responsibility for New York Life's Treasury and Economic ResearchDepartments and New York Life International Investment Inc. He was electedexecutive vice president in 1991, and later became responsible for New YorkLife Worldwide Holding Inc. as well as the company's Mergers & Acquisitionsand Mortgage Finance Departments. Kernan currently serves as a director of Express Scripts Inc., GreystoneRealty, MacKay Shields Financial Corp., NYLCare Health Plans Inc., and NewYork Life Insurance and Annuity Corp. He also serves as chairman of NYLIFEInc. and New York Life Insurance Worldwide Ltd., chairman, chief executiveand president of New York Life International Investment Inc., and chairman,chief executive and director of the MainStay VP Series Fund Inc. Kernan holds BS and MBA degrees from Seton Hall University and is a member ofthe American Council of Life Insurance Investment Committee. He and hiswife, Barbara, have two children and reside in Holmdel, N.J. New York Life Insurance Company, a Fortune 100 company, is one of the largestfinancial services companies in the United States and the world. Founded in1845 and headquartered in New York City, New York Life concentrates oninsurance and investment services. On the insurance side, New York Life andits affiliates offer traditional life and group insurance, annuities, andmanaged health care. On the investment side, New York Life and itsaffiliates provide institutional asset management and trust services and,through a broker-dealer subsidiary, NYLIFE Distributors Inc. providesecurities products and services such as institutional and retail mutualfunds, including 401(k) products. CONTACT: New York Life Insurance | Bill Werfelman, 212/576-5385 | or |Edelman Worldwide | Jon Goldberg, 212/704-8115 [11-20-96 at 14:28 EST, Business Wire, File: b1120142.800] Entire contents (C) 1996 by INDIVIDUAL, Inc., 8 New England Executive ParkWest, Burlington, MA 01803. Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-82IA046-000816-B011-221http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/cpnwwn02.html 207.121.184.160 19970119011914 text/html 8465HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 01:18:26 GMTContent-type: text/html New York Life Elects Sy Sternberg as its Next Chairman and Chief Executive Officer New York Life Elects Sy Sternberg as its Next Chairman and Chief Executive Officer CEO Harry Hohn to Retire on April 1 After 40 Years of Service New York, September 18, 1996 - Sy Sternberg has been named chairman andchief executive officer-elect by the Board of Directors of New York Life Insurance Company, and will takethe helm of the nation's 4th largest life insurer and a leading provider of managed health care andfinancial services for individuals and businesses on April 1, 1997. Sternberg, 53, will succeed Harry G. Hohn, who will be retiring after 40 years with New York Life,including seven years as its chief executive. Sternberg, who has been president and chief operatingofficer of New York Life since October 1995, also will retain the title of president. As New York Life's top executive, Sternberg will lead the Company's more than 12,000 employees and10,000 agents and oversee all of its operations, including individual life and annuity, group life, healthand disability insurance, and financial and investment services for individuals and institutions. Theseoperations include NYLCare, the company's fast-growing health benefits subsidiary that providesmanaged care services to more than 3.5 million people nationwide, New York Life's life insuranceprogram offered through the American Association of Retired Persons (AARP) and the Company'sMainStay family of mutual funds. "Sy Sternberg's high intelligence, drive, and total knowledge of our business make him the ideal leaderto take New York Life into the next century. He is a brilliant strategist above all else," said Hohn, 64, whojoined the company as an attorney in 1956 following his graduation from New York University and theFordham University School of Law. "Harry Hohn has transformed New York Life into a truly diversified life insurance company, not tomention one of the most financially secure companies in America," Sternberg said. "Under hisleadership, the Company has taken a clear lead in instituting enhanced compliance procedures and acomprehensive consumer protection program that is already serving as a model for the industry." Since joining New York Life eight years ago, Sternberg has revitalized the company's group healthinsurance operations and spearheaded its highly successful growth strategies in the managed carearena. As head of the company's core individual insurance business, Sternberg reaffirmed New YorkLife's commitment to agents as the primary marketing channel for the Company's products andservices. "My job will be to lead the best employees and agents in the business in adding even more luster to NewYork Life's already outstanding franchise," Sternberg added. "In my view, no company is better situatedto successfully navigate the wide range of emerging challenges facing our industry, from increasedcompetition from banks and pending legislative changes in the health care arena, to intense publicscrutiny over the way insurance and other financial products are bought and sold." Before joining New York Life, Sternberg served as senior executive vice president and member of theboard of directors of the Massachusetts Mutual Life Insurance Company. A Brooklyn native, he earned aB.S. degree from the City College of New York in 1965 and an M.S. degree from NortheasternUniversity in 1968. He is also a Chartered Life Underwriter. Sternberg is a board member of the HealthInsurance Association of America, and serves on its committees on federal programs and health reformstrategies. Mr. Sternberg is the father of two grown daughters, Jodi and Donna, and resides in Purchase, N.Y., withhis wife, Laurie, and their son, Matthew. New York Life, a Fortune 100 company, is one of the largest financial services companies in the UnitedStates and the world. New York Life has assets of more than $78 billion and reported total revenues of$16.7 billion and net income of $625 million in 1995. Founded in 1845 and headquartered in New YorkCity, New York Life and its affiliates offer traditional life and group insurance, annuities and managedhealth care. On the investment side, New York Life and its affiliates provide institutional assetmanagement, trust services, and 401(k) services. One of its subsidiaries, NYLIFE Distributors Inc., offersan array of securities products and services, such as institutional and retail mutual funds. Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-83IA046-000816-B011-247http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/cpnwwn01.html 207.121.184.160 19970119011943 text/html 7235HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 01:18:36 GMTContent-type: text/html New York Life Reaches Out to Young Families with New Insurance Package New York Life Reaches Out to Young Families with New InsurancePackage New York, August 21, 1996 - Recognizing the need to assist growing familieswith their insurance requirements, New York Life Insurance Company announcedtoday a new package of life insurance plans called Spectra Life, whichcombines the lower costs of term life insurance with tax deferred cash valuewhole life insurance. "We recognized that young families often have limited resources but stillrequire protection," said Mike Gallo, senior vice president of the Company'sIndividual Life Department. "Spectra Life will provide flexible, neededinsurance protection at a reasonable cost to a segment of the populationthat studies show is often underinsured." Indeed, New York Life believes Spectra Life is the ideal insurance packagefor growing families headed by individuals between the ages of 20 and 45with an income between $30,000 and $75,000 - a market that representsapproximately 14.4 million households in the United States. 1 Spectra Life offers growing families three different options of lifeinsurance protection designed to provide insurance coverage at a premiumcost that can be, in some cases, up to 60 percent less than a traditionalwhole life policy. The options are as follows: Spectra 1 - offers families a 25 percent whole life and 75 percent term insurance mix that maintains a level of cost for a five-year period. In addition, customers have the privilege of converting the term insurance portion of the coverage into cash value whole life. Spectra 2 - offers families a 50/50 mix of whole life and term life insurance that maintains a level cost for a five-year period. In addition, customers have the privilege of converting the term insurance portion of the coverage into cash value whole life. Spectra 3 - offers families a 50/50 mix of whole life insurance with a Dividend Option Term rider and the Option to Purchase Paid-Up Additions rider. This blend maximizes insurance coverage and eventually replaces the term insurance with paid-up additional insurance. "We believe New York Life's Spectra Life plans will give young families theability to purchase insurance when their needs are greatest - at a loweconomical cost - and to allow them to increase their coverage as theirneeds mature," added Gallo. New York Life Insurance Company, a Fortune 100 company, is one of thelargest financial services companies in the United States and the world.Founded in 1845 and headquartered in New York City, New York Life and itsaffiliates offer traditional life and group insurance, annuities, andmanaged health care. On the investment side, New York Life and itsaffiliates provide institutional investment management and trust servicesand, through a subsidiary, NYLIFE Distributors Inc., provide and array ofsecurities products and services such as institutional and retail mutualfunds, including 401(k) products. 1(Source:SRI/Gallup Macromonitor Survey - 1994) Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-84IA046-000816-B011-281http://www.newyorklife.com:80/nyl/images/sysmim.map 207.121.184.160 19970119012014 text/html 315HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 01:19:20 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 180 Imagemap Error Imagemap Error Your client did not send any coordinates. Either your client doesn't support imagemap or the map file was not accessed as a map.WT02-B28-85IA046-000816-B012-11http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer_dev/wsh-nyl.hts/mainstay/smsm.html 207.121.184.160 19970119012040 text/html 4759HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 01:19:47 GMTContent-type: text/html Site Map Below is a graphical representation of the sections in the MainStay site. You can use thissite map to quickly navigate to a section of the site you are interested in. Just move yourmouse over a section and click. New York Life NYLCare Home · Contact MainStay · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-86IA046-000816-B012-46http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer_dev/wsh-nyl.hts/nylcare/snsm.html 207.121.184.160 19970119012103 text/html 5058HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 01:20:12 GMTContent-type: text/html Site Map Below is a graphical representation of the sections in the NYLCare site. You can use thissite map to quickly navigate to a section of the site you are interested in. Just move yourmouse over a section and click. New York Life NYLCare Home · Contact NYLCare · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal · Provider List WT02-B28-87IA046-000816-B012-71http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/psin5t.html 207.121.184.160 19970119012121 text/html 11000HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 01:20:32 GMTContent-type: text/html 5 Year Term Insurance 5 Year Term Insurance 5 Year Term (5YT) offers affordable, temporary life insurance protection. Thepremiums are guaranteed and level for the first five years, then increase and areexpected to remain level within each successive five year period, but are notguaranteed to do so. The coverage 5YT provides could help families and business owners safeguard theirfinancial future. The proceeds can be used to help pay mortgages and other debts,fund a child's college education, and help a family continue its standard ofliving. The Benefits of 5YT The peace of mind of pure life insurance protection A death benefit that is, in most instances, free from federal income tax Guaranteed renewable coverage through the expiry age (see"Product Specifics") The privilege to convert to a permanent policy that builds cash value (See"Conversion Privilege") The financial strength of New York Life The Uses of 5YT There are many situations where 5YT may be appropriate. Here are just a fewexamples: Temporary Need for Protection When coverage is needed for a relatively short period of time, 5YT can beideal. A common use is when a mortgage or student loan is taken. Limited Funds In situations where life insurance is essential but dollars are scarce, 5YTcould serve as a stop-gap. Young people starting their careers can choose 5YT,then convert to a permanent plan as their finances improve. Supplemental Insurance 5YT can be added as a rider to some permanent plans to help boost the deathbenefit. It's an affordable way to increase total insurance coverage. Provide Family Coverage Riders can be added to the policy to insure your spouse and/or children,guarenteeing their future insurability (see "Riders" section for more information) Protection For Businessowners 5YT can be used as a hedge to cover outstanding loans, shielding partners orshareholders from financial hardship. Product Specifics: Issue Ages: Base Plan - 15-75 Rider - 0-75 Expiry Age: 90 (New York: 80) Minimum Face Amount: Base Plan - $50,000 Rider - $10,000 Premium Modes: New York Life offers several convenient ways to pay premiums: annually,semi-annually, quarterly, monthly, through our NYL-A-Plan, or via ourautomatic bank drafting method, Check-O-Matic (COM). Premium Guarantee: Premiums are guaranteed and level for the first five years. The Modificationof Premium Guarantee Rider can be added to assure level premiums for thesecond 5 year interval. See the "Available Riders" section below for more details. Risk Classes: Based on defined underwriting criteria, New York Life offers the following riskclasses: Preferred (for face amounts of $250,000 and more),Non-smoker, Select Standard, Standard, and Substandard A-G. Policy Fees Different policy fees apply by premium mode: Annual $50.00 Semi-Annual $28.00 Quarterly $16.50 Monthly $9.00 Check-O-Matic and NYL-A-Plan $5.00 Conversion Privilege 5YT policies allow the owner to convert all or part of the policy into permanent ,cash value life insurance without furnishing evidence of insurability. In allstates, except New York, the conversion period is, generally, the later of 10 yearsor age 30. For more detailed information on the conversion privilege and the NewYork variation, please contact your agent. Available Riders To customize your policy, you can choose from a variety of policy riders to meetyour specific needs. Rider Issue Ages Accidental Death Benefit (ADB) Provides additional death benefit if the insured dies as a direct result of anaccident. 15-65 5 Year Term Rider (OCI) Allows coverage on the primary insured, the insured's spouse and/or children. 0-752 Modification of Premium Guarantee Rider (MPGR) Guarantees that premiums will remain level throughout the second five year interval(years 6-10). This rider can only be applied for at issue. The premium for theMPGR is paid during the first five years, and the benefit is in effect duringpolicy years 6 through 10. 15-70 Living Benefits Rider (LBR) Gives policy owner access to a portion of the policy's eligible death benefitshould the insured be diagnosed with a terminal illness with a life expectancy of12 months or less. 15-651 Spouse's Paid-up Insurance Purchase Option (SPPO) Gives spouse-beneficiary the right to purchase a new paid-up whole life policy onhis/her life at the death of the primary insured, without evidence of insurability(not available in New York state). 15-59 Waiver of Premium (WP) Waives all premiums should the primary insured become totally disabled, as definedin the rider. 15-59 Our History of Unsurpassed Financial Strength Since 1845 New York Life has served the needs of individuals , families and,businesses. As one of the nation's premier financial institutions, New York Lifehas honored its commitment to policy owners through the Civil War, two World Wars,the Great Depression, and numerous recessions. 1There is no charge forthese riders. 2These ages refer to the age of theprimary insured under the policy, not the ages of the spouse , and/or children. Whole Life|Modified Premium Whole Life|5 Year Term Insurance|Increasing Premium Term Insurance|Single Premium Life|Survivorship Whole Life|Employee's Whole Life|Employee's Adjustable Life|Universal Life*|Charitable Adjustable Life|Spectra Life|Variable Universal Life* ** Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-88IA046-000816-B012-103http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/cpbgfr.html 207.121.184.160 19970119012142 text/html 11953HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 01:20:47 GMTContent-type: text/html A Company of Firsts A Company ofFirsts Celebrating 150 Years of Strength and Innovation Being a leader in the financial services industry means not resting on one'slaurels, butcontinually striving for improvement. Ours is a history notable for consistentfinancialstrength as well as dynamic innovation. For a century and a half, New YorkLife's firstpriority has been our policyowners' financial well-being. To keep pace withpolicyowners'needs, the Company has launched new products, enhanced product features,expanded qualityservice, and pioneered new technologies. Breaking new ground is part of theNew York Lifetradition. That's what makes us "A Company of Firsts." Unsurpassed Financial Strength 1845 - New York Life declares the first cash dividendeverpaid topolicyowners in America As a mutual insurer, New York Life is owned by its policyowners. Andvirtually everyyear since its inception, New York Life has declared dividends to those policyowners - nearly$23 billion in total. In 1995, New York Life made the highest totaldividendsdistribution in our history -- approximately $1.19 billion. 1899 - New York Life becomes the first American lifeinsurance companyto publish a detailed financial report for its policyowners Early financial reports showed a Company with a strong foundation and apromising future. Starting modestly with assets of $17,000 in 1845, the Company has grown to over $74 billion in consolidated assets, with over $449 billion of life insurance inforce.1 Those first financial reportsshowed acompany with a sound, conservative investment philosophy. Today, we remaintrue to thatprudent approach to investing. Three-quarters of our assets are invested inbonds, with 94%of that bond portfolio held in investment grade bonds. 1 Consolidated figures ofNewYork Life InsuranceCompany, including its direct, wholly owned life insurance subsidiaries, NewYork LifeInsurance and Annuity Corporation, New York Life and Health Insurance Company,and NYLIFEInsurance Company of Arizona. Our Commitment to Our Customers 1894 - New York Life becomes the first United Statescompany to issuelife insurance to women at the same rates as men Susan B. Anthony, the 19th-century American social reformer, believedstrongly that ifwomen were to achieve political equality, they had to be financiallyindependent. She wasone of the first women to own an insurance policy, and her insurer was New YorkLife. 1896 - New York Life becomes the first company toinsurepeople withphysical impairments or hazardous occupations Using a scientific basis to evaluate people with substandard risks, NewYork Life wasable to issue policies to people previously considered uninsurable. Thisinnovation --praised by experts at the time as the single greatest advancement in lifeinsurance -- enabled millions of people (who in the past would have been declined) to qualifyfor lifeinsurance and protect their families' financial future. Adding Value and Flexibility to Life Insurance 1860 - New York Life becomes the first company to issuepoliciescontaining a "non-forfeiture option" Before any state law required it, New York Life developed thenon-forfeiture option,which formed the foundation of guaranteed cash values found in policies today. This featureenables a policy to remain in force even when a premium payment isinadvertently missed. Today, policyowners have various ways to apply cash values to prevent theirpolicies fromlapsing. Typically, the options include automatic premium loan, extended terminsurance, andreduced paid-up insurance. 1892 - New York Life becomes the first major company toissue policieswith an incontestable clause To give policyowners even more peace of mind, New York Life sets a timelimit on theinsurer's right to dispute a policy's validity based on material misstatementsmade in theapplication. 1920 - New York Life becomes the first company to issueapolicy with adisability benefit that presumes total disability to be permanent after apredeterminednumber of months New York Life has long been a leader in liberal insurance concepts. TheCompany providesa benefit that waives premiums when the insured is disabled for a predeterminedperiod oftime. 1948 - New York Life becomes the first non-industrialcompany to offerfamily insurance The Company helps families by introducing a family insurance plan offeringcoverage onall members of a family under one policy. 1956 - New York Life becomes the first company to offerthe convenienceof Check-O-Matic premium payments This innovation relieves policyowners of the burdensome task of writing acheck to makepremium payments. Policyowners can now authorize New York Life to draw fundsdirectly fromtheir bank accounts to pay premiums each month. 1992 - New York Life becomes the first major insurer tooffer policieswith an Unemployment Rider To help aid policyowners through hard times, this no-cost rider offers towaive premiumsif policyowners become unemployed for a predetermined period of time. Earlier, the Companyintroduced the Living Benefits Rider. Should an insured become terminally ill,this riderprovides for a benefit payment that can be used to pay medical expenses duringthisdifficult time. Our Focus on Quality Service 1892 - New York Life becomes the first insurer toorganizea BranchOffice System To provide the highest possible level of service to our expanding customerbase, theCompany established an integrated network of General Offices across thecountry. Today, these"G.O.s" serve our nearly 11,000 agents. We believe this highly trainedteam ofdedicated professionals is our most valuable asset. Our agents have beenhonored by theindustry for outstanding service to their clients, and New York Life hasconsistently led theindustry in membership in the Million Dollar Round Table, an organizationdevoted to promoting exemplary ethical standards of the insurance industry. 1989 - New York Life becomes the first insurer to requirecontinuingeducation for its agents To provide agents with the knowledge they require to keep pace with therapidly changingfinancial services marketplace, the Company launched NYLIC University inJanuary 1995. Thisprogram is designed to give uniform, comprehensive training to both new andestablishedagents. In addition, many agents have successfully met stringent academicstandards, earningprestigious professional designations such as CLU, ChFC, and MSFS. 1990 - New York Life becomes the first major insurancecompany to offerwhole life policyowners an "Owner's Manual" New York Life has always sought to educate the public about the workingsand variousbenefits of life insurance. Beginning in 1895 with the introduction of the"Golden Policy,"all of our policies have been written in concise, plain language, not"insurance-ese." TheWhole Life "Owner's Manual," an easy-to-read guidebook available to ourpolicyowners, continues this tradition. Through its newsletters, intouch andinbusiness, aswell as thein-depth discussions in the Concept Papers series, New York Life seeks toprovide itscustomers with timely information regarding life insurance and financialissues. Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-89IA046-000816-B012-144http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/pffmcegp.html 207.121.184.160 19970119012211 text/html 14858HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 01:21:11 GMTContent-type: text/html A Game Plan For Meeting College Costs A Game Plan For Meeting College Costs Sending children to college can be a major financial burden for many parents. Establishing asoundfinancial plan can be a key to easing that burden and allow your children the education theydeserve. Putting a Foundation Beneath Your Children's Dreams All parents have big dreams for their children. They hope one day they'll grow up to becomesomeonetruly great - the President of the U.S., a doctor who finds a miracle cure, a concertpianist. Thesedreams can be obtained with the help of a college education. How Much Does College Cost? Most people look back on their college years with great fondness - and many look ahead totheirchildren's education with some anxiety. With costs so high, how can I afford to send my kidsto college?According to 1995-1996 College Board statistics, a college education currently averages about$37,000 for a four-year degree at a public college, and over $79,000 at a four-year privateschool.Looking at the Ivy League? Four years of tuition, fees, room and board now costs about$100,000 atelite schools such as Harvard and Yale. And costs keep rising. The College Board says thattheaverage annual increase in tuition at private universities during the 1980s was about 11%.Thesenumbers can strike fear into the hearts of parents of college-bound children. Sure, the everrising costsof college can be a challenge, but it is one that can be met. Early preparation can help makeit easierfor everyone concerned. How Much Will You Need To Save? If your child is age 1: It will take a $434 invested each month for 17 years to pay for a college education at aprivateuniversity. If your child is age 10: It will take a $876 invested each month for 8 years to pay for a college education at aprivateuniversity. Assumes a 4% annual inflation rate and a hypothetical rate of return of 6%.Thisdoes not predict nor guarantee the rate of return of any actual product. No consideration ismade fortaxes, sales charges, or any other fees and expenses. Here Are Some Tips on Getting a Handle on College Funding: Pre-Pay Tuition - Some state universities have set up innovative programswhere college expensesmay be paid in installments over many years, prior to attending the school. This may be aconvenientway to meet expenses, but it takes the choice of school away from your child. What if yourchild doesnotwant to attend the state university? This could pose a problem. Borrowing - These days, most people borrow at least a portion of the moneyneeded to cover collegeexpenses. You may want your children to look for student loans with special lower rates andrepaymentterms for college. However, repaying a large loan for many years after graduation can be a burden for some recent graduates. Tapping into your401(k)plan may be an option, but you may want to take a loan rather than a withdrawal to avoid taxconsequences. Of course, a loan will impede the potential growth of your retirement nest egg. Financial Aid - There are billions of dollars available each year inscholarships, grants, and work studyprograms. Financial aid to middle income families may be tough to come by, but with theshrunkencollege age population, some student-hungry universities are more willing to offer generousfinancialaid packages. It's certainly worth contacting your child's high school and prospectivecollege financialaid office to see if you're eligible. The Team Approach - With the seemingly overwhelming cost, it may be mostpractical to financeschool through many sources such as your personal savings, student loans, financial aid, even apart-time jobfor your child. Once in school, your child might want to look into paid internships thatprovide valuableexperience and help pay the bills. Every bit will help, but the bulk may still have to comefrom moneyyouput away over the years - so it's essential to make the most of your savings and investments. The Key to College Funding Start saving now! There's no better time than the present to begin accumulating funds forfuture collegecosts. Below are some tips: Put time on your side - If your children are young, or you don't havechildrenyet, you can put the powerof time to work for you. The sooner you start, the better, letting the wonder of compoundinterest helpbuild a nice college fund. Pay yourself first - Systematically set aside a fixed amount at a regularintervalthat you can comfortablyafford. You may be able to have this done automatically through bank drafting and payrolldeduction.Speak to your financial institution and payroll department to set up these convenient savingsmethods. Use tax advantages - You can try to maximize earnings and minimize taxesthrough severaltax-advantaged strategies. Investing in tax-free municipal bonds or bond funds, setting up atrust, andmaking a gift under the Uniform Gift to Minors Act are three ways to possibly lower the taxbite. Consultyour tax advisor and attorney regarding these approaches. Don't put all your eggs in one basket - Diversification is a key to reducingpotential risk. Dividing yourmoney among different financial vehicles may help protect against loss and increase thepotential forcompetitive returns. If your children are still in diapers and you have a long time horizon,you may wantto consider financial products that may offer the potential for greater returns to complementtraditionalbank products. The Financial Vehicles to Take Your Kids to College Before your child asks you for a spiffy new sports car to take to school, you may want totake a look atsome financial vehicles. Permanent life insurance products, such as whole life and universallife, offercash value accumulation in addition to their essential financial protection. Over the longterm, the cashvalue accumulation may be significant enough to help fund a portion of college expenses.Annuitiesmay also be an option. There are a variety of annuities designed to help build your nest egg.Someproducts offer the convenience of automatic bank drafting - making systematic monthly premiumpayments easy (withdrawals from annuities prior to age 59 1/2 may be subject toa10% IRS penaltytax). 130,404116,937104,50593,02482,42272,63363,59455,25147,54426,95222,57227,79222,19117,01912,2437,833 Amount of Money Available When Your Child Turns 18 (if you save the following amounts each month) Child's AgeNow $100 Month $200 Month $300 Month $400 Month Newborn $48,329 $96,658 $144,987 $193,316 1 43,468 86,936 173,872 2 38,979 77,958 155,916 3 34,835 69,670 139,340 4 31,008 62,016 124,032 5 27,474 54,948 109,896 6 24,211 48,422 96,844 7 21,198 42,396 84,792 8 18,417 36,834 73,668 9 15,848 31,696 63,392 10 13,476 40,428 53,904 11 11,286 33,858 45,144 12 9,264 18,528 37,056 13 7,397 14,794 29,588 14 5,673 11,346 22,692 15 4,081 8,162 16,324 16 2,611 5,222 10,444 This illustration shows monthly compounding at a hypotheticalrate of return of 8%. This does not takeinto consideration taxes, inflation, or any expenses connected with any particular product.This does notpredict nor guarantee the performance of any actual product. Choosing the Right Investment Product Click on this link to explore various investment options you may want to consider to help youfinanceyour children's education. The College Board is a national membership association of schools and colleges whose aim is tofacilitatethe student transition to higher education. Before clicking on this link, remember to bookmark this pageso you can return easily after exploring the College Board's Web site. Cost of Education Calculator|A Game Plan For Meeting College Costs|Financing Your Children's Education Enjoy Your Vacation While You Plan for Your Kid's Education Securities offered through NYLIFE Securities Inc. (Member NASD) New York Life Insurance Company New York Life Insurance and Annuity Corporation (A Delaware Corporation) NYLIFE Securities Inc. & NYLIFE Distributors Inc. (Members NASD) 51 Madison Ave., NY, NY 10010 Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-90IA046-000816-B012-179http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/cpemeq.html 207.121.184.160 19970119012248 text/html 5186HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 01:21:54 GMTContent-type: text/html An Equal Opportunity Employer An Equal Opportunity Employer New York Life continually strives to build a diverse workforce, and to ensure that all employees aregiven equal and ample opportunities to establish successful careers. We are committed to recruiting,hiring, training, and promoting our employees solely on the basis of merit and qualification withoutregard to a person's age, alienage, color, marital status, national origin, physical or mental disability,race, religion, sex, sexual preference or orientation, or status as a disabled veteran or veteran of theVietnam Era. Equal opportunity is an integral part of our daily activities as well as our business practices. Treatingeveryone with the dignity and respect they deserve is not only the right thing to do, but also makes goodbusiness sense. Simply stated, New York Life wants the best people we can find, people who can contribute, people whocan get the job done. For further information on career opportunities at New York Life, please write to: New York Life Insurance Company Human Resources Department Recruiting Group Room 151 51 Madison Avenue New York, New York 10010 You can also send us an e-mail. Click on the "Contact NYL" button above to get in touch with us. Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-91IA046-000816-B012-213http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/psinancn.html 207.121.184.160 19970119012311 text/html 5061HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 01:22:17 GMTContent-type: text/html Annuity Considerations Annuity Considerations Do you have money to invest as a result of any of these situations: A lump sum distribution from a pension plan? An inheritance? The sale of a home or business? A CD or money market account that is no longer generating competitive yields? Extra liquidity now that your children are grown? If any of these situations apply and your goal is long term savings, an annuity may be anappropriate part of your portfolio. There are four very different types of annuities whichfall into the categories of deferred annuities and immediate annuities. Annuity Considerations|Deferred Annuities|Fixed Deferred Annuities Variable Deferred Annuities|Immediate Annuities|Are There Any Risks With Annuities? What Exactly is an Annuity?|Fixed Rate Annuities |Variable Annuities Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-92IA046-000816-B012-246http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/bfgwsm.html 207.121.184.160 19970119012321 text/html 7021HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 01:22:33 GMTContent-type: text/html Are Pension Plans Too Complicated For Small Businesses? Are Pension Plans Too Complicated For SmallBusinesses? Simplified Employee Pension Plan Ideas From The Company You Keep Owners of small businesses agree that a retirement plan can do a lot for a growing company.Findingone with features that your business needs, such as tax advantages, low cost, and minimalpaperwork,can be challenging. Look no further than a Simplified Employee Pension plan (SEP). A SEP plan is an easy way to make contributions toward youremployees' retirement income - and your own. Through a SEP, you take a tax deduction for contributions you make directly to youremployees' IRAs.Meanwhile, these contributions are excluded from employees' gross incomes. Since employeeshandle their own IRAs, you pay benefits directly into their accounts instead of operating apension planof your own. Your contributions are also completely discretionary, and you can change themfrom year toyear. Even if you've missed the year-end deadline that applies to most qualified plans, you canstill establisha SEP for last year - and get the tax deduction. Thanks to the tax deductibility of contributions, the net cost of installing and running aSEP can be zeroor may even create a positive cash flow for many business owners. The Simplified Employee Pension Plan (SEP): Tax-Free, Form-Free, Hassle-Free...Completely Stress-Free You may find a SEP most attractive for what it doesn't have: No annual IRS or Department of Labor filings; No funding until your company's tax filing date; No income taxes on contributions; No required contributions from year to year; No complicated plan documentation; No complex record keeping or expensive administration. A SEP means no longer trying to accommodate an expensive, labor-intensive pension plan designed for a large company. A SEP is a cost-effective and flexible program, packed with employeeadvantagesand the flexibility a small company needs. You can: Choose from a wide variety of investment options; Offer a companion plan (a Salary Reduction SEP [SARSEP]) that enables employeesto makepre-tax contributions, just like a 401(k); Design eligibility criteria that make the most sense for your company. For information only - not intended to provide specific tax or legal advice.Consult your professional tax or legal advisor for specific advice. Simplified Employee Pension (SEP) Click on this link for information on Simplified Employee Pension (SEP) plans at the MainStay Mutual Funds Web site. Securities offered through NYLIFE Securities Inc. (Member NASD) New York Life Insurance Company New York Life Insurance and Annuity Corporation (A Delaware Corporation) NYLIFE Securities Inc. & NYLIFE Distributors Inc. (Members NASD) 51 Madison Avenue, New York, NY 10010 Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-93IA046-000816-B012-277http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/psinanrk.html 207.121.184.160 19970119012334 text/html 5428HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 01:22:42 GMTContent-type: text/html Are There Any Risks With Annuities? Are There Any Risks With Annuities? As with any investment, there are some risks that you should be aware of. With afixedannuity, since the insurance company is guaranteeing the value of the annuity, youmustmakesure that the company is backing its promise with sound investments. If you selecta wellmanaged and highly rated company, you will have a secure investment that offersattractiverates of return. Since there are so many types of annuities, selecting the proper type can beveryconfusing. Should it be fixed or variable? The answer depends on your ownsituation. As your personal goals and financial situation change, your financial planmustalsochange. Your New York Life agent and/or NYLIFE Securities registeredrepresentativeare there to help you identify those financial products that can help you meet yourgoal. Annuity Considerations|Deferred Annuities|Fixed Deferred Annuities Variable Deferred Annuities|Immediate Annuities|Are There Any Risks With Annuities? What Exactly is an Annuity?|Fixed Rate Annuities |Variable Annuities Securities offered through NYLIFE Securities Inc. (Member NASD) 51 Madison Avenue,NY,NY 10010 Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-94IA046-000816-B012-307http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/cpream.html 207.121.184.160 19970119012345 text/html 5730HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 01:22:55 GMTContent-type: text/html Asset Management Asset Management The markets performed exceptionally in 1995, and Asset Management (including related subsidiaries)took full advantage, turning in sales of $7.8 billion. The Stable Value Group and the MainStay Family ofFunds, the largest contributors to our sales results, both had record years. Stable Value reached $3.9billion in sales and maintained its position during the year as the leading distributor of traditionalGuaranteed Investment Contracts (GICs) to retirement plans. Going forward, Stable Value intends tocontinue its leadership role while delving into new market opportunities with alternative GICproducts. With Stable Value providing the foundation, the MainStay Funds represent growth opportunity forouroperation. MainStay closed out the year with strong investment results and the best sales year in thehistory of the funds. MacKay Shields Financial Corporation, our largest money managementsubsidiary, was a key to MainStay's success, with outstanding equity performance in 1995. MainStayalso developed relationships with major brokerages, accounting for half of all new account sales in1995. In addition, a coordinated brand awareness campaign for MainStay, complete with television andprint advertisements, was a meaningful contributor to MainStay's results. Past performance is no guarantee or indication of future results. MainStay Mutual Funds Click here to go to the MainStay Mutual Funds web site. Individual Operations|Asset Management|Investment|NYLCare Health Plans, Inc.|Special Markets|New York Life Worldwide Holding, Inc. Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-95IA046-000816-B012-331http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/cprebd.html 207.121.184.160 19970119012355 text/html 7915HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 01:23:06 GMTContent-type: text/html Board of Directors Board of Directors Robert M. Baylis was elected a director in January 1996. He is a former vicechairman of CS First Boston, Inc. Mr. Baylis serves on the Investment Committee. William G. Burns was elected a director in 1986. He is a former vice chairmanof NYNEX Corporation. Mr. Burns is a member of the Audit and Investment Committees. Patricia T. Carbine was elected a director in 1976. She is a co-founder and thepresident of the Ms. Foundation for Education and Communication, Inc. Ms. Carbine is chairwoman ofthe Audit Committee and a member of both the Corporate Organization & Compensation andInvestment Committees. Paul W. Douglas was elected a director in 1987. He is a retired chairman andchief executive officer of The Pittston Company. Mr. Douglas is a member of the Audit, CorporateOrganization & Compensation, and Executive & Insurance Committees. Kent B. Foster was elected a director in 1995. He is the president of GTECorporation. Mr. Foster is a member of the Executive & Insurance Committee. Lee M. Gammill, Jr. was elected to the Board in 1992. He is currently vicechairman of the Board of New York Life. Mr. Gammill is a member of the Executive & InsuranceCommittee. Richard L. Gelb was elected a director in 1981. He is chairman emeritus ofBristol-Myers Squibb Company. Mr. Gelb serves as chairman of the Corporate Organization &Compensation Committee and is a member of the Investment Committee. William R. Grant was elected a director in 1985. He is chairman of GalenAssociates. Mr. Grant is a member of both the Executive & Insurance and Investment Committees. Conrad Harper rejoined the Board in 1996 after a three-year absence during which he served as a legaladviser to the Department of State and as a member of the Permanent Court of Arbitration at the Hague. Heis a partner at the law firm of Simpson Thacher & Bartlett. Mr. Harper is a member of the Executive & Insurance Committee. Harry G. Hohn was elected a director in 1985. He is chairman of the Board andchief executive officer of New York Life. Mr. Hohn is chairman of both the Executive & Insurance andInvestment Committees. Thomas W. Langfitt, M.D., was elected to the Board in 1989. He is chairmanand chief executive officer of The Glenmede Corporation. Dr. Langfitt is a member of the Audit andExecutive & Insurance Committees. Leslie G. McCraw was elected a director in 1995. He is the chairman andchief executive officer of Fluor Corporation. Mr. McCraw serves on the Investment Committee. David W. Mitchell was elected to the Board in 1973. He is a retired chairmanand chief executive officer of Avon Products, Inc. Mr. Mitchell is vice chairman of the Audit Committeeand a member of the Investment Committee. Richard R. Pivirotto has been a member of the Board since 1974. He is aretired chairman of Associated Dry Goods Corporation. Mr. Pivirotto is vice chairman of the CorporateOrganization & Compensation Committee, and a member of the Executive & Insurance and InvestmentCommittees. Robert J. Richardson, Ph.D., was elected a director in 1984. He is a retiredpresident of Bell Canada Enterprises Inc. Dr. Richardson serves on the Audit and CorporateOrganization & Compensation Committees. Seymour Sternberg was elected to the Board in 1995. He is the president andchief operating officer of New York Life. Mr. Sternberg is vice chairman of both the Executive &Insurance and Investment Committees. Message to Policyowners|Board of Directors|Consolidated Financials Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-96IA046-000816-B012-357http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/pfpitpcd.html 207.121.184.160 19970119012407 text/html 10353HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 01:23:17 GMTContent-type: text/html CD vs. Deferred Annuity CD vs. Deferred Annuity Which Best Meets Your Needs? They're both quality financial tools. If you're debating whether the best place foryourmoney is acertificate of deposit (CD) or deferred annuity, the answer depends upon yourindividualfinancialsituation and investment objectives. Both CDs and deferred annuities are savings vehicles used by individuals toaccumulatewealth.However, these two products are quite different; each has its own unique strengthsand uses.For thesake of comparison, let's look at two similar versions of these products - anindividuallyowned,non-tax qualified bank CD and an individually owned, non-tax qualified singlepremiumdeferred annuityearning an annually renewable fixed rate of return. Review the list of objectivesandidentify those whichare most important to you. This will help determine which of these two products -CD ordeferredannuity - is best suited for your needs at this time. Objectives Safety of Principal: Both CDs and deferred annuities areconsidered low-riskinvestments. CDs aregenerally issued by banks and, in most cases, are insured by the Federal DepositInsuranceCorporation (FDIC) for up to $100,000 per depositor. Should the bank fail, theFDICguarantees CDs upto this amount. Deferred annuities, on the other hand, are issued by insurance companies and arenot insuredby theU.S. government. They are backed in their entirety by the financial strength of theissuinginsurancecompany, regardless of the amount. Before purchasing an annuity however, you shouldmake suretheissuing insurance company is financially sound. You can determine financialstability byrequesting thefindings of independent rating companies such as Moody's, A.M. Best, Standard &Poor's andDuff & Phelps. Short-Term Accumulation: When deciding between a CD and adeferredannuity, your investmenthorizon should be a key factor. Your investment horizon is the amount of time youneed tosave for aspecific goal. For short-term goals, such as a down payment on a home, a new car oravacation, a CDmay prove to be a better choice for you. In most instances, you can select amaturity datefor your CDthat corresponds to your time horizon. Maturity periods can be as short as onemonth or aslong asseveral years. Long-Term Accumulation: On the other hand, a deferred annuity isgenerallythe product of choice forthe long haul. Deferred annuities are designed to help accumulate money forretirement or toprotectfunds already saved up once you've reached retirement. They can even be used toprovide alegacy foryour heirs. In later years, a deferred annuity also provides more flexibility foraccessingyour money. Interest Return: CDs offer a guaranteed rate of return for aspecifiedperiod oftime. Interest rates willvary depending on current market conditions and the length of time to maturity.Generally,the shorterthe period of time to maturity, the lower the rate. There is no guaranteed minimumforrenewal rates.With a deferred annuity, a guaranteed interest rate is locked in for an initialperiod,usually one to threeyears. After that, interest rates may be adjusted periodically, generally eachyear. Becauseannuities arelong-term vehicles, their interest rates tend to be higher than comparable CDs. Deferred annuities also offer a guaranteed minimum interest rate. Regardless ofmarketconditions, theannuity will pay at least the minimum guaranteed rate established at the time ofpurchase. Inaddition,some companies offer a "bailout" rate to protect against excessive year-to-yearratefluctuations. Tax Savings: If taxes are a concern, a deferred annuity may be abetteroptionfor several reasons: Earnings on CDs are taxable in the year the interest is earned even if you don'ttake themoney out. Withdeferred annuities, on the other hand, earnings accumulate free of currenttaxation. Earningsinside anannuity are not treated as taxable income until they are withdrawn. This allowsmore of yourmoney towork harder towards achieving your long-term goals and gives you a measure ofcontrol overwhen youpay taxes and how much you pay. This tax deferral feature is one of the greatestadvantagesof deferredannuities. As you can see from the chart below, when saving for the long term it makes goodinvestmentsense tohave the power of tax deferral on your side. Keep in mind that withdrawals from theearningsportion of adeferred annuity are taxable and, if you're under age 59 1/2, these earnings may besubjectto a 10% taxpenalty. *Hypothetical rate used for illustrative purposes only. Not intended to predictnor guarantee any actual product results. This amount does not reflect the effect of applicable feesand/or charges. Deferred annuities may also help reduce or eliminate the taxes on your SocialSecuritybenefits. Byleaving your money in a deferred annuity you can reduce your taxable income,keeping it belowthe levelwhere you would begin to owe taxes on your Social Security benefits. But with CDs,yourinterestearnings count in the calculation to determine how much of your Social Securitybenefits willbe taxed -even if you don't withdraw the earnings. As much as 85% of your Social Securitybenefitscould end upsubject to taxation. At death, the annuity's account value will be paid directly to your namedbeneficiary(ies),avoiding thecosts and delays associated with the probate process. This is not the case with aCD, whichisincluded in your estate. When purchasing a deferred annuity, look for one thatdistributesthe fullaccount value to beneficiaries. Some companies apply surrender charges on deathbenefitproceeds. Liquidity: If you need access to the funds in a CD prior to thematuritydate, youmay pay an interestpenalty ranging from 30 days' to six months' interest. Of course, you can limityour exposuretosurrender penalties by investing in several CDs with staggered maturity dates. A deferred annuity also provides you with access to funds should the need arise.Mostcompanies willgive you the flexibility to withdraw a portion of your deferred annuity's accountvalue,usually 10% eachyear, without a company-imposed surrender charge. Withdrawals from deferredannuities can bemadein response to a one time cash need or set up systematically to respond to acontinuous need.In fact,most deferred annuities offer the opportunity to systematically withdraw funds on amonthly,quarterly,semi-annual or annual basis. Keep in mind that deferred annuities are designed to build your retirement nestegg.Withdrawals ofearnings prior to age 59 1/2 may be subject to a 10% penalty tax. Plus, mostinsurers assessasurrender charge if the contract is terminated during the firsWT02-B28-97IA046-000816-B013-23http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/psinca.html 207.121.184.160 19970119012444 text/html 7001HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 01:23:44 GMTContent-type: text/html Charitable Adjustable Life Ideas Charitable Adjustable Life Ideas Nonprofit organizations perform many vital functions in communities across thecountry. It'simportant that thefuturefinancial strength of these nonprofit organizations is secure. They face thedilemma ofincreased demandfor services in the wake of reduced government support and overflowing operationalcosts. New York Life offers hope. Charitable Adjustable Life (CAL), a specially designedlifeinsurance plan,underwritten by New York Life Insurance and Annuity Corporation (NYLIAC), can helpsecureendowment funds for the future. Charitable Adjustable Life is Here to Help CAL can help ensure the well-being of individual nonprofit organizations bycreating a poolof moniesfor futureefforts. CAL is a simple permanent life insurance policy with competitive interestcrediting. As theowner and beneficiary of the policy, individual nonprofit organizations have accessto anycash values thataccrue - areal plus if they need liquidity. CAL makes it possible to plan now for a brightfuture. CAL - The Best of Both Worlds In the past, it was common to rely heavily on a handful of wealthy donors. BecauseCAL isaffordable,those limited to making smaller donations may now be able to fund sizable gifts fortomorrow. CALneed not interfere with present solicitation efforts - it's meant to supplement,not replace,currentdonations. Donors to a nonprofit organization that participates will also find CAL attractive.Sincedonors can fund CAL from current income,rather thanaccumulated wealth, they don't have to utilize assets that were intended for theirfamilies. Of course,they may also be able to take any applicable tax deductions when itemizing theirtax returns. Gifts areeasy to arrange and are outside of the probate estate. We're Here to Support Nonprofit Organizations CAL is simple, effective and makes perfect sense for nonprofit organizations. NewYorkLife'soutstandingreputation for customer service makes establishing a CAL arrangement easy. Aftera nonprofit organization has secured agroup of interested donors, the donors fill out a simple medical form, and a NewYork Liferepresentative provides a letter of intent to the organization. When theorganizationreceives all premiums/donations,they simply send acheck for the total amount to New York Life. Whole Life|Modified Premium Whole Life|5 Year Term Insurance|Increasing Premium Term Insurance|Single Premium Life|Survivorship Whole Life|Employee's Whole Life|Employee's Adjustable Life|Universal Life*|Charitable Adjustable Life|Spectra Life|Variable Universal Life* ** Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-98IA046-000816-B013-55http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/pfrpch.html 207.121.184.160 19970119012520 text/html 5051HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 01:24:23 GMTContent-type: text/html Choosing The Right Products Choosing the Right Products As you plan for your retirement, you may also want to consider some of your otherinvestmentmilestones along the way. These milestones may not be major. You may justwant to redecorate your living room or increase the amount you set aside each month. In anycase, it isimportant to maintain your focus on your retirement objectives. For more specificinformation about thetypes ofinvestments you might consider, click on the links below. Individual Life Insurance MainStay Mutual Funds New York Life Annuities MainStay 401(k) IRA Rollover Why Retirement Planning is So Important|Fulfilling Your Retirement Goals|Retirement Issues|Choosing the Right Products Retirement Planning Calculator|Personal RetirementStrategies Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-99IA046-000816-B013-94http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/psinilmx.html 207.121.184.160 19970119012546 text/html 11521HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 01:24:56 GMTContent-type: text/html Choosing the Right Insurance Mix Choosing the Right Insurance Mix Should you purchase term insurance, or is permanent insurance the better buy? If youalready own aterm policy, should you convert it to a permanent plan, such as whole life? Or is a flexibleplan, such asuniversal life, the way to go? There are no easy answers to these questions. And that is not because thethree kinds ofinsurance are so complex and difficult to understand - actually, the differences between themare basicand easily comprehensible. What makes these questions difficultis that theanswers depend on you, your budget, and your needs. One kind of insurance is notnecessarily"better" than the other; and they are certainly not mutually exclusive. More than likely, yourchoice willnotbe "either/or" but "the best mix." Term, Whole Life, Universal Term insurance provides economic protection for a specified period (or "term") at aspecified rate. Itis "no frills" coverage that is very inexpensive at younger ages and becomes increasinglymoreexpensive as you get older. Its "premium" (what you're required to pay to keep the policy inforce)increases each term (since you can also buy this kind of insurance for periods of one,five, or eventen years). It is designed to lock-in insurability for conversion to permanent insurance in thefuture. Permanent insurance, on the other hand, provides permanent protection, coverage foryour wholelife. "Whole life" insurance offers a level or fixed premium that is guaranteed never to go up,because itaverages insurance costs over your lifetime. In the early years, therefore, premiums arehigher than theamount required to pay only for pure death benefit protection. If it were that simple, the choice between term and permanent insurance would bestraightforward: Whatever your age, buy the cheaper product. However, the premium you pay in the earlyyears of awhole life policy helps build a guaranteed tax-deferred "cash value," which is availableduring yourlifetime, in the form of policy loans that can be used to meet emergencies, fund educationexpenses, orprovide income for retirement. Moreover, whole life policies from mutual insurancecompanies aregenerally "participating," which means that they earn dividends. What about universal life? Like whole life, this kind of insurance is permanent, offeringlifetimeprotection and cash value accumulation. Unlike whole life, however, universal-type policiesfeature anadjustable death benefit and flexible premiums. After making an initial minimum premiumpayment,policy owners may pay whatever they desire, subject to IRS and companyminimum/maximum rules;they may even skip premium payments for a year or longer. The policy's death benefit mayfluctuateaccordingly. With a universal policy, you have added flexibility to adjust your death benefitand premiumpayments according to your current needs. Which is Best for You? Term insurance is normally the better buy for the younger age groups and for the shortrun. Itmakesthe ideal choice when you're young, just starting out, and on a strict budget, since it allowsyou to buythe full amount of coverage you need at an affordable price. After all, there is no point tobuying apermanent policy if you simply can't afford it; you'll either buy less coverage than you needor, evenworse, lose your money as well as your coverage if you allow the policy to lapse because ofnonpayment. Term insurance is perfect when your needs are temporary and when you needprotection until adebt,such as a mortgage or a business or education loan is paid off. Generally speaking, if yourneed forprotection lasts ten years or less, or will cease entirely before age 50, term insurance is anintelligentbuy. If you don't need protection after a certain point in your life, for instance once the children have left home, your spouse is self-supporting, Additional income is not needed for retirement years, or you have no desire to leave an inheritance or need to protect an estate orbusiness, terminsurance is right for you. However, if you need insurance for an extended period - for ten or more years - and ifyou do havethekinds of needs listed above, you should consider permanent plans, such as whole life anduniversallife. Some Things to Consider "Baby Boomers" who are having children in their thirties and forties are often financinga mortgage,paying and saving for the education of their children, building a retirement nest egg, andperhaps evenhelping to fund long-term care for their parents. They are the first generation of Americans tobehandling these responsibilities simultaneously. Permanent insurance provides not onlynecessaryeconomic protection, but also the kind of asset accumulation opportunity they need to meetconvergingdemands. Over time, it is much more cost-efficient than term insurance. After the age of fifty, permanent insurance is almost certainly the better buy, since termpremiumsincrease considerably thereafter and are not recoverable in the form of cash value ordividends. Permanent insurance, however, allows you to leave your options open with respect toeconomicprotection, retirement and education funding, and estate planning. It can be used to boostmonthlyretirement income through a technique known as "pension maximization." It can also be amajor estateplanning tool, enabling you to minimize estate taxes and provide liquidity for your heirs. What about the retirement years? The cash value in a permanent policy can be used tosupplementSocial Security, pension benefits, and investment income. You can borrow from it or eventurn it into anannuity generating monthly income for life. Choosing the Best Mix What if you're sold on the value of permanent insurance but can't afford all thecoverage you need? You have some options. You can buy the term insurance you need and gradually convert it,piece bypiece, into permanent insurance. (Most term policies have a "conversion" privilege thatallows you toturn your term insurance into permanent insurance without proving good health.) Let's sayyou need$200,000 worth of insurance: you can buy a term policy for that amount and later convert$50,000 of itinto a permanent plan, keeping the rest of the term in force to convert in the future. Whetheryou chooseto convert to whole life or universal life will depend on your specific needs for an adjustabledeathbenefit and flexible premium payments. Another option is to buy a permanent plan with term insurance added to it. If, again,you need$200,000 of insurance but can only afford to pay for little more than $100,000 of permanentcoverage,you may be able to buy a base plan with $100,000 of cash value insurance and, for only alittle moremoney, a $100,000 "term rider." Or, you might buy a $200,000 universal life policy, startingoff with theminimum premium and gradually increasing those payments as circumstances allow. When all is said and done, you needn't be thinking in terms of "term versuspermanent." Rather,youshould be thinking of what is the best mix of term and permanent insurance that will meetyour needs. With the help of your New York Life agent, you can design an insurance plan that is flexibleandaffordable - a customized plan that will meet your needs and help you reach your goals. Pension Maximization Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-100IA046-000816-B013-129http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/cprecffh.html 207.121.184.160 19970119012621 text/html 9190HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 01:25:13 GMTContent-type: text/html Consolidated Financial Highlights Consolidated Financial Highlights December 31, 1995 December 31, 1994 (in millions) (in millions) New York Life Insurance Company New York Life Insurance and Annuity Corp. Consolidated (After Eliminating Inter- company Transactions) New York Life Insurance Company New York Life Insurance and Annuity Corp. Consolidated (After Eliminating Inter- company Transactions) Insurance Life insurance in force $394,245 $55,577 $449,267 $371,378 $51,541 $422,475 Life insurance sales (face amount) 56,724 6,895 63,425 41,886 6,829 48,556 Average individual life policy sold (in thousands) 160 139 157 126 158 130 Premiums 9,498 1,348 10,846 9,030 1,203 10,255 Benefit payments and dividends to policyowners and to beneficiaries 9,424 1,225 10,648 8,279 1,238 9,554 Investments Net invested income 3,850 1,037 4,889 3,717 1,020 4,697 Yield on invested assets before federal income taxes 7.53% 7.78% 7.68% 7.76% 8.17% 7.84% Long-term investments made 18,743 4,468 23,217 17,064 4,510 21,160 Financial Position Total assets 59,415 15,977 74,281 55,343 14,499 68,926 Total liabilities 55,659 15,099 70,525 51,620 13,654 65,203 Surplus 3,756 878 3,756 3,723 845 3,723 Surplus and asset valuation reserve 5,024 1,016 5,162 4,646 950 4,751 The condensed consolidated financial information shown in this Consolidated Financial section includes New York Life Insurance Company and its direct, wholly owned subsidiaries: New York Life Insurance and Annuity Corporation, New York Life and Health Insurance Company, and NYLIFE Insurance Company of Arizona. Policyowners may request a copy of the unabridged financial statements by writing to New York Life Insurance Company, 51 Madison Avenue, New York, New York 10010. Policyowners may obtain a copy of the financial statements applicable to their respective company by addressing the Secretary of the parent company, New York Life Insurance Company, at 51 Madison Avenue, New York, New York 10010. Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-101IA046-000816-B013-155http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/cprecf.html 207.121.184.160 19970119012641 text/html 5136HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 01:25:52 GMTContent-type: text/html Consolidated Financials Consolidated Financials Consolidated Financial Highlights Consolidated Operations Statement of Financial Position Statement of Operations & Surplus Notes to Financial Statements The condensed consolidated financial information shown in this Consolidated Financial section includes New York Life Insurance Company and its direct, wholly owned subsidiaries: New York Life Insurance and Annuity Corporation, New York Life and Health Insurance Company, and NYLIFE Insurance Company of Arizona. Policyowners may request a copy of the unabridged financial statements by writing to New York Life Insurance Company, 51 Madison Avenue, New York, New York 10010. Policyowners may obtain a copy of the financial statements applicable to their respective company by addressing the Secretary of the parent company, New York Life Insurance Company, at 51 Madison Avenue, New York, New York 10010. Message to Policyowners|Board of Directors|Consolidated Financials Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-102IA046-000816-B013-191http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/cprecfco.html 207.121.184.160 19970119012702 text/html 7845HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 01:26:09 GMTContent-type: text/html Consolidated Operations Consolidated Operations Bond Portfolio We continue to maintain an excellent bond portfolio that is 94 percent investmentgrade. The comparable percentages for New York Life InsuranceCompany and New York Life Insurance and Annuity Corporation are 94 and 95 percent, respectively. Total Assets Sixty-seven percent of the Company's total assets of $74.3 billion are investedin bonds;10 percent are invested in mortgage loans and realestate. Ten Years of Growth (in $billions) Surplus AtDecember 31, 1995,oursurplus,including investment reserves, was $5.2 billion. Life Insurance inForce Insurance coverage provided for policyowners through individual policies grew to$333.8billion in 1995. When combined with group coverage, thetotal was $449.3 billion. Total Assets Totalassets atDecember31,1995 were $74.3 billion. Total PremiumIncome* Premiumsfrom allpolices in force in 1995 amounted to $10.8 billion. New Premiums The sale of new policies during 1995 added approximately $7.1 billion in newpremiums. NewYork Life Insurance Company and New York Life Insuranceand Annuity Corporation accounted for $5.1 billion and $1.6 billion of newpremiums,respectively. Total Benefits Including Dividends Paid* Policyowners and theirbeneficiarieswere paid $10.6 billion in 1995. Eleven percent of thetotal represents dividend payments. * Before reinsurance for 1985. 1995 financial information by company not provided in these graphs can be found in the appropriate sections of Consolidated Financial Highlights, Statement of Financial Position, and Statement of Operations & Surplus; comparable data for 1985 is not provided. Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-103IA046-000816-B013-221http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/cprecffp.html 207.121.184.160 19970119012748 text/html 12821HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 01:26:46 GMTContent-type: text/html Consolidated Statement of Financial Position Statement of Financial Position (Condensed) December 31, 1995 December 31, 1994 (in millions) (in millions) New York Life Insurance Company New York Life Insurance and Annuity Corp. Consolidated (After Eliminating Inter- company Transactions) New York Life Insurance Company New York Life Insurance and Annuity Corp. Consolidated (After Eliminating Inter- company Transactions) Assets: Bonds $37,594 $12,262 $49,927 $34,134 $11,141 $45,300 Mortgage loans 5,239 1,062 6,301 5,020 969 5,990 Common and preferred stocks 3,298 64 2,403 2,595 69 1,789 Real estate 1,144 141 1,285 1,171 119 1,290 Policy loans 4,981 445 5,426 4,960 420 5,380 Cash and short-term investments 1,571 343 1,923 1,922 580 2,506 Deferred and uncollected premiums 967 1 968 927 (3) 924 Investment income due and accrued 808 181 990 810 175 985 Separate account assets 2,435 1,444 3,879 2,609 971 3,580 Other assets 1,378 34 1,179 1,195 58 1,182 Total Assets $59,415 $15,977 $74,281 $55,343 $14,499 $68,926 Liabilities: Policy reserves $29,809 $12,821 $42,630 $27,800 $12,100 $39,900 Deposit funds 16,245 7 16,252 14,991 -- 14,991 Dividends and policy proceeds deposited with the Company 2,077 88 2,165 2,030 70 2,100 Dividends payable to policyowners 1,186 -- 1,186 1,121 -- 1,121 Policy claims 315 79 371 297 67 345 Taxes -- federal, state, and other 415 2 417 175 1 176 Separate account liabilities 2,434 1,396 3,830 2,609 905 3,514 Other liabilities 1,593 542 1,925 1,486 386 1,821 Interest maintenance reserve (IMR) 317 26 343 188 20 207 Asset valuation reserve 1,268 138 1,406 923 105 1,028 Total Liabilities 55,659 15,099 70,525 51,620 13,654 65,203 Surplus: Common stock and paid-in capital -- 505 -- -- 505 -- Surplus notes 449 -- 449 449 -- 449 Special surplus funds 77 1 77 71 1 71 Uanssigned surplus 3,230 372 3,230 3,203 339 3,203 Total Surplus 3,756 878 3,756 3,723 845 3,723 Total Liabilities and Surplus $59,415 $15,977 $74,281 $55,343 $14,499 $68,926 The condensed consolidated financial information shown in this Consolidated Financial section includes New York Life Insurance Company and its direct, wholly owned subsidiaries: New York Life Insurance and Annuity Corporation, New York Life and Health Insurance Company, and NYLIFE Insurance Company of Arizona. Policyowners may request a copy of the unabridged financial statements by writing to New York Life Insurance Company, 51 Madison Avenue, New York, New York 10010. Policyowners may obtain a copy of the financial statements applicable to their respective company by addressing the Secretary of the parent company, New York Life Insurance Company, at 51 Madison Avenue, New York, New York 10010. Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-104IA046-000816-B013-260http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/cprecfos.html 207.121.184.160 19970119012809 text/html 12057HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 01:27:17 GMTContent-type: text/html Consolidated Summary of Operations & Surplus Statement of Operations & Surplus (Condensed) Year ended December 31, 1995 Year ended December 31, 1994 (in millions) (in millions) New York Life Insurance Company New York Life Insurance and Annuity Corp. Consolidated (After Eliminating Inter- company Transactions) New York Life Insurance Company New York Life Insurance and Annuity Corp. Consolidated (After Eliminating Inter- company Transactions) Income: Premiums $9,498 $1,348 $10,846 $9,030 $1,203 $10,255 Net investment income 3,850 1,037 4,889 3,717 1,020 4,679 Other income 914 162 954 719 157 873 14,262 2,547 16,689 13,466 2,380 15,807 Benefits and Expenses: Benefit payments 8,205 1,225 9,429 7,112 1,238 8,386 Additions to policy reserves 1,856 522 2,379 1,584 442 2,026 Additions to other insurance reserves 1,076 369 1,326 1,669 183 1,842 Operating expenses 1,377 276 1,651 1,298 250 1,556 12,514 2,392 14,785 11,663 2,113 13,810 Net Gain Before Federal Income Taxes and Dividends 1,748 155 1,904 1,803 267 1,997 Federal income taxes 251 60 312 350 105 456 Net Gain Before Dividends to Policyowners 1,497 95 1,592 1,453 162 1,541 Dividends to policyowners 1,219 -- 1,219 1,167 -- 1,168 Net Gain From Operations 278 95 373 286 162 373 Net realized capital gains (losses) before IMR transfers 420 23 443 (157) (21) (178) Less: Net realized capital gains (losses) transferred to the IMR 168 23 191 (184) (25) (209) Net realized capital gains (losses) after IMR transfers 252 -- 252 27 4 31 Net Income 530 95 625 313 166 404 Surplus: Unrealized capital gains (losses) 200 (1) 165 7 (1) (54) Increase in asset valuation reserve (345) (33) (378) (97) (27) (124) Other adjustments (352) (28) (379) 51 (73) 48 Increase in surplus 33 33 33 274 65 274 Surplus at beginning of year 3,723 845 3,723 3,449 780 3,449 Suprlus at End of Year $3,756 $878 $3,756 $3,723 $845 $3,723 The condensed consolidated financial information shown in this Consolidated Financial section includes New York Life Insurance Company and its direct, wholly owned subsidiaries: New York Life Insurance and Annuity Corporation, New York Life and Health Insurance Company, and NYLIFE Insurance Company of Arizona. Policyowners may request a copy of the unabridged financial statements by writing to New York Life Insurance Company, 51 Madison Avenue, New York, New York 10010. Policyowners may obtain a copy of the financial statements applicable to their respective company by addressing the Secretary of the parent company, New York Life Insurance Company, at 51 Madison Avenue, New York, New York 10010. Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-105IA046-000816-B013-327http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/psinanda.html 207.121.184.160 19970119012839 text/html 5993HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 01:27:42 GMTContent-type: text/html Deferred Annuities Deferred Annuities Deferred annuities are the most popular. They allow people to accumulate moneywithoutpaying current income tax on their earnings. This means that the amount can grow faster,dueto the tremendous power of compound interest. For example, if you have $10,000 to invest in a deferred annuity that is earning 5% ayear, at the end of the first year your annuity will be worth $10,500. That full amount willbe available to earn interest the following year. If, instead, you invest in a currentlytaxable investment that is also earning 5%, and your marginal tax rate is 28%, at the endofthe year only $10,360 will be available for reinvestment. The remaining $140 will be paid tothe government for income tax on the $500 you earn. This may seem like a small sum ofmoney,but if this continues for ten years, the difference between the values of the tax-deferredannuity and the currently taxable investment will be $2,046! (Of course, taxes must still bepaid when the earnings inside the annuity contract are distributed. If the annuity werecashed in after ten years, the income tax would be $1,761, assuming a 28% rate and nopenaltytaxes). There are two types of deferred annuities - fixed and variable. Fixed annuities pay afixed rate of interest similar to CDs. Unlike annuities, CDs are FDIC insured. Variable annuities offer the choice of severalinvestment divisions such as stocks, bonds, and money market funds, which can cause therate ofreturn to fluctuate with market conditions. Annuity Considerations|Deferred Annuities|Fixed Deferred Annuities Variable Deferred Annuities|Immediate Annuities|Are There Any Risks With Annuities? What Exactly is an Annuity?|Fixed Rate Annuities |Variable Annuities Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-106IA046-000816-B013-383http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/cpemdv.html 207.121.184.160 19970119012904 text/html 5221HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 01:28:13 GMTContent-type: text/html Developing Our Talent Developing Our Talent How far you go at New York Life depends on your own talent, initiative, and drive. We'll provide theopportunity. New York Life offers its employees the resources to meet the challenges that lie ahead. As we broadenthe scope of our financial services, it is vital for our employees to keep ahead of the industry, hone theirskills, and grow personally as well as professionally. The primary means of career development is on-the-job training. We expect our employees not only tomaster their individual responsibilities, but also to gain a sense of how their operations fit into thelarger picture. Teamwork at New York Life does not stop within any department. Job experience is supplemented by in-house professional development programs. We offer a variety ofcourses such as effective presentation skills, time management, supervisory skills and productawareness. Using a combination of techniques -- ranging from instruction-led training programs toself-study programs -- we give employees the opportunity to learn at their own pace with minimalinterference to their work and personal lives. New York Life also encourages employees to advance their education ouside of Company programs.Tuitition assistance is available for those pursuing degrees in business-related majors. Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-107IA046-000816-B014-7http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/pfpitpdc.html 207.121.184.160 19970119012954 text/html 12470HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 01:28:27 GMTContent-type: text/html Dollar Cost Averaging Dollar Cost Averaging A Time-Tested, Disciplined Approach To Sound Investing If you are looking for an investment strategy that offers simplicity, with along-termapproach, thistechnique may be right for you. Choosing an investment strategy that suits you is never easy. You face a myriad oftoughquestions,including: How much money should I invest? How often should I invest? Where should I invest my money? Fortunately, there's a venerable investment strategy that could be the answer tomany of yourconcerns.It's called Dollar Cost Averaging, and it can simplify your investment planning. The name may sound complicated but, simply put, Dollar Cost Averaging is nothingmore thanthesystematic investment of a fixed dollar amount at regular time intervals. Forexample, youcould invest$100 every week. Or $500 every month. Or $1,000 every three months. The amountandfrequencyofyour investments depends upon your financial means and long-term goals. However,once youinitiatethe plan, the key to success is sticking with it and ignoring market fluctuations. How Does Dollar Cost Averaging Work? Basically, Dollar Cost Averaging attempts to take the ups and downs of the marketand "smooththemout." Instead of trying to time the highs and lows (a daunting task, even forprofessionals),you'reinvesting the same amount of money at regular intervals. Dollar Cost Averagingencourages asystematic approach to investing that frees you from trying to time the market.Let's take alook at how aDollar Cost Averaging program would work under three hypothetical marketenvironments:fluctuating,rising, and declining. Dollar Cost Averaging in Turbulent Times Let's assume you decide to put $100 every month in an investment that is currentlysellingfor $10 pershare. (For this hypothetical example, let's assume that there are no additionalcharges).The firstmonth you invest $100 and receive 10 shares. Then, in an extreme but easy tofollowexample,themarket falls and the price drops to $5 per share. In the second month your $100buys you 20shares.The market rebounds in the following month, the price jumps to $10 per share, andfor your$100investment you receive 10 shares. Let's see where you would stand: Fluctuating Market Regular Investment Share Price # of Shares Acquired $100 $10 10 $100 $5 20 $100 $10 10 Total: $300 $25 40 Average Share Cost To You: $7.50 ($300÷40) Average Share Price Over 3 Months: $8.33 ($25÷3) As you can see, you now own 40 shares after a total investment of $300. Theaverageprice is$8.33,but the average cost to you was $7.50. Being disciplined and remaining with theprogram isthe key tothe long-term success of Dollar Cost Averaging. In Good Times... Let's say you continue with your investment program, and the market rallies. Yourinvestmentrises to$20, then $25, and eventually $50 per share. Let's see where you stand. Rising Market Regular Investment Share Price # of Shares Acquired $100 $20 5 $100 $25 4 $100 $50 2 Total: $300 $95 11 Average Share Cost To You: $27.27 ($300÷411) Average Share Price Over 3 Months: $31.67 ($95÷3) When the market rises, you benefit in two ways: the value of your total investmentincreases(obviously),and the average cost you paid is lower than the average share price (not soobvious, buttrue). Whenyou compare the average share price ($31.67) to what you actually paid ($27.27),you canappreciatethe benefits of Dollar Cost Averaging. ...And In Bad It's tough to find a silver lining in the dark cloud of a declining market, butthrough theconsistency ofDollar Cost Averaging, you can take some consolation. Let's assume the marketbegins to slideandthe price drops to $25, then $20 and eventually $10 per share. Declining Market Regular Investment Share Price # of Shares Acquired $100 $25 4 $100 $20 5 $100 $10 10 Total: $300 $55 19 Average Share Cost To You: $15.79 ($300÷19) Average Share Price Over 3 Months: $18.33 ($55÷3) Here, when the share price fell from $25 to $10 you were able to purchase thegreatest numberofshares. In addition, your average share cost ($15.79) was less than the averageshare price.Becauseyou invested a fixed dollar amount at regular intervals, ignoring the pricefluctuations, youwere able topurchase a larger number of shares when the price was low and a smaller number ofshareswhenthe price was high. In effect, you are buying a lot at bargain prices, andrelatively littleat what might beconsidered exorbitantly high prices. No Guarantees in Life As illustrated in the "declining market" example, Dollar Cost Averaging does notguarantee aprofit norprotect against loss. If you have to "sell low," no system is going to give you again. It'severy investorsdream to "beat the market," but unfortunately there are no magic methods that canguaranteethat.However, a Dollar Cost Averaging plan can offer a disciplined, systematic approachtoinvesting, thatcould be the cornerstone of your long-term planning. Since such plans involvecontinuousinvestment insecurities regardless of fluctuating price levels, you should consider yourfinancial abilityto continuemaking purchases during periods of low price levels. Setting Up a Dollar Cost Averaging Plan While Dollar Cost Averaging may simplify the questions "How much?" and "How often?"youshouldinvest, before you can enjoy the benefits of this program you must first answer thequestion,"Whereshould I invest?" Investing in variable products is a popular way to utilize DollarCostAveraging.Vehicles such as mutual funds, variable annuities, and variable universal lifeinsuranceofferinvestment flexibility and convenience. You can set up a customized program whereyou investa fixedamount at regular time intervals into a variable product. Your regular investmentscan bemade bysimply writing checks, or you can take advantage of the convenience of bankdrafting. Withthis method,automatic payments are withdrawn from your bank savings or checking account topurchaseshares ona regular basis. What Are Your Goals?|What Are the Obstacles?|The Cost of Waiting|Risk vs. Return Dollar Cost Averaging... A Time-Tested Approach Securities offered through NYLIFE Securities Inc.(Member NASD), 51 Madison Avenue, New York, New York, 10010 Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-108IA046-000816-B014-37http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/psinea.html 207.121.184.160 19970119013036 text/html 9102HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 01:29:34 GMTContent-type: text/html Employee's Adjustable Life Insurance Employee's Adjustable Life Insurance Life Insurance Protection For You and Your Family New York Life, in cooperation with thousands of employers across the country, offers aprogram that assists employees in providing protection andfinancial securityfor themselves and their families. This program allows employees of participating companiestopurchase individual universallife insurancecoverage through voluntary payroll deduction1. Here are just afew of the importantfeatures offered: 1 Participation in the payrolldeduction lifeinsurance programis completely voluntary. Since this program is not intended to be subject to theEmployee RetirementIncome Security Act of 1974 (ERISA), participating employers cannot contribute to or endorseany policy offeredunder this program. Competitive Rates - This policy is available to employees of participatingcompanies.Through payroll deduction, we are able to offer rates that are competitive. Flexibility - With universal life employees can adapt their plan toaccommodate theirchanging needsthroughout the years. For instance, Premiums can be adjusted to satisfy an employee's changing needs and/or new budget. The policy provides an increasing cash value, which may be used foremergencies, retirement,college education, or other financial needs. Employees also have the option to increase or decrease the policy death benefit orcash accumulationvalue without purchasing an additional policy. Easy Participation - Completion of a short, simple application isusually allthat's needed. Physicalexams are usually not necessary. Control & Portability - Individual employees own their policy, so theycantailor it tomeet their ownneeds. Should employees leavetheir present employer for any reason, they can continue their policy without anychange in premiums or benefits. Convenient Payments - There are no checks for employees to write, andnothing forthem to mail. Premiumsare deducted from their paychecks before they receive them. Optional Family Coverage - An employee's spouse, children, and evengrandchildrenmay be able to obtain highquality insurance protection - even if the employee doesn't participate. Common Questions Who is Eligible for a Policy? All full-time employees (30+ hrs/wk) of participating companies, ages 16-65, who have beenworkingat leastsix months mayapply for coverage. Does This Replace Other Employer-Provided Group LifeInsurance? No, this individual life insurance supplements any existing insurance that employees mayhave. Unlike manygroup life insurance programs, it isn't reduced or eliminated when employees retire orleave the company. When Does the Insurance Begin? Immediately. Once an employee signs the application and the Payroll Deduction Authorizationform, insurance isprovided, under a temporary coverage agreement, until a permanent policy isissued. What Happens if an Employee Leaves the Company? An employee who leaves the company is billed directly, in the manner that is most convenientfor himor her. New York Lifeprovides him or herwith the flexibility to be billed on a monthly, quarterly, semi-annual, or annual basis. Theamount of premium changes to reflect the billing option chosen. How Does the Cash Value of the Policy Grow? Cash values earn a competitive interest rate, which is credited and compoundedmonthly. The cashaccumulation values grow income tax deferred and the interest rate credited isguaranteed never to fallbelow 4.5%. Can Additional Insurance be Purchased at a Later Date? Universal life insurance offers the flexibility to adjust the insurancecoverage (within policy limits) toaccommodate changing needs. How Does an Employee Know What Program is Best for Them? A New York Life agent provides individualized counseling to help employees decidewhat coveragesatisfies their needs and objectives. New York Life offers quality products, fast and efficient service, and anoutstanding track record ofproven success. New York Life has a long tradition of providing personal,confidential service to peopleacross the country. Whole Life|Modified Premium Whole Life|5 Year Term Insurance|Increasing Premium Term Insurance|Single Premium Life|Survivorship Whole Life|Employee's Whole Life|Employee's Adjustable Life|Universal Life*|Charitable Adjustable Life|Spectra Life|Variable Universal Life* ** Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-109IA046-000816-B014-70http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/psinew.html 207.121.184.160 19970119013103 text/html 9328HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 01:30:06 GMTContent-type: text/html Employee's Whole Life Insurance Employee's Whole Life Insurance Life Insurance Protection For You and YourFamily New York Life, in cooperation with thousands of employers across thecountry, offers a programthat can assist employees in providing protection andfinancial securityfor themselves and their families. This program allows employees ofparticipating companiesto purchaseindividual permanent life insurance, through voluntary payrolldeduction, upon answering afew simplemedical questions. Program Highlights Competitive Rates - Because the policy is beingoffered through individualemployersto all their employees,premiums are competitive with rates found outside such a program. Cash Accumulation - In addition to lifeinsurance protection, the policy provides increasing cashvalue, which may be used for emergencies, retirement, collegeeducation, or other financialneeds. Convenient Payments - There are no checksfor employees to write, andnothing forthem to mail. Premiumsare deducted from their paychecks before they receive them. Easy Participation - Completion of a short,simple application is usuallyallthat's needed. Physicalexams are usually not necessary. Optional Family Coverage - An employee'sspouse, children, and evengrandchildrenmaybe able to obtainquality protection - even if the employee doesn't participate - uponanswering a few simple medicalquestions. Flexibility - Employees tailor their insuranceplan to meet their needs. We also offer a number of affordable options that allowemployees tofurther enhancetheir policy. Policy riders that waive the premium if employees becomeunemployed or disabled areavailableat the point of sale. Should an employee become terminally ill, fundsfrom the policy may beavailable during atime of great financial need. A New York Life agent helps individualemployees design a plan that meetstheirspecific objectives. Portability - Employees own their policy. Ifthey retire or leave their presentemployer forany reason, they havethe right to continue the benefits of this policy. Several convenientpremium payment optionsare evenavailable to satisfy their changing needs and/or new budget. Common Questions Who is Eligible for a Policy? Any employee of a participating company, age 16-65, who has beenworking full-time (30+ hours perweek) for at least sixmonthsmay apply for coverage. In addition, eligible employees may also applyfor coverage for theirspousesand children or grandchildren (ages 15 days to 25 years). Does This Replace Other Employer-Provided Group LifeInsurance? No, this individual life insurance supplements any existing insurancethat employees may have.Unlike manygroup life insurance programs, it isn't reduced or eliminated whenemployees retire or leave thecompany. When Does the Insurance Begin? Immediately. Once an employee signs the application and the PayrollDeduction Authorization form,insurance isinitially provided, under a temporary coverage agreement, until apermanent policy isissued. What Happens if an Employee Leaves theCompany? An employee who leaves the company is billed directly, in the mannerthat is most convenient for himor her. New York Lifeprovides him or herwith the flexibility to be billed on a monthly, quarterly, semi-annual, orannual basis. Theamount of premium will change to reflect the billing option chosen. How Does the Cash Value of the PolicyGrow? The policy has a guaranteed cash value that increases annually whenpremiums are paid onthe duedate. Also, dividends, which are not guaranteed,can add tothe policy's value. How Much Insurance Are Eligible Employees Entitled toPurchase? Eligible employees may spend any amount from $15 a month to apremium that will purchase amaximum faceamount of $100,000. The policy must have a minimum face amount of$5,000. Can Eligible Employees Purchase Additional Insurance at aLater Date? An additional policy (providing more coverage) can be purchasedduring the annualre-enrollmentperiod, as long as the combined face amounts of the policies does notexceed $100,000. Participation in the payroll deduction life insurance program iscompletely voluntary.Since thisprogram is not intended to be subject to the Employee RetirementIncome Security Act of 1974(ERISA),participating employers cannot contribute to or endorse any policyoffered underthis program. Whole Life|Modified Premium Whole Life|5 Year Term Insurance|Increasing Premium Term Insurance|Single Premium Life|Survivorship Whole Life|Employee's Whole Life|Employee's Adjustable Life|Universal Life*|Charitable Adjustable Life|Spectra Life|Variable Universal Life* ** Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-110IA046-000816-B014-103http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/cpemab.html 207.121.184.160 19970119013118 text/html 7427HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 01:30:29 GMTContent-type: text/html Employment - About New York Life About New York Life When New York Life opened its doors in 1845, Manhattan north of 14th Street was farm country; traintravel was a luxury; Abraham Lincoln was a country lawyer; and land beyond the Mississippi River wasconsidered the Wild West. We began as a single-product company, with just $18,000 in assets, in awalk-up office at 57 Wall Street. Our first consideration was to pay all our finanical obligations when theycame due. It still is. After a century and a half of growth, New York Life now has consolidated assets of over $74billion and a full range of financial products and services. Through a subsidiary, New York LifeWorldwide Holding, Inc., we have operations in Europe, Asia, and SouthAmerica. We've reached this position through prudent management, a wise investment philosophy, andinnovative product development. Today, New York Life and its affiliates offer much more than lifeinsurance. We provide individual annuities and an employees' disability income product, as well as anarray of mutual funds and investment products. Group life and health indemnity coverage and managedcare services are offered through a subsidiary, NYLCare. New York Life also offers its customers a wide variety of retail and institutional investmentopportunities. On the retail side, through the Company's broker/dealer subsidiary, NYLIFE SecuritiesInc., customers can invest in the MainStay Family of Mutual Funds. On the institutional side, manypension managers and plan sponsors have turned to MainStay and stable value products to help their clientsmaximize their retirement savings. But whether it's to protect loved ones from a loss of income due to a breadwinner's death or disability,or to create wealth for retirement, generations of customers have come to us for their financial needs.They know New York Life will provide the high quality products and services to help them meet those needs.That's why we're known as "The Company You Keep." As an employer, New York Life provides: Valuable exposure to the exciting financial services industry; A stimulating environment in which to expand your capabilities; The opportunity to tap your own resources, and to learn from the experience and talents of a widerange of professionals; A challenging position that lets you make a real contribution to the growth and success of a majorcompany. New York Life offers opportunities in areas such as accounting, actuarial science, asset management, auditing, communications, compliance, customer service, financial management, human resources, information systems, investments, legal, marketing, and mutual funds. We seek employees with a wide range of abilities and talent. We have to -- our extensive customerbase and product lines demand it. Your skills will be put to the test as we continue to seek andcapitalize on opportunities within the financial services arena. We are shaping our Company to keep a step ahead of today's marketplace, without compromising theservice and financial security our customers expect. That means hiring and developing capable menand women who can provide effective and innovative solutions for the problems people andbusinesses face. MainStay Mutual Funds Click here to go to the MainStay Mutual Funds Web site. NYLCare Click here to go to the NYLCare Web site. Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-111IA046-000816-B014-139http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/pffmceaf.html 207.121.184.160 19970119013133 text/html 11012HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 01:30:41 GMTContent-type: text/html Enjoy Your Vacation While You Plan for Your Kid's Education Enjoy Your Vacation While You Plan for Your Kid'sEducation You've packed the car. Your kids are buckled up and ready to go. You remembered theswimfins,the beach umbrella, and the gift for your friends in Florida. This is going to be a terrificvacation! But asyou pull onto the highway, you get the strange feeling that there's something you forgot todo. Even the most relaxed traveler can be preoccupied with the thought of starting aninvestment planfora child's college tuition. You should know that there's no reason to procrastinate. You canjust pick upyour car phone - or pull over at the next phone booth - and call your registeredrepresentative todiscuss opening an UTMA account as soon as you return home. What is UTMA? The Uniform Transfers to Minors Act (UTMA) - and in certain states, the Uniform Gift toMinors Act(UGMA)-may be a way for you to save on taxes as you save for your children's education. As statelaws mayvary, investors should consult their personal legal/tax professional for additionalinformation. (ThisWeb page discusses UTMA since it has been adopted in the majority of states.) By setting up an account in the child's name under the UTMA, you can make a transfer ofup to$10,000 per year per child, without affecting your lifetime unified gift/estate tax credit. Since yourspousecan do the same, together you can give each of your children up to $20,000 per year,shiftingall or partof the investment earnings to the child's tax rate, which may be lower than your own. Evenif yourtransfer is less than $10,000, the strategy may offer potential tax benefits. Here's howearnings arecurrently taxed in an UTMA account: Until your child turns age fourteen, the first $650 in unearned income each year iscovered by thechild's standard deduction and is not taxed. The next $650 in unearned income may be taxedat thechild's rate. Unearned income above $1,300 per year is taxed at the parent's rate. After your child turns age fourteen, the first $650 in unearned income each year iscovered by thechild's standard deduction and is not taxed. Remaining income may be taxed at the child'srate. Help Make Saving for College Less Taxing The table shows how an UTMA transfer may help reduce taxes and build a larger fund forfutureexpenses. It assumes a systematic investment of $150 per month in an UTMA account for achild,starting at age seven. The account earns a hypothetical eight percent annual return, beforetaxes. If thechild's tax rate is fifteen percent (after the first $650 on interest, which is not taxed)and the parent's taxrate is twenty-eight percent, the table shows the potential tax advantages of the UTMAinvestment. $1,119$4,281 An UTMA May Help Reduce Taxes UTMA Account Account inParent's Name Child's Age at year end Annual Tax Balance Annual Tax Balance 8 $0 $1,871 $20 $1,851 9 0 3,891 61 3,808 10 0 6,073 105 5,878 11 0 8,429 151 8,068 12 0 10,974 200 10,383 13 30 13,693 252 12,832 14 55 16,604 307 15,422 15 82 19,721 365 18,162 16 120 23,049 427 21,059 17 152 26,612 491 24,122 18 187 30,424 560 27,363 19 226 34,502 633 30,790 20 267 38,866 709 34,414 Total Tax Thischart is for illustrative purposes only and is not intended to predict or guarantee theresults of any investment, which will vary with market conditions and fluctuations. Thischart assumes an inflation rate of 4%. Accordingly, the child's standard deduction willincrease over time. Easy to Set up Setting up an UTMA account in a child's name is easy. The account will involve acustodian; yourregistered representative can guide you in completing the application. Separate accounts arerequiredfor transfers to each child. Be sure to provide the child's Social Security number (not thatof the personmaking the gift or of the custodian). The custodian will have full authority to makedecisions, includingcontrol over investments. Since transfers must be permanent, parents can't gain access to the money for their ownuse. Also,all assets in the UTMA account will belong to the child when he or she reaches the age ofmajority. Youmay also want to consider the possibility that assets held in your children's names couldaffect thelevel of financial aid they'll be eligible to receive when they apply to schools. MainStay Mutual Funds Click on this link to explore various investment funds you may want to consider to help youfinance yourchildren's education. For more information and a worksheet to help you determine how much you will need to save foryour children's education, call our toll-free Marketing Services number today, 1-800-MainStay(1-800-624-6782) or e-mail us. You may alsorequest a free prospectus containing more complete information, including charges andexpenses. Please read it carefully before you invest or send money. Cost of Education Calculator|A Game Plan For Meeting College Costs|Financing Your Children's Education Enjoy Your Vacation While You Plan for Your Kid's Education The MainStay Funds are offered through NYLIFE Securities Inc. (Member NASD),51 Madison Ave., NY, NY 10010 Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-112IA046-000816-B014-194http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/pfepfl.html 207.121.184.160 19970119013202 text/html 11815HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 01:31:11 GMTContent-type: text/html Estate Planning:  it's a fact of life Estate Planning: It's A Fact of Life Fact: Without proper estate planning over half the value of your estate could be lost tofederal estate taxes at death. In other words, the IRS, not your heirs, could be the singlelargest beneficiary of your estate. Some people think estate planning is only necessary for those select individuals who appearin episodes of Lifestyles of the Rich and Famous. Unfortunately, this misconception couldcost your heirs. Federal estate taxes begin at 37% for estates valued over $600,000 and canclimb as high as 60% for estates over $10,000,000 and under $21,040,000. In reality, if youown assets, you need to plan for their future disposition. Do you need to worry about estate taxes? All too often, people underestimate the value oftheir estate. Did you know that your estate includes your home, cash, investments, pensionbenefits, personal property, trusts you own, alter, amend or revoke, certain life insuranceproceeds, and any other assets you and your spouse may own jointly or as community property?The fact is, you are generally worth more than you think. Fortunately, there are a number of strategies designed to minimize the impact of estatetaxes. The following illustrates some of the most fundamental estate planningtechniques. Unlimited Marital Deduction The unlimited marital deduction is one of the most powerful estate planning tools available.The Internal Revenue Code allows an unlimited amount of property to be transferred to thesurviving spouse who is a U.S. citizen tax free when the first spouse dies. Therefore, if youare willing to pass all of your assets to your surviving spouse, there will be no federalestate tax exposure at that time. This is an effective strategy but it is not a completesolution to your estate planning needs. Yes, a surviving spouse will receive the assetsestate tax free, but when he or she dies the entire estate will be subject to estate taxes.Using the unlimited marital deduction does not eliminate estate taxes, it merely defers them- leaving your heirs, in most cases your children, with the responsibility of paying theestate tax bill. (Different rules apply to resident alien surviving spouses.) Unified Tax Credit The unified estate and gift tax credit of $192,800 allows you to give away up to $600,000while you are alive to anyone you want, whenever you want, gift tax free. If married, you andyour spouse can combine your credits. By properly utilizing the unified tax credit you candecrease the value of your estate by $1.2 million and save your heirs close to $400,000 inestate taxes. By gifting money or property while alive, the income and appreciation on the gifted assets isnot part of your estate when you die and is not subject to federal estate taxes. Tax-Effective Will A tax-effective will utilizes a combination of the unlimited marital deduction and theunified tax credit to reduce your estate tax exposure. Here's how it works: You and yourspouse establish a special account that allows the first-to-die spouse the right to leave upto $600,000 of assets to heirs. This special account is a credit bypass trust. The estate taxattributed to this trust is offset by the unified credit. If properly structured, anyremaining estate balance should qualify for the unlimited marital deduction. The survivingspouse can be an income beneficiary of the credit bypass trust, and have the right to incomefrom the trust for life. At the death of the second spouse, the assets in the trust can pass to your beneficiarieswithout being subject to estate taxes in the surviving spouse's estate. In addition, anyappreciation of the assets in the trust will pass to your heirs tax free. Irrevocable Life Insurance Trust There are basically two life insurance categories: traditional and second-to-die. Traditionalinsurance is term, whole life, and universal life coverage that pays a death benefit afterthe insured dies. Survivorship Whole Life insurance, or second-to-die insurance, insures twoindividuals in one insurance plan and pays the death benefit after the death of the secondinsured. Life insurance is a cost-effective funding vehicle for an estate plan. You pay pennies on thedollar for life insurance protection, and your heirs may use the life insurance proceeds topay the estate tax bill, without depleting the estate's assets. However, if you own a lifeinsurance policy at death, the proceeds will be included in your gross estate. To avoid this,you need to make sure you do not own the policy when you die. Also, be sure your estate isnot the beneficiary of your life insurance proceeds. Instead, create an irrevocable life insurance trust. You would gift cash to the trust so thetrust can make the necessary premium payments. The trust applies for, owns the policy, andpays the premiums. At death, the insurance proceeds pass into the trust and escape estatetaxes. If properly structured, the trust can also provide benefits to a surviving spouseand/or any other beneficiaries. If you were to transfer an existing life insurance policy to an irrevocable life insurancetrust, you must live three years from the date of transfer or the value of existing policyproceeds will be brought back into your estate. To avoid this three-year rule, you must havean irrevocable trust or other third-party owner apply for and purchase a new policy on yourlife. Annual Exclusion Gifts By gifting a portion of money and property while alive, you can dramatically reduce the sizeof your taxable estate. The federal Annual Exclusion Gift Law permits you to give $10,000each year to as many individuals as you desire. Most people choose to give such gifts totheir children and grandchildren. If married, you and your spouse can give away up to $20,000per recipient annually. Your gifts are income tax free to your recipients and each gift maydecrease the amount your heirs will have to pay in estate taxes. $3,000,000(800,000) $2,200,000$735,000 The Annual Gift Tax Exclusion 5 Years Ago Today Estate Value (married couple) $3,000,000 Less gifts (0) Taxable estate $3,000,000 Estate tax $1,098,000 Tax Savings $363,000 Assumptions: A married couple begins a five-year gift program. Both spouses gift $20,000 per year to eight family members for a total of $160,000 peryear. Taxable estate is reduced by $800,000 after five years. Estate tax is reduced to $735,000 for a total estate tax savings of $363,000. As you can see, estate planning is a little like surgery. No one can expect you to understandit all, much less perform the operation yourself. But, wouldn't you rather plan today thanhave your heirs lose 37 to 60 cents on the dollar later? Estate Planning: It's A Fact of Life|The Importance of a Will|The Zero Estate Tax Plan|Estate Planning Calculator Note: New York Life does not offer tax, legal, or financial advice. Consult your taxadvisorbefore making any decisions. Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-113IA046-000816-B014-228http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/cpbgfq.html 207.121.184.160 19970119013239 text/html 10853HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 01:31:41 GMTContent-type: text/html FAQ about NYL Frequently Asked Questions About NYL How long has New York Life been in business? New York Life first opened for business in 1845 as Nautilus Insurance Company. It became NewYork Life Insurance Company in 1849. How large is New York Life? New York Life is a Fortune 100 company, with over $75 billion in assets and $16 billion inannual revenues. It has 152 general offices and 81 sales and satellite offices, and itemploys nearly 11,000 agents nationwide. Internationally, we have offices in Argentina,Bermuda, mainland China, Hong Kong, Indonesia, Mexico, Taiwan, South Korea, and the UnitedKingdom. What, exactly, is a "mutual insurance company?" Unlike a stock company, a mutual insurance company, such as New York Life, does not offershares of stock on public exchanges. Rather, it is operated and maintained for the benefitof its members, or policyowners. All policyowners have the right to vote for the Company'sBoard of Directors and to receive a fair share of the dividends declared by the Board eachyear. Who are some of New York Life's major clients? Some of New York Life's more recognizable clients include General Motors, the NationalBasketball Association, the Air Line Pilots Association, and The American Institute ofArchitects. Over the course of our history, we have also insured many United StatesPresidents and a host of political, social, business, and military leaders, professionalathletes, and entertainers. What products and services does New York Life offer? On the insurance side, New York Life and its affiliates offer traditional life and grouphealth insurance, annuities, and managed health care. On the financial side, New York Lifeand its affiliates provide institutional investment management, trust services, and 401(k)services. One of its subsidiaries, NYLIFE Securities Inc., offers an array of securitiesproducts and services, such as the MainStay funds for both retail and institutional investors. Does New York Life have an office near me? New York Life has offices in every state nationwide. But you don't have to go to a New YorkLife office -- an agent can visit you in your home or place of business. Click on the "Contact NYL" button to find the office nearest you or to send an e-mail. How can I purchase a product from New York Life? Insurance products must be purchased through an agent, who will work closely with you todetermine your needs and the best product to fill them. Mutual funds may be purchasedthrough your workplace or individually, through a New York Life registered representative. What makes New York Life different? Why should I buy from you? Throughout its 151-year history, New York Life has built a reputation for integrity andfinancial strength. Our highly trained agents are required to continue their educationsthroughout their careers, ensuring they'll be knowledgeable and responsive to your needs. Most importantly, for over seven generations, we have been there for our customers when theyneeded us most. And we are committed to carrying on this proud tradition. How can I obtain the services of an agent? Click on the "Contact NYL" button above or anywhere on our Web site to locate an office near you or to send an e-mail. How are New York Life agents selected and trained? All New York Life agents must complete a rigorous training course, called NYLIC University,before they can sell our products. After that, they are required to continue theirprofessional educations throughout their careers. In each general office,agents are recruited by sales managers, who look for initiative, intelligence, and characterin a candidate. Who is on your Board of Directors? New York Life's Board of Directors includes leaders from the worlds of finance,communication, and business. New York Life's Board of Directors: Robert M. Baylis, former Vice Chairman of CS First Boston, Inc. William G. Burns, former Vice Chairman of NYNEX Corporation Patricia T. Carbine, Co-founder and President of the Ms. Foundation forEducation and Communication, Inc. Paul W. Douglas, retired Chairman and CEO of The Pittston Company Kent B. Foster, President of GTE Corporation Lee M. Gammill, Jr., Vice Chairman of the Board of New York Life InsuranceCompany Richard L. Gelb, Chairman Emeritus of Bristol-Myers Squibb Company William R. Grant, Chairman of Galen Associates Conrad K. Harper, Partner at Simpson Thatcher & Bartlett Harry G. Hohn, Chairman of the Board and CEO of New York Life InsuranceCompany Thomas W. Langfitt, M.D., Chairman and CEO of The GlenmedeCorporation Leslie G. McCraw, Chairman and CEO of Fluor Corporation David W. Mitchell, retired Chairman and CEO of Avon Products, Inc. Richard R. Pivirotto, retired Chairman of Associated Dry GoodsCorporation Robert J. Richardson, Ph.D., retired President of Bell Canada Enterprises,Inc. Seymour Sternberg, President of New York Life Insurance Company What are ratings? Why are they so important? Independent ratings for insurance companies are based on their financial strength and abilityto pay claims -- two critical factors in choosing an insurer. The higher a company is rated,the stronger and more reliable it is. Four major companies -- Duff & Phelps, Moody'sInvestors Service, Standard & Poor's, and A.M. Best -- have all given New York Life and NYLIAC(its annuity subsidiary) high ratings. Term vs. Whole Life - What's the difference, and which one should I buy? As with any insurance product, it depends on your needs. Generally, the difference betweenterm life insurance and whole life insurance is that whole life is a permanent product thatbuilds cash value. Policyowners can make loans against the cash value if needed. It has ahigher initial premium, which remains level throughout the life of the policy. Term is a temporary insurance product with a fairly low initial premium, which increases asyou get older. Beneficiaries will receive insurance proceeds only if death occurs within aspecified period - the "term" of the contract. A term policy offers protection only and doesnot build cash value. How can I get more information? Click on the "Contact NYL" button above or anywhere on our Web site to locate an office near you or to send an e-mail. Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-114IA046-000816-B014-264http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/pfstchns.html 207.121.184.160 19970119013319 text/html 9532HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 01:32:16 GMTContent-type: text/html Feathering a Nest of Your Own Feathering a Nest of Your Own Building Your Financial Foundation Moving out of your parents' house and having a go of it on your own can be a shockto the system. Afterdecades of living in the comfort of family, you're suddenly faced with the harshrealities of life - bills,bills, bills. How does one deal with these new-found responsibilities? You canstart by building asound financial foundation. Acting discerningly on these matters could make thedifference betweenmaking it on your own, or moving back with the folks. Choose wisely... Banking - Shop around. You shouldn't necessarily stick with yourcurrent bankjust because you'vebeen with them a long time. You may want to open both a savings account forearning interest, and achecking account for paying the bills. It's important to compare interest rates,but you also should bewary of charges for services. Some banks allow you to "link" your accounts to reduce fees. Many local newspapersrun a "scorecard"of bank rates, which can be helpful. Although deposits up to $100,000 arefederally insured, you'll stillwant to choose a financially strong institution. If possible, have your employer"direct deposit" yourpaychecks into your bank. Health Insurance - With medical costs spiraling upward, havingsufficienthealth insurance is anecessity. If you're job hunting, you should take a serious look at the medicalbenefits offered byprospective employers. If you're fortunate, your employer will offer a grouphealth plan. If not, it'sessential to obtain some type of individual health insurance. Major Medical Plans typically offer a fee-for-coverage arrangement for a rangeof services includingphysicians' costs, medical tests, hospital fees, etc. With some plans, you may goto a doctor of yourown choice and your insurer reimburses you a predetermined percentage of cost. Most plans havedeductibles, which is the amount of money you must pay out-of-pocket before theinsurer begins payingthe expenses. Health Maintenance Organizations (HMOs) have become a popular option because oftheirminimal out-of-pocket cost. Generally, members must visit only doctors affiliatedwith the HMO;however your co-payment could be as low as $5-$10 per visit.When evaluating different plans it's important to consider what services arecovered, and theco-payments and deductibles that are involved. Life Insurance - If you think it's just for "older people," thinkagain. If you havestudent loans from yourcollege days, you may want to consider having some life insurance to cover them,and then some. It'sprobably a good idea to purchase a policy now, because generally the younger youare, the lower thepremium. Two of the basic types of life insurance are whole life and term life. Whole life is permanentinsurance - it's yours for as long as you continue to pay the premiums. Thepremiums are fixed andthe policy cannot be canceled by the insurer. Over the long-term, the policybuilds "cash value" that canbe tapped into for financial needs. Term insurance provides inexpensive coverageover apre-determined period of time - 5 years, 10 years, etc. It is pure protection anddoes not build cashvalue. One type is not necessarily "better" than the other, but you may find thata mixture of the two maybest suit your needs. Building Credit - If you plan on buying a home, starting abusiness, or doinganything in the future thatrequires borrowed money, you'll definitely want to start building a credit historynow. Getting a creditcard and paying it off faithfully is a good way to start. Many banks andorganizations offer VISA andMastercard with lots of bells and whistles attached - product discounts, airlinemileage, etc. - butdon't overlook the basics. You'll want to find a deal that offers worldwide acceptance, no annual fee, and alow interest rate. If youdon't have any credit history or if it's poor, there's still an alternative. Somebanks offer a "securedcredit card," which is an arrangement where you deposit funds in an account thatare then used as yourcredit limit. Of course, the key to building good credit is to spend within yourmeans. Looking to The Long-Term - Building a financial foundationmeansplanning for the long haul. If your employer offers a 401(k) or similar plan you'll certainly want to takeadvantage of this convenient,tax-deferred retirement plan. IRAs, CDs, annuities and mutual funds are options toconsider to helpbuild your nest egg. The key to realizing your financial dreams is starting nowwhile you have a longtime horizon. Individual Life Insurance To find out which New York Life Insurance product may be appropriate for you, as you buildyour financial foundation, click on the link above. Tips on Purchasing Life Insurance|How Much Life Insurance Do You Need?|Feathering a Nest of Your Own How Younger Consumers Can Benefit From Whole Life|Five Insurance and Financial Mistakes Securities offered through NYLIFE Securities Inc.(Member NASD), New York Life Insurance Company,New York Life Insurance and Annuity Corporation(A Delaware Corporation)NYLIFE Securities Inc. & NYLIFE Distributors Inc.(Members NASD),51 Madison Ave., NY, NY 10010 Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-115IA046-000816-B014-298http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/pffmcech.html 207.121.184.160 19970119013350 text/html 10712HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 01:33:01 GMTContent-type: text/html Financing Your Children's Education Financing Your Children's Education Millions of Americans, especially the "Baby Boomers" born in the 20 years followingWorldWar II, nowhave children of their own and are starting to think about how to pay for futureeducationalexpenses.Four years at the best universities can now cost close to $100,000, and theseexpenseshave beenrising faster than inflation. Middle-income families that do not expect to benefitfromscholarships orreceive substantial financial aid must save this money in advance or borrow itlater. Thesimplest way tosave money is in a savings account at a bank, but more sophisticated investmentsmayprovide betterreturns. Amount Needed Now to Accumulate$100,000 (35% Tax Rate) 15 Years 6% 8% 10% Tax-free 41,727 31,524 23,939 Tax-deferred 52,417 41,461 32,624 Fully-taxed 56,334 46,748 38,883 10 Years 6% 8% 10% Tax-free 55,839 46,319 38,555 Tax-deferred 66,048 57,035 49,118 Fully-taxed 68,209 60,234 53,273 5 Years 6% 8% 10% Tax-free 74,726 68,058 6,092 Tax-deferred 81,978 76,625 71,591 Fully-taxed 82,589 77,611 72,988 One factor that slows the growth of savings is income taxes, which apply toordinary bankinterest.Consider a long term certificate of deposit paying 7 percent interest. If $10,000wereinvested andaccumulated tax-free for 15 years, it would grow to $27,590. However, if Federaland stateincome taxestook 35 percent of the interest every year, the initial $10,000 investment wouldgrow to just$19,492. Thedifference, $8,098, is significant. Even if the taxes on interest had to be paidwhen themoney waswithdrawn, after 15 years, the $27,590 would be reduced to $21,434, still $1,942ahead ofpaying thetaxes annually. The difference is due to interest earned on the tax dollars thatwere not paiduntillater. For many years, the tax laws provided numerous ways to defer income taxes oninvestmentearnings.(Deferred taxes are not paid immediately but are paid later, usually when funds arewithdrawn. Incometaxes cannot normally be avoided forever, except at death.) During the 1980s, mostof thosespecialrules were repealed. Three notable, but by no means the only, exceptions involvelifeinsurance, mutualfunds, and U.S. savings bonds. Life insurance proceeds paid at death have always been free of income taxes. Lesswell-known, butequally important, is the fact that the growth in cash value of insurance policiesis alsotax-free forindividuals as long as the funds remain in the policy and are not withdrawn. Thus,the cashvalueaccumulates without any tax reduction and can be borrowed when needed to pay foreducation (or forother reasons) without tax consequences in most cases. A special rule applies to so-called "modified endowment contracts," policies thatare stronglyinvestment-oriented. Check with your agent to see if your policy qualifies as aborrowedwhen needed topay for education (or for other reasons) without tax consequences in mostcases.modifiedendowmentcontract. Mutual funds can also provide tax advantages. Even if the mutual fund payscurrentlytaxable interest ordividends, income taxes can be reduced by putting assets in a child's name. Until1987, thistechnique,which relies on the Uniform Gifts to Minors Act (UGMA), was very effective inreducingincome taxes,because all income was taxed at the child's rate, which normally is low. ThenCongresschanged thelaw, so that so-called "unearned" income (which includes interest and dividends)receivedby childrenunder age 14 is partly taxed at the rate applying to the child's parents. Even so,childrenunder 14 canreceive up to $550 in unearned income without paying any income tax. Thenext$550 is taxedat the child's own tax rate, typically 15 percent. Any unearned income exceeding$1,100 istaxed at theparents' rate. Another investment possibility with tax advantages is U.S. Savings bonds. Thesebonds arepurchasedfor half their face amount and pay variable market-based interest rates if held forfive yearsor longer.The interest rate is 85 percent of the rate on certain Treasury securities andvaries every sixmonths.Federal income tax is normally not paid until the bonds are redeemed, and they arecomplete exemptfrom state income taxes. Choosing the Right Investment Product Click on this link to explore various investment options you may want to consider to help youfinanceyour children's education. The College Board is a national membership association of schools and colleges whose aim is tofacilitatethe student transition to higher education. Before clicking on this link, remember to bookmark this pageso you can return easily after exploring the College Board's Web site. While life insurance, mutual funds, and U.S. savings bonds are well-suited tofinancingeducation inmost cases, ask your tax adviser about your own situation. Cost of Education Calculator|A Game Plan For Meeting College Costs|Financing Your Children's Education Enjoy Your Vacation While You Plan for Your Kid's Education Securities offered through NYLIFE Securities Inc. (Member NASD), 51 Madison Avenue, NY, NY 10010 Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-116IA046-000816-B014-324http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/psinanfd.html 207.121.184.160 19970119013404 text/html 5313HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 01:33:14 GMTContent-type: text/html Fixed Deferred Annuities Fixed Deferred Annuities Fixed annuities are viewed as secure investments by many people, since the insurancecompany that offers the annuity guarantees the current cash value plus a future guaranteedinterest rate. Today, they often offer interest rates that are comparable to (or higherthan) CDs, along with the added benefit of deferring taxes on the earnings until theyare withdrawn. Unlike annuities, CDs are FDIC insured. Fixed annuities, unlike many other fixed interest investments, contain guarantees ofminimum future interest rates. All fixed annuities have a minimum rate guarantee thatspecifies the lowest rate the insurer can offer. Some contracts also offer a "bailout"provision that allows the owner to withdraw money from the annuity without surrenderchargesif the crediting rate falls by more than a specific amount. Annuity Considerations|Deferred Annuities|Fixed Deferred Annuities Variable Deferred Annuities|Immediate Annuities|Are There Any Risks With Annuities? What Exactly is an Annuity?|Fixed Rate Annuities |Variable Annuities Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-117IA046-000816-B014-354http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/psinanfr.html 207.121.184.160 19970119013452 text/html 4680HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 01:33:29 GMTContent-type: text/html Fixed Rate Annuities Fixed Rate Annuities New York Life offers two different fixed rate annuity products to meet your needs. Single Premium Retirement Annuity (SPRA2) The Single Premium Retirement Annuity helps you save for your retirement on a tax-deferredbasis. If you're worried about saving enough for retirement, this product may help you torealize your retirement goals. Single Premium Immediate Annuity (SPIA) The Single Premium Immediate Annuity helps ensure that you don't outlive your retirementsavings. To find out more, click on this link. What Exactly is an Annuity?|Fixed Rate Annuities |Variable Annuities Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-118IA046-000816-B014-387http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/pfrprd.html 207.121.184.160 19970119013546 text/html 5692HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 01:34:33 GMTContent-type: text/html Fulfilling Your Retirement Goals Fulfilling Your Retirement Goals Turning Retirement Dreams intoReality Some helpful hints to make retirement planning easier. You've worked hard all your life. Yourretirement years should be a time for you to relax and reflect on all that you've accomplished. Clickon this link to find out how you can fulfill your retirement dreams. IRAs: Still One of The Best Ways toSave If you really want to fulfill your retirement goals, you may want to consider investing your funds in anIRA. Tried and tested, IRAs are still one of the most secure and tax-effective ways for you to saveforyour retirement. This article outlines the benefits of saving through IRAs. Retirement Calculator Use this tool to calculate your retirement funding needs. Personal Investing Although IRAs are an important investment tool when saving for retirement, there may be otherinvestment vehicles that are right for you. This link to the Personal Investing section outlinessome of the other financial products that can help you fulfill your retirement goals. How Do I Start? Personal Retirement Strategies Click here for more information on personal retirement strategies. Why Retirement Planning is So Important|Fulfilling Your Retirement Goals|Retirement Issues|Choosing the Right Products Retirement Planning Calculator|Personal RetirementStrategies Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-119IA046-000816-B015-18http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/pfrprdho.html 207.121.184.160 19970119013615 text/html 5402HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 01:35:22 GMTContent-type: text/html How Do I Start? How Do I Start? Investing in mutual funds is as easy as picking up the phone. Just call a NYLIFE Securities Registered Representative to discuss what you hope toachieve, whenyou'll needyourmoney, and how you feel about risk and reward. Your answers will assist your investment professional in helping you decide whichmutual fundsare right for you. The prospectus contains more complete information about the Fundsyou've selected,including advisory fees, other expenses, and share classes. Please read it carefully beforeyou investor send money. Once you've invested, your Registered Representative is your best source for answersabout yourstatements, confirmations, transactions, or investment performance. As the economy andyourfinancial circumstances change, regular discussions with your Registered Representativecan help youadjust your holdings to keep your investments on course. Mutual Funds Background Click here to get to the MainStay Funds website for more information on mutual funds. Turning Retirement Dreams into Reality|IRAs: Still One of The Best Ways to Save|Retirement Calculator Personal Investing|How Do I Start? Securities offered through NYLIFE Securities Inc.(Member NASD), 51 Madison Avenue, NY, NY, 10010 Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-120IA046-000816-B015-56http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/pfstchyc.html 207.121.184.160 19970119013631 text/html 9900HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 01:35:39 GMTContent-type: text/html How Younger Consumers Can Benefit From Whole Life Insurance How Younger Consumers Can Benefit From Whole LifeInsurance Looking Toward Tomorrow According to a recent survey1, more people between theages of 18to 34 believe inUFOs more than they believe that there will be money left in Social Security when theyretire. One could dismiss thismerely as the voice of a cynical generation but many financial experts have alsoexpressed reservationsregarding the future of the U.S. Social Security system. With working baby-boomerscomprising a largeportion of the U.S. population, the current Social Security system, funded by thenation's workforce, isfine. But what happens when today's boomers retire, and become tomorrow'srecipients of SocialSecurity benefits? What if there are more people receiving benefits, in the nextcentury, than there are inthe workforce funding those benefits? Many individuals in their twenties and thirties aren't wasting time speculating -they're planning for thefuture. According to the June 15, 1995 Wall Street Journal, 61% of"twenty-somethings" responding to asurvey sponsored by Kemper Financial Services, Inc. (a Chicago based moneymanagement firm)stated that they or their spouse had put money aside for retirement. The articlealso revealed that manyrespondents "were prepared to cut personal spending now in order to save forretirement." Even moreso than the boomers before them, today's under-35s are planning for the long-termfuture. With aresponsible mind focused on the future, it's also important to keep an eye ontoday, as well. Perhaps this is why one of the preferred long-term financial vehicles named by therespondents of theKemper poll was life insurance. It's wise to want to preserve future assets aslong as it does not turninto a situation of "putting the cart before the horse." While the baby boomergeneration may have beeninclined to ignore insurance in favor of financial products with potentiallyquicker and higher returns,more and more consumers under thirty-five have recognized the long-term advantagesof productssuch as whole life insurance. The first asset that younger consumers should seek toprotect -perhaps the most important asset - is themselves, and what they have today. Wholelife is a smartstep in that direction. Starting With Today The beauty of whole life insurance is that it not only offers the long-termbenefits of cash value andtax-deferred accumulation, but it also offers immediate coverage in the event of atragedy. For a marriedindividual, the need for life insurance is obvious; so much rides on an income thefamily is counting on:the mortgage payments, living expenses, child care costs - even the future plansfor a child'seducation. For young single individuals, the life insurance need is sometimes less obvious,but just as real. Acrucial step toward true independence lies in making sure that no one else will beforced to shoulderthe consequences of choices that we've made. Many people in their twenties have toborrow moneyfrom their families, or from financial institutions. Frequently, young singleswith student loans, carloans, or mortgages on a condo are only able to secure these funds by having aloved one co-sign theloan, as well. If something were to happen to the young single person, the personwho co-signed theloan would be fully responsible for the debt repayment. What if there were notenough liquid resourcesto pay off the debts and loans? Losing a loved one is difficult enough; combinedwith having to dealwith exorbitant financial debts and struggles, it quickly becomes a devastatingexperience. Whole life insurance protects against the financial consequences of these potentialtragedies, and italso gives the younger consumer a financial foundation to build on for the rest ofhis/her life. With cashvalue, tax deferred growth, and the accumulation potential of dividends2, whole lifeinsurance can easily evolve from today's protection plan to the beginning oftomorrow's retirement plan. What's more: the younger the insured, the more affordable insurance is. Sinceeveryone needs thiscoverage sooner or later, it'sa good idea to get it when it's more affordable - and when good health will usuallyassure coverage. Unfortunately, once health has declined, insurance is often no longer an option. Ironically, this could bewhen people need it the most. Whether anticipating the future or focusing on today, the under-35 consumer shouldalways keep this inmind: the ideal plan allows for today's protection as well as tomorrow'spossibilities. The financialchoices made today impact the rest of one's life. 1 Survey was conducted inSeptember of1994 byFrank Luntz forthe under-35 political advocacy group Third Millennium. 2 Dividends are based on the policy'sapplicabledividend scaleor interest crediting rate which is neither guaranteed nor an estimate of futureperformance. Whole Life Insurance To find out more about Whole Life Insurance policies offered by New York Life, click on thelink above. Tips on Purchasing Life Insurance|How Much Life Insurance Do You Need?|Feathering a Nest of Your Own How Younger Consumers Can Benefit From Whole Life|Five Insurance and Financial Mistakes Securities offered through NYLIFE Securities Inc.(Member NASD), New York Life Insurance Company,New York Life Insurance and Annuity Corporation(A Delaware Corporation)NYLIFE Securities Inc. & NYLIFE Distributors Inc.(Members NASD),51 Madison Ave., NY, NY 10010 Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-121IA046-000816-B015-89http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/pfrprdir.html 207.121.184.160 19970119013644 text/html 9523HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 01:35:54 GMTContent-type: text/html IRAs: still one of the best ways to save IRAs: Still One of the Best Ways toSave Most retirement experts agree that you will need about 70%-75% of yourworkingincome to maintainyour current lifestyle in retirement. Unfortunately, Social Securitywill provideonly a portion of thisincome. According to the Social Security Administration, the averagemonthly SocialSecurity check in1994 was just $674. Factor in that most Americans are living longerand it becomesclear that you willneed additional sources of income if you hope to live comfortably inretirement. A Simple and Effective Retirement Planning Tool One of the easiest ways to start building wealth and saving forretirement isthrough an IndividualRetirement Account (IRA). An IRA is a tax-deferred vehicle thatprovides you withthe opportunity toinvest in various instruments. These include: stocks, bonds,money-market funds,governmentsecurities, unit investment trusts, and mutual funds. Since the IRA is a tax-deferred account, all of your contributions andearningswill compound andaccumulate quicker than money placed in a similar taxable account. Overthe longhaul, this taxadvantage will significantly increase your retirement nest egg. Eligibility Requirements Anyone who receives compensation for working during the year (includingwages,salaries,commissions, and professional fees) can establish an IRA. The maximumamount youmay contributeper year is the lesser of $2,000 or 100% of your annualcompensation. If you have a non-working spouse, you may contribute an additional $250into theplan on your spouse'sbehalf. This would increase the maximum contribution for the year to$2,250. Thecontribution wouldhave to be made into two separate accounts and may be divided in anyfashion aslong as no morethan $2,000 is contributed to either IRA. The extra account is called aspousalIRA. IRA Deductibility Limits If both you and your spouse are employed, but are not considered activeparticipants in your employer'squalified retirement plans, your IRA contributions are fullydeductible. (Twoindividual IRAs must be setup.) If you and your spouse file a joint tax return, a maximumdeduction of $4,000would be allowed.This deduction will reduce your taxable income and your current incometax bill. If both you and your spouse participate in your employer's qualifiedretirementplans, your deduction foryour contribution may be reduced or eliminated depending on your annualadjustedgross income.Singles with adjusted gross incomes of $25,000 or less and marriedcouples withadjusted grossincomes of $40,000 or less can deduct their entire IRA contribution. Asyour annualincome increases,the amount you can deduct gradually decreases. Deductions are reducedby $200 forevery $1,000 ofincome over $40,000 ($25,000 for singles). The Power Of Tax Deferral Even if you cannot deduct your annual contribution, IRAs still offer apowerfuladvantage - tax-deferredgrowth. All of the earnings on amounts contributed to an IRA are nottaxed untilthey are withdrawn. Forexample, if you were to invest $2,000 annually, assuming an 8% returnand a 33%combined federal,state, and local income tax bracket, after 30 years, a tax-deferredaccount couldpotentially grow to$244,692. Under this same scenario, a taxable account would have grownto$148,971. That is$95,721, or 64%, more in the tax-deferred account than in the taxableaccount.1 Time Is Still Available An IRA should serve as the cornerstone for your retirement plan.Whether retirementis years away orjust around the corner, you owe it to yourself to prepare now for afuture that'sfree of financial worry.Implementing a disciplined approach to investing can put you on thepath towardyour retirementdreams. You have until April 15, 1996 to make the maximum 1995contribution of$2,000. And insteadof waiting another full year, you could invest $4,000 today (for 1996and 1997) andlet the power of taxdeferral start working toward your retirement dreams. Starting an IRA Click here to link into the MainStay site to see how starting an IRA fits into yourpersonalretirement strategy. MainStay is a registered investment company. Personal Retirement Strategies Click here for more information on personal retirement strategies. Turning Retirement Dreams into Reality|IRAs: Still One of The Best Ways to Save|Retirement Calculator Personal Investing|How Do I Start? Securities offered through NYLIFE Securities Inc. (Member NASD) New York Life Insurance Company New York Life Insurance and Annuity Corporation (A Delaware Corporation) NYLIFE Securities Inc. & NYLIFE Distributors Inc. (Members NASD) 51 Madison Avenue, New York, New York, 10010 1Withdrawalsfrom anIRA are taxable and, if you are under age 59 1/2, you may be subject toan IRSpenalty. This example is for illustrative purposes only and does notreflect thetax due on fundswithdrawn from the tax-deferred account. Withdrawals of funds from anIRA mustbegin by age 70 1/2 ora penalty may be imposed. Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-122IA046-000816-B015-112http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/psinanim.html 207.121.184.160 19970119013703 text/html 5309HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 01:36:10 GMTContent-type: text/html Immediate Annuities Immediate Annuities While deferred annuities are designed to help you maximize savings, immediateannuitiesare there to make sure your savings provide an income for as long as you need it. Immediateannuities, as the name implies, begin paying you an immediate income and last for aspecifictime period that you select. They are often designed to pay as long as you live. Theseannuities are commonly used to provide pension benefits to retired employees. The benefit of an immediate annuity is the consistent and stable income itprovides. You know that a check for a specific amount will be received on a regular basis andthat theincome will continue for as long as you have requested. You can even arrange foranannuityto pay for as long as you or your spouse lives. This last option is called a JointandSurvivor Immediate Annuity. Annuity Considerations|Deferred Annuities|Fixed Deferred Annuities Variable Deferred Annuities|Immediate Annuities|Are There Any Risks With Annuities? What Exactly is an Annuity?|Fixed Rate Annuities |Variable Annuities Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-123IA046-000816-B015-150http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/psinpt.html 207.121.184.160 19970119013739 text/html 10703HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 01:36:44 GMTContent-type: text/html Increasing Premium Term Insurance Increasing Premium Term Insurance Increasing Premium Term (IPT) offers temporary life insurance protection at a low initialpremium. IPT is guaranteed renewable through the contract's expiry age and includes aconversion privilege which is available until age 70. The coverage it provides could helpfamilies and business owners safeguard their financial future. The Benefits of IPT The peace of mind of pure life insurance protecion A death benefit that is, in most instances, free from federal income tax An initial premium that is considerable lower than a comparable permanent plan Guaranteed renewable coverage through the contract's expiry date (see"Product Specifics"for variations) The privilege to convert to a permanent policy that builds cash value (See "ConversionPrivilege") A Conversion Credit that's applied against the new policy's first year premium The financial strength of New York Life The Uses of IPT There are many situations where IPT may be appropriate. Here are just a few examples: Temporary Need for Protection When coverage is needed for a relatively short period of time, IPT can be ideal. Acommon use is when a mortgage or student loan is taken. Limited Funds In situations where life insurance is essential but dollars are scarce, IPT could serveas a stop-gap. Young people starting their careers can choose IPT, then convert to apermanent plan as their finances improve. Supplemental Insurance IPT can be added as a rider to some permanent plans to help boost the death benefit. It's an affordable way to increase total insurance coverage. Provide Family Coverage Optional riders such as can be added to the policy to extend coverage to family members. See "Riders" section formore information. Protection For Businessowners IPT can be used as a hedge to cover outstanding loans, shielding partners or shareholdersfrom financial hardship. Product Specifics: Issue Ages: 15-65 Expiry Age: 100 for all states except:New York: 80, New Jersey: 98, Maryland: Base Plan 98, Rider 100 Minimum Face Amount: Base Plan - $100,000 Rider - $25,000 Premium Modes: New York Life offers several convenient ways to paypremiums: Annually, semi-annually, quarterly, monthly, through GovernmentAllotment, our NYL-A Plan, or via our automatic bank drafting method,Check-O-Matic (COM). Premium Guarantee: Premium shown in the policy contract are guaranteedfor the first three years. Risk Classes: Based on defined underwriting criteria, New York Lifeoffers the following risk classes: Preferred (for face amounts $250,000 and more),Non-smoker, Select Standard, Standard, and Substandard A-G. Policy Fees: Different policy fees apply by premium mode: Annual $50.00 Semi-Annual $28.00 Quarterly $16.50 Monthly $9.00 Check-O-Matic, NYL-A-Plan, and Government Allotment $5.00 Conversion Privilege: IPT policies allow the owner to convert all orpart of the policy into permanent, cash value building life insurance without furnishingevidence of insurability. This valuable privilege is available until the insured is age 70. Rider Issue Ages Accidental Death Benefit (ADB) Provides additional death benefit if the insured dies as a result of an accident. 15-65 Children's Insurance (CI) Provides level term insurance on the children of the insured. 16-502 Living Benefits Rider (LBR) Gives policy owner access to a portion of the policy's available death benefit should theinsured be diagnosed with a terminal illness with a life expectancy of 12 months or less. 15-651 Policy Purchase Option (PPO) Gives policyowner the right to purchase a new policy on the life of the insured at specificoption dates without proof of insurability. 15-43 Spouse and Children's Insurance (SCI) Allows insured to purchase level term insurance for spouse and children. 16-502 Spouse's Paid-up Insurance Purchase Option (SPPO) Gives spouse-beneficiary the right to purchase a new paid-up whole life policy on his/herlife without evidence of insurability. Not available in New York state. 15-65 1 Waiver of Premium (WP) Waives all premiums should the insured become totally disabled, as explained in the rider. 15-59 Our History of Unsurpassed Financial Strength Since 1845 New York Life has served the needs of individuals , families and, businesses. Asone of the nation's premier financial institutions, New York Life has honored its commitmentto policy owners through the Civil War, two World Wars, the Great Depression, and numerousrecessions. 1There is no charge for theseriders. 2These ages refer to the age of the primaryinsured under the policy, not the ages of the spouse , and/or children. Whole Life|Modified Premium Whole Life|5 Year Term Insurance|Increasing Premium Term Insurance|Single Premium Life|Survivorship Whole Life|Employee's Whole Life|Employee's Adjustable Life|Universal Life*|Charitable Adjustable Life|Spectra Life|Variable Universal Life* ** Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-124IA046-000816-B015-182http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/psin.html 207.121.184.160 19970119013802 text/html 6063HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 01:37:02 GMTContent-type: text/html Individual Individual Life Insurance Annuities Mutual Funds1 Fundingfor 401(k)IRA Rollover New York Life, and its subsidiaries offer you fullyintegrated financial and insurance services and products. Individual LifeInsurance New York Life offers a variety of different individual life insurancepoliciesto meet varied needs. This link introduces these products to you. Annuities This section explains what an annuity is, and presents the differenttypesof annuities available. MutualFunds1 MainStay Mutual Funds are offered to you through MainStay. MainStay isa registered investment company. This link introduces you to theMainStay family of mutual funds for individuals. Fundingfor401(k) IRA Rollover If you are interested in rolling your 401(k) plan assets into an IRA,eithernowor sometime in the future, click on this link to find out more. 1Offered through NYLIFE Securities Inc. (Member NASD),51 Madison Ave., New York, NY 10010 Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-125IA046-000816-B015-216http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/psinilbg.html 207.121.184.160 19970119013827 text/html 5085HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 01:37:30 GMTContent-type: text/html Individual Life Insurance Background Individual Life Insurance Background Of 100 People Age 25 Working Today * By Age 65 . . . 25 will have died, 22 will have incomes less than $7,000, 49 will have incomes between $7,000 and $40,000, and 4 will have incomes greater than $40,000. Choosing the Right Insurance Mix What's the difference between term life insurance and whole life insurance? Click on thislink to find out. You can also have a plan that is a combination of term and whole life. It alldepends on your personal needs and situation. Term Insurance An introduction to term insurance. Whole Life Insurance An introdution to whole life insurance. Why Life Insurance in Your Tax Qualified Plan? Many employer-sponsored retirement plans offer several funding options. One of theseoptions may allow you to purchase life insurance with your contributions. Find out why thiscan be advantageous for you. * SOURCE: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (April, 1992) Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-126IA046-000816-B015-279http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/cpreio.html 207.121.184.160 19970119013926 text/html 5802HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 01:38:37 GMTContent-type: text/html Individual Operations Individual Operations In 1995, for the first time, both new life insurance and annuity premiums surpassed $1 billion. OurIndividual Life area introduced Whole Life, Modified Premium Whole Life, and Employee's Whole Lifeproducts with higher guaranteed cash values; new Survivorship Whole Life plans, and new features onVariable Universal Life. The enhancements spurred career agents, who wrote 17% more life insuranceapplications than last year. In addition, our Brokerage operation produced over $500 million in newpremium. Our Individual Annuity line of business also set a record: Sales through agents and supplementaldistribution channels totaled $1.4 billion, a 42% increase from 1994; assets under managementreached nearly $12 billion; and LifeStages, a new variable annuity, was introduced. The individual Policy Services Department now provides enhanced service to agents and policyowners through service centers located in Atlanta; Cleveland; Dallas; Minneapolis; and San Ramon,California. Our toll-free number for client services will soon appear on consumer correspondence,making it easier for you, our valued clients, to obtain assistance. Our Agency Department remains committed to the people who serve you. NYLIC University, anintensive training program, advances the skills of managers and agents - 1995 enrollment swelled aswe hired 2,500 new agents, an increase of 18% over 1994. Preparing for a changing future, ourMarketing Department developed targeted strategies for growth markets, such as small business,ethnic, and fifty-plus. Individual Operations|Asset Management|Investment|NYLCare Health Plans, Inc.|Special Markets|New York Life Worldwide Holding, Inc. Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-127IA046-000816-B015-308http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/pfpitpin.html 207.121.184.160 19970119013950 text/html 4550HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 01:38:56 GMTContent-type: text/html Inflation Inflation As time passes, the rising cost of goods and services can also affect the valueof yourinvestments. This process, known as inflation, may reduce the amount of food, clothing, housing,andhealthcareyour money can buy. If the cost of living rises faster than the value of yoursavings orinvestments, youcould actually be losing money. Even modest inflation can eat away at the dollarsyou setaside, whichis one important reason why many people use investments to seek higher returnpotential. Taxes|Inflation|CD vs. Deferred Annuity Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-128IA046-000816-B015-332http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/cpbgin.html 207.121.184.160 19970119014002 text/html 5686HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 01:39:12 GMTContent-type: text/html Introduction Introduction Formed in 1845 by Pliny Freeman, a dry goods store owner, and a number of New York business,political and financial leaders, the Nautilus Insurance Company was the third mutual lifeinsurance company established in the U.S. On an initial investment of $17,946, insurancesales for the first year were about $790,000. In 1849, the name was changed to New York Life InsuranceCompany. From the outset, Freeman knew the kind of individual who would be successful working with theCompany, and he conducted an aggressive recruiting campaign to find "capable, energeticagents" to work in all the settled territories. As pioneers moved west, New York Life agentswere there to greet them. Famous men like Lew Wallace, author of Ben Hur, and SchuylerColfax, who became Ulysses S. Grant's Vice President, represented the Company. At that time,selling and servicing insurance had not yet become a career in itself. Agents were localdoctors, lawyers, bankers, etc., who offered policies as an added service. In the twentieth century, despite war, the Great Depression, stock market upheavals andeconomic instability both at home and around the world, New York Life remained solid bystaying true to its guiding principles of prudent expansion, conservative growth,full-service and a strong Field Force. The Company's conservative approach hasenabled it to grow steadily and provide outstanding service. New York Life has neverfaltered on its obligations and has put the financial well-being of its policyholders aboveevery other concern. The Company's dedication to service has given our customers an unprecedented levelof security. As a result, our agents have earned a level of respect from our customers andthe insurance industry that is second to none. Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-129IA046-000816-B015-366http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/pffmin.html 207.121.184.160 19970119014030 text/html 5137HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 01:39:37 GMTContent-type: text/html Investing For Your Family's Future Investing For Your Family's Future Investing to meet the needs of your family is very important. You may have severalinvestmentobjectives. Long-term objectives may be established to provide for the education ofdependents, orretirement savings for yourself. You may also have some short-term objectives, such assaving for afamily vacation, or saving enough for a down payment on a new home. Regardless of your investment needs and objectives, we may be able to help you develop a strategythatwill beright for you and your family. Investment Tips Determine how to make your investment decisions based on your current situation, and otherinvestment factors. Investment Issues Some issues you should consider before investing. Choosing the Right Investment Product Information on choosing the investment product that is right for you and your family. Choosing the Right LifeInsurance|Investing For Your Family'sFuture|Your Children'sEducation Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-130IA046-000816-B015-402http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/pfstin.html 207.121.184.160 19970119014057 text/html 5244HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 01:40:06 GMTContent-type: text/html Investing for Your Future Investing for Your Future The sooner you start investing, the more you can set aside and the longer yourmoneycan work for you. While past performance is no guarantee of future results, in thepast, thosewho havestayed invested for 20 years or more have generally earned positive total returns. People who wait to invest may be missing opportunities. No one can say where themarkets willmove next. If you're looking for the "perfect moment," you may never know when itcomes. The wisestrategy is to invest today and adjust your holdings over time. Investment Tips Determine how to make your investment decisions based on your current situation,andother investment factors. Investment Issues Some issues you should consider before investing. Choosing the Right Investment Product A selection of different investment vehicles is presented through this link. Assomeonestarting out, you have a relatively long investment horizon. You may want toconsiderlooking at investment tools that may give you good returns over the long term. Choosing the Right Life Insurance | Investing for Your Future Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-131IA046-000816-B016-15http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/pfpiin.html 207.121.184.160 19970119014135 text/html 4829HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 01:40:43 GMTContent-type: text/html Investment Issues Investment Issues Through the links below: Learn about the different types of annuities available. Find out how you can defer the taxes on your savings. And see why you should start saving right away to meet your retirement fundinggoals, even if you only put aside a little bit at a time. The number of investment issues included here will expand as the site grows and evolves. Ifyou needany more information on these issues, send us a message by clicking on the "Contact NYL"buttonabove. The Ins and Outs of Annuities Tax Deferral... What it Can Do for You Why Is Time is So Important When It Comes to Saving? Investment Tips |Investment Issues |Choosing the Right Investment Product Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-132IA046-000816-B016-48http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/pfpitp.html 207.121.184.160 19970119014205 text/html 4987HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 01:41:07 GMTContent-type: text/html Investment Tips Investment Tips This page provides some links to other pages in the New York Life Web site that can help youmake yourinvestment decisions. For instance, before you invest, you need to establish your investment goals. Click on thefirst link to findout why it is important to establish specific investment objectives. It is also important tohave a solidunderstanding of the obstacles you might face in meeting your investment objectives. Thesecond linkidentifies some of the investment risks you may face. In addition to goals and risks,links areincluded for pages that provide other investment tips. What Are Your Goals? What Are the Obstacles? The Cost of Waiting Risk vs. Return Dollar Cost Averaging... A Time-Tested Approach Investment Tips |Investment Issues |Choosing the Right Investment Product Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-133IA046-000816-B016-87http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/cpreiv.html 207.121.184.160 19970119014222 text/html 5177HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 01:41:31 GMTContent-type: text/html Investments Investment 1995 was an excellent year for our Investment operations. The area performed well across all assetclasses, making significant contribution to New York Life's financial strength. Declining interest ratesand moderate economic growth led to a soaring stock market and a benign environment for bondinvestors. The strength of the stock market helped us realize substantial capital gains in our private equityportfolio. Our credit skills and knowledge of capital markets also enabled us to take advantage of newinvestment vehicles, including bank loans, equity-linked notes, and commercial mortgage-backedsecurities. Our London office, opened in late 1994, completed its first year by originating almost $250million of attractive fixed-income investments. In addition, our Private Finance Team launched asuccessful third-party money management and advisory business for institutional clients, includingpension plans and other insurance companies. Individual Operations|Asset Management|Investment|NYLCare Health Plans, Inc.|Special Markets|New York Life Worldwide Holding, Inc. Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-134IA046-000816-B016-115http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/pfobfm.html 207.121.184.160 19970119014238 text/html 9271HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 01:41:43 GMTContent-type: text/html Keeping Your Business in the Family Keeping Your Business in the Family Owning your own business is a most cherished American dream. While a family-owned businesscan provide financial benefits - capital growth, salary, fringebenefits etc. - the realbenefits are oftenmore personal. A family-owned firm can provide a better workingenvironment than a largeimpersonalcompany. Family members can take pride in seeing the family nameon products and on the signoutside the door. A well run family firm not only stressespersonal service and customerloyalty, butalso provides benefits to the local community. Some business owners build a business with an eye to selling itto the highest bidder. Manyentrepreneurs, however, hope that the business they have builtwill remain within the family. Whenmembers of the founding generation retire, with proper businesscontinuation plans in place,they cantake pleasure in knowing that the firm is in good hands. Suchhappy endings, however, cannotbetaken for granted. According to a study by the Journal ofAccountancy, fewer than fiftypercent of familybusinesses survive past the second generation. Challenges to Retaining the Business in theFamily No Qualified or Interested Family Member:Some firms do have anemployeewho could run the business, but that person is not a familymember. Perhaps the children aretooyoung, have other interests, or lack the founder's drive, feelfor the market, or technicalskills. Limited Access to Capital: A child may nothave the same relationshipwiththe bankers, suppliers, bonding company, and customers as theprior generation. Death, Disability, or Retirement: Seniormanagement may leave, whetherthrough death, disability, or retirement, before the nextgeneration is prepared to assumecontrol. Disgruntled Second-Tier Management: Asenior employee who has givenhis or her life to a company may find it difficult to work for a"boss" young enough to behis or her child. First-rate salaried managers often leave to become the nextgeneration's most potentcompetitors. Current Income versus Growth of Firm: Theretired generation may beconcerned about income to meet living expenses. The children maywant to retain profits togrow thebusiness. That could spell trouble. Estate Taxes: A closely held corporation isan illiquid asset. Taxesareassessed based on "fair market value" at a date of death. Fairmarket value is what a"Willing sellerwould accept from a willing buyer." Often, however, there are nowilling buyers. Otherassets, or eventhe firm itself, may have to be liquidated to cover the estatetaxes due. Family Differences: The eldest daughter hasan aptitude for business,buther husband has transferred to another city. The son wants torun the business, and lives intown, but has much to learn. How are parents to do what is right for eachchild, when they have onlyone largeilliquid asset to divide? Obviously, business continuity planning is not simple. Some ofthe problems are reducibletomoney. Money can provide for estate taxes,purchase a retiring owner'sinterest, orprovide an equivalent asset for the children who will not enterthe business. Along with thefinancialconsiderations, appropriate legal agreements may need to bedrafted, and coordinated with thewill andestate plan. It is up to the business owner to set the planning wheels inmotion. Here's how to begin: Planning Steps Clarify Goals: What would you, as anowner, prefer? To work in thebusiness for as long as possible? To retire at a certain age? To provide for your childrenthe lifestyleand status you have enjoyed? To reward key employees who havehelped you build the business? Consider the Children: Who wants tocontinue the firm? What are thefeelings of the others? Who, if anyone, has the neededabilities? What training is takingplace now? Appoint a Project Manager: No person islikely to have all the skillsneeded to make your vision of the future a reality. Yourattorney, CPA, banker, andinsurance advisorare all essential members of your strategic planning team. Youmay want to give one theoverallresponsibility of researching the possible strategies andpresenting recommendations for yourapproval. As the owner of a family business, you made the company what itis today. Some simpleplanningcan help ensure that your business continues to thrive for manyyears. What is Your Business Worth?|Keeping Your Business in the Family|Taking Care of Business with Split-Dollar Life Insurance Outsourcing Your Employee Benefits: Pension and Health Care|The Advantages of a Bundled 401(k) Plan Can YouAfford Not to Have a Health Care Plan for Your Business?|ThreeDemographic Trends Reshaping The Workforce Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-135IA046-000816-B016-149http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/pfrprili.html 207.121.184.160 19970119014307 text/html 6544HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 01:42:11 GMTContent-type: text/html Life Insurance For Retirement Planning Life Insurance For Retirement Planning Once you retire, will you have any need for life insurance? The answer to thatquestion maynot be assimple as it seems. Retirement does not necessarily mean the end to your need forlifeinsurance. However, as with any other major life change, you should re-evaluate your lifeinsurancecoverage to besure it is adequate. If, as you near retirement, you still have dependents who would suffer financialhardship ifyou die, youshould consider having life insurance. On the other hand, if you no longer havedependents, you mayfind you have less of a need for life insurance. So, what are your options with your life insurance policy? One place to start isto talk withyour agent. He or she can help you determine what is appropriate for you in your situation. Here are some ideas that you might want to discuss with your agent if you have awhole lifepolicy: Keep the policy in force indefinitely by converting it to a paid-up policy. You pay nomorepremiums, but the amount of insurance is reduced. The accumulated cash valueremainsintact, andyou retain the option of borrowing against it. Use the policy's accumulated cash value to purchase an annuity, which canprovide aguaranteedlifetime income. Or, you might use the cash value for another investment. However,beaware thatincome taxes likely will be due. Taxes will be based on the sum of the cash valueplusdividends youreceive that exceed the premiums you have paid while the policy was in force(dividends arebased onthe policy's applicable dividend scale or interest crediting rate which is neitherguaranteednor anestimate of future performance). If you keep the policy in force as paid-up insurance until death, no income taxeswill bepayable. Regardless of the type of life insurance policy you have, it is a good idea toreview yourcoverage andoptions with your agent, as you approach retirement age to be sure that your policywill meetyourneeds. Individual Life Insurance Click here to get to New York Life's insurance products you may consider toensurethat your retirement years are secure. Retiring Parents: Are they prepared?|Six Myths That Can Rob You of Your Retirement Plans|IRAs: Still One of the Best Ways to Save Life Insurance for Retirement Planning|Long Term Care|Your Spouse and Your Pension Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-136IA046-000816-B016-211http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/psinanls.html 207.121.184.160 19970119014346 text/html 15554HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 01:42:50 GMTContent-type: text/html LifeStages LifeStagesSM - AVariableAnnuity From NYLIAC Are you concerned you won't have enough money to finance the retirement youwant? Are youworriedyou'll outlive your income after you do retire? With expenses, taxes, andinflation eatingaway at yourincome, the amount of money you'll need for your future is certainly a movingtarget. Merely saving isn't enough anymore. To make your money go further, you need aproduct thatcan adapt to your long-term financial goals, one that gives you control overyourfunds andthe freedomto change course when necessary. And you need a product that gives you theadvantage ofprovenmoney management techniques yet still provides a measure of security. LifeStagesSM offers all this - and more. LifeStagesSM is a variable annuity that canprovide incomefor your retirement. Your earnings accumulate on a tax-deferred basis, whichmayhelp yourmoneyaccumulate faster than it would in a similar but taxable investment. WithLifeStagesSM youcontrol how your money's invested. And when you retire, you'llcontrol how you receive your money - LifeStagesSMcan evenoffer you income for the rest of your life. LifeStagesSM is issued by New York LifeInsuranceandAnnuity Corporation (NYLIAC), a wholly owned subsidiary of New York LifeInsuranceCompanyand available through NYLIFE Securities Inc. (member NASD) 51 Madison Avenue, NYNY10010. Select From a Variety of Options Since no one understands your retirement goals better than you, you decide howyourfunds inLifeStagesSM can be invested. You canallocateyour moneyto stock, bond, balanced, international or money market accounts - or to theFixedAccountthat's fullybacked by assets in NYLIAC's general account. What's more, you're not locked into your choices. When your lifestyle orfinancialgoalschange, you canchange your mind - and your investment choices - simply by calling our toll-freenumber.1 Benefit From Professional Management Although you choose the investment accounts, you're certainly not on your own. Theprofessional fundmanagers at MacKay-Shields Financial Corporation Financial Corporation, MonitorCapitalAdvisors, Inc., CalvertAssetManagement Company, Inc., and New York Life manage the LifeStagesSM portfolio accounts. They are experienced financialadvisors withproventrack records in investment management. Control Your Premium Schedule LifeStagesSM offers an extremely flexiblepremiumarrangement. Initially, the minimum premium is $2,000 for tax-qualified plans,or$5,000 fornon-qualified plans. You can then add to your annuity as you wish, with aminimumpremium of$500. Earn Special Additional Interest Rate When you add new funds to the Fixed Account, a special interest rate will becredited to thatmoneyduring the first contract year. After the first year, those funds will earnrenewal ratesset annually. Keep In Touch With LifeStagesSM, quality service is just aphone callaway. Use our toll-free number to get information on your policy's cash value, totransfer moneybetweenaccounts, or to change the allocation of your future premium payments. You'llalsoreceivequarterlystatements to keep you up-to-date on your policy. The Power of Tax Deferral Earnings in LifeStagesSM accumulatetax-deferred. In otherwords, you don't pay taxes on earnings until you withdraw your money. Thatmeansmoney mayaccumulate faster than it would in a similar but currently taxable investment.(Remember,withdrawalsprior to age 591/2 may be subject to a 10% IRS penalty.) Control Your Taxes Here's another advantage of tax deferral: since you aren't taxed on annuityproceeds untilyou withdrawthem, you can plan your withdrawals so you're not hit too hard by Uncle Sam. Afteryouretire, you mayfind yourself in a lower tax bracket - perhaps you can wait until then beforeyouwithdrawyour money. Oryou can withdraw funds prudently, so you don't push yourself into a higherbracket. Anannuity can offergenuine tax control. It can help your money accumulate - and last. Select a Balance That's Right For You No two people have identical needs and concerns. Depending on your life stageandyourfinancialgoals, you'll want to make sure you choose the investment mix that meets yourneeds. Perhapsyou'reyounger and want to be more aggressive in your investment choices - you canallocate yourmoney toinvestment choices that offer the potential for higher return. Later you mayprefer tobalance youraggressive investments with those that offer a higher measure of safety. And ifyou'renearingretirement or have already retired, a more conservative allocation may suit yourgoalsperfectly. LifeStagesSM allows you to change yourinvestmentstrategyas your needs change. Set a Course Some people track their investment accounts daily - others set a course and letitrunitself. LifeStagesSM gives you those options. Dollar Cost Averaging Option "Making money is easy," a wit said. "You simply buy low and sell high." Buthowcan youpredict whenprices will be "low" or "high?" You may not need to if you dollar cost average. With dollarcostaveraging, you set up a program of scheduled investments - given dollar amountsinvested atgivenpoints in time - and stick to it, regardless of the changes in the markets. Thisconsistent,disciplinedapproach allows you to take advantage of market volatility by buying moreinvestment unitswhen pricesare low and fewer when prices are high. Although dollar cost averaging does notensure aprofit norprotect against a loss in a declining market, over time a sustained dollar costaveragingstrategy canreduce your timing risk and optimize your return. Investors should considertheirfinancialability to continue purchases through periods of low and high price levels. Automatic Asset Reallocation Option Let's say you want to maintain a particular allocation of your assets in investmentdivisions, forexample, 40% in Bond, 40% in Capital Appreciation and 20% in Cash Management. Sinceportfoliovalues change at different rates, you may need to move money between investmentdivisions tokeepyour desired ratio. It's a popular investment strategy, but it requires a lotofmaintenance. Fortunately, LifeStagesSM offers anAutomaticAssetReallocation feature that allows you to specify when - quarterly,semi-annually,or annually- NYLIACwill review your accounts and automatically make any necessary transfers tobringyourdistributionback into the balance you selected. Payout at Retirement The goal of any annuity - including LifeStagesSM- is toprovide retirement income. And with LifeStagesSM, you canelect to receive an income that's guaranteed to last as long as you live. AndalthoughLifeStagesSM is designed as a longer-terminvestment, thereare otherways to access your money without incurring surrender charges.2 Withdrawals prior to age 59 1/2 may besubject to a10% IRS tax penalty. Windows of Opportunity LifeStages' 10% Window allows immediate accessto10% of your policy's cash value each year (less any surrender-charge-freewithdrawals you'vemadeduring the year) without triggering a surrender charge. In addition, LifeStagesSM offers a Gain Windowfor policieswith $100,000 or more in accumulated premium payments. Without incurringsurrendercharges,youcan withdraw the greater of all of the gain in your policy or the 10% Windowamount. Loan Option for TSAs If you're investing through a Tax Sheltered Annuity (TSA) program only,LifeStages offers liquidity through a TSA loan provision. Loans mayequal thelesser of 50% of the value of your policy or $50,000. Guaranteed Refund of Initial Premium on Fixed Account If you surrender your policy during the first three years, you're guaranteed toreceive theportion of theinitial premium you allocated to, and that remained in, the Fixed Account. Thisrefund doesnot apply ifany partial withdrawals are taken from the policy, such as the 10% Window or the Gain Window. Guaranteed Advantages For Your Heirs To help you provide for your heirs, LifeStagesSMoffers adeath benefit equal to the greater of the cash value or the premiums paid lesswithdrawals. In otherwords, your heirs will receive at least the amount of money you've invested -evenif youraccounts havedeclined in value.3 There's even a three-year step-up4 feature that offers even more protection. Everythreeyears,yourdeath benefit "locks in" so your beneficiary is guaranteed the greater of thecurrent cashvalue orpremiums paid less withdrawals or the cash value at each third-year anniversary(plus anypremiumspaid less any withdrawals and surrender charges since the last third-yearanniversary). Thisenablesyou to lock in new, higher levels of guarantees in a growing market. Thisstep-upfeaturecontinues untilthe owner or annuitant reaches insurance age 85. 1 TransfersfromtheFixed Account to Investment Divisions are subject to some restrictions. See theprospectusfor details. Subject to contract limitations, you are permitted twelve free transfers peryear. NYLIACreserves theright to charge up to $30 for each transfer exceeding twelve per year. Thisoffermay bemodified orwithdrawn at any time. 2LifeStagesSM surrender charges are based onthedate ofeach premium payment as follows: 7% in years one through three; 6% in yearfour;5% in yearfive and4% in year six. For residents of Oregon - after ten years, surrender chargeswillnever bemore than 1%of the policy cash value. 3 Deathbenefitpayments are dependent upon the claims-paying ability of NYLIAC. 4 ForresidentsofTexas, the step-up death benefit is "stepped up" every six years. New York Life Insurance and Annuity Corporation(NYLIAC) Variable Annuity LifeStages SM|Conservative|Moderate|Aggressive Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-137IA046-000816-B016-250http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/pfrprilt.html 207.121.184.160 19970119014423 text/html 11999HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 01:43:23 GMTContent-type: text/html Long-Term Care: What You Need To Know Long-Term Care: What You Need To Know Consumers are increasingly becoming aware that sound retirementplanning must take into account the need for and cost of long-termcare services, and for good reason. Studies show that 60% of thepeople who reach age 65 will need long-term care services1 duringtheir lifetime, with 40% requiring a stay in a nursing home2. As people live longer, those odds will increase. Changing Times Bring New Concerns Most of us know at least one person who has stayed in a nursinghome or needed professional home health care. The financial consequencesof long-term health care can have a significant impact on a family'ssavings and lifestyle. According to the Health Care FinancingAdministration (Fall 1992), over 56% of long-term home healthcare expenses are paid, out-of-pocket, by the patients and theirfamilies. Those accumulated expenses can use up a major partof your savings. For people who enter a nursing home, the financialoutcome can be worse: according to the Congressional Subcommitteeon Aging, 70 to 80% of nursing home residents deplete theirassets within twelve months. To understand this increasing need to plan for the financial impactof long-term care services, it's necessary to understand basicchanges taking place in American society. According to the U.S.Census, there were 32 million people age 65 and older in 1990-butby the year 2030, this figure could double to 64.6 million. Moreover,people are living longer today than ever before. By the year2040, there may be more people over age 85 than there are over65 today. Not only are we getting older but, over the next 50years, working age population may increase only 2 to 18%, whilethe elderly population is expected to increase anywhere from 139to 169%. For years, it was tradition for adult children to take care oftheir parents during the "golden years". But changingtimes have brought an increase in dual-career families, job insecurity,family mobility, and divorce. Today, many adult children arenot able to stay home and look after their own children, let alonean aging parent. In addition, corporate downsizing has eliminatedthousands of mid-management jobs throughout the country; consequently,many adult children are not in a position to financially helptheir parents as they had planned. Add to this the increasinguncertainty of health care benefits for senior citizens, and agiant question mark looms on the horizon. Who Will Pay For Long-Term Care? Not Uncle Sam. Who will support this population and help pay its inevitable medicalbills? The writing is on the wall. According to Alice M. Rivlinand Joshua M. Weiner, authors of Caring for the Disabled Elderly(published by the Brookings Institution), the combination of agingBaby Boomers and an increase in the longevity of the aged willdramatically heighten the need for more public and private spending. But when it comes time to pay the bill, no federal programs-SocialSecurity, Medicare, or Medicaid will pay for all long-term careexpenses. How "Secure" Is Social Security? Social Security is not a savings account that builds up over time. It is a "pay as you go" system, paid for through payrolltaxes on present employees to support former workers. Today,according to the Social Security Administration, each retiredSocial Security beneficiary is supported by the payroll taxesof 3.3 workers. By 2020, it's estimated that each Social Securitybeneficiary will be supported by the payroll taxes of 1.9 workers. According to the Social Security system, payroll taxes wouldhave to increase by almost 60% for the system to remain solventand provide the same level of benefits in the future. Don't Bank On Medicare Or Medicaid Although Medicare provides health coverage for senior citizens,it is limited in the area of long-term care coverage. In 1992,Medicare paid a total of 4.3% of all nursing home care expensesin the country, and 9.5% of long-term home health care expenses3,primarily for nursing home and home health care services immediatelyfollowing a hospital stay. Medicare generally will not coverthe cost of nursing home or home health care services due to achronic condition. Medicaid, on the other hand, will cover thecost of long-term care, but there's one catch: to qualify, youmust become indigent ("spend down" your assets). Remember:once you have depleted your assets, you have also lost controlover where and when you receive care. Also, because of stateand federal budget cutbacks, the facilities close to your familyand friends might not have openings for Medicaid patients at thetime you need care. What are the options? If Medicare won't pay, and spending down your assets to qualifyfor Medicaid is not attractive, the cost of any required long-term care services may be paid for out of current income and savings,as by long-term care insurance. And, long-term care can be veryexpensive. In 1994, nursing home care averaged $36,000 per yearnationally4, but costs substantially more in some states. Home care usually is less expensive, but full-time home carecan cost as much as a nursing home stay. What Does Long-Term Care Insurance Cover? Long-term care insurance usually pays for skilled, intermediate,or custodial care in a nursing home. It can also cover professional"at-home" health care. This type of insurance can helppay for a variety of home and community-based care services, including:physical, speech, and occupational therapists; home health aidesand visiting nurses; adult day care, and hospice care. (Note:Generally, skilled care refers to round-the-clock treatmentby a registered nurse under a doctor's supervision. Intermediatecare refers to occasional nursing and rehabilitative careunder the supervision of skilled medical personnel. Custodialcare primarily meets personal care needs in activities ofdaily living such as help in eating or bathing.) Typically, long-termcare insurance policies pay up to a specific dollar amount day(which may be less than the total cost of the services provided). Few, if any, policies provide full coverage for all expenses. More Information is Available HIAA publishes a booklet, "The Consumer's Guide To Long-TermCare Insurance," which provides basic information on long-termcare and long-term care insurance. Long-term care insurance maynot be for everybody, so it is important to research the subjectcarefully. Your agent can help you make an educated decision. 1Long-Term Care Group,October 1990 2"Lifetime UseOf Nursing Home Care." New England Journal Of Medicine:Vol. 324, No.9, 1991 3Health Care FinancingAdministration, Fall 1992 4Families USA Foundation,Health Care Financing Review, Fall 1992 Retiring Parents: Are they prepared?|Six Myths That Can Rob You of Your Retirement Plans|IRAs: Still One of the Best Ways to Save Life Insurance for Retirement Planning|Long Term Care|Your Spouse and Your Pension Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-138IA046-000816-B016-290http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/cprepo.html 207.121.184.160 19970119014450 text/html 13342HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 01:43:50 GMTContent-type: text/html Message to Policyowners Message to Policyowners Every child is born with the right to dream, and hopefully, they'll go as far as their dreams will take them. But, wherever they go and whatever they dream, New York Life will be there -- just as it has been for the last seven generations. When we began in 1845, we were a small company located in New York City doing business intheeastern part of the United States. Today, 150 years later, we are a $74 billion financial servicesorganization with interests that span the globe. We have locations in thousands of towns and citiesacross the country and throughout the world. As a world leader in the financial services field, we touch the lives of millions of Americans -- andothers around the world -- through diversified investments and a wide range of services. Our clients include such large organizations as the American Veterinary Medical Association and the Minor League Baseball Insurance Trustfor players and umpires, as well as you, your family, your neighbors, and friends. Our greatest accomplishments during our sesquicentennial were a natural outgrowth of 150 yearsofdedicated, continuous service to our customers. We set ambitious financial goals -- and exceededthem, created new products to meet your changing needs, and enhanced our leadership position asa company that protects policyowners' interests. Through our financial products, managed health care, and invested assets, we help shape thefuturefor millions of men and women. Our size and diversity are part of what keeps us financially strong. Proof of this statement can be found in our 1995 financial results. Our sales -- generally annualizedinsurance premiums and new money from investment products -- increased 13 percent from 1994; ourconsolidated assets reached $74.3 billion; our net gain was $373 million; our surplus and investmentreserves totaled $5.2 billion; and the ratio of surplus to assets, a key measure of strength, was a solid6.95 percent -- one of the highest among major life insurers. Remaining strong enables us to help you reach your financial goals. It's a strategy we intend to keep for the next 150 years. And those years promise to be even more dynamic -- and successful -- than the last. Adding new products also helps us to meet your goals. While industry growth remained sluggish, the introductionof new products and plans helped our individual insurance and annuity sales climb 24 percent from 1994. We'repleased at this tremendous vote of consumer confidence in our agents, brokerage producers, products, and quality of service. One new product, our LifeStagesSM variable annuity, contributed to a record-breakingyear for the Individual Annuity line of business -- resulting in nearly $1.4 billion in sales. Ourrevitalized Agency Force alone sold 34 percent more annuity business in 1995 than the year before. And, ourFive-Year Term policy contributed significantly to our more than $70 million in new term premium -- one of ourbest years ever for this traditional product. Another important move was the reorganization of our managed care operations to form NYLCareHealth Plans, Inc. We merged our Group insurance operations with one of our most profitable andfastest-growing subsidiaries, Sanus Corp. Health Systems, an HMO and managed care organization. This enhanced the quality of our operations and service, and simplified the way theorganizations and individuals can purchase and manage their health care benefits. NYLCare, whichestimates its 1996 revenues will reach $2.5 billion, now offers a full spectrum of health careproducts and services, including group insurance, preferred provider organizations, and HMOproducts. In 1995, we also became a major direct marketer of life insurance as the provider for the AARP LifeInsurance Program. Chosen by the American Association of Retired Persons after a rigorous selectionprocess, we began offering the program to AARP members in the fall of 1994, and the response wasoverwhelming. In 1995, sales reached $53 million, exceeding our initial estimates by a widemargin. Our MainStay® Funds set records for sales and surpassed the $6 billion asset mark in 1995. We cancredit this success to outstanding equity performance, as well as the efforts of both of our distributionchannels -- the New York Life Agency Force and Wall Street brokerage firms. On the pension side, ourtraditional Guaranteed Investment Contract (GIC) product continued to provide retirement security forour clients as we maintained our market leadership position. One of our strongest assets is integrity. It's been a hallmark of our Company for 150 years. Aprime example of our belief in the integrity of our people, our products, and our promises was the settlement in 1995 of a class action lawsuit brought on behalf of certain policyowners. It involved sales practiceissues and in particular, policyowners' understanding of dividends and interest crediting rates. The Company's financial strength and our confidence in our agents allowed us to work out an innovative settlement,approved by the Supreme Court of New York State in January 1996. It was high in benefits and aid to policyowners in the class, while doing nothing to disadvantage our other policyowners. In fact, over 99 percent of thepolicyowners in the class have elected to accept the settlement, attesting to its fairness. Our great financial strength, coupled with our leadership position on issues of integrity which affect our policyowners, is reflected on many levels. A Fortune 100 company overall, New York Life now ranks fourth in the insurance industry on the basis of assets and revenues, and in life insurance sales. And, onceagain, New York Life and its subsidiary, New York Life Insurance and Annuity Corporation (NYLIAC), have receivedhigh marks from the major ratings agencies. For claims-paying ability, both Standard & Poor's and Duff & Phelpsassign us AAA, their highest ratings. For financial strength, A.M. Best gives us an A++, its second highest classification, and Moody's Investors Service gives us Aa1, its second highest of 19 possible ratings. Our consistently high ratings are further proof that we keep the needs of our policyowners at the forefront of every decision we make. Our financial strength will enable us to pay out $1.2 billion in dividendsin 1996, the highest amount in New York Life's history. 1995 was also a year of change for our Board. President George Bundschuh took a long-planned early retirement on October 1, 1995. George's New York Life career spanned 36 years, and he was a valued member of both our Board and our Company. He will be missed for his intellect and vision. As chairman, I will especially miss George. We worked closely on many issues and his advice was always invaluable. It was imperative that his replacement also be an innovative leader who believes in the New York Life commitment to provide quality sevice and sound financial management. For that reason, it gives me great pleasure to have Sy Sternberg as my co-signer on this letter, having succeeded George as president. Sy joined New York Life in 1989 as head of Group operations. With his steady leadership and innovative thinking, this area became a major player in the health care arena, culminating in the creation of NYLCare. Now, as president and chief operating officer, Sy has all of the business operations of the Company reporting to him. He is the vice chairman of twoBoard committees: Executive & Insurance and Investment. We also welcomed three new Board members and were heartened by the recent return of a former Director. Our new membersare Robert Baylis, former vice chairman of CS First Boston, Inc., who is a member of the Investment Committee; Kent Foster, the president of GTE Corporation, who is a member of the Executive & Insurance Committee; and Leslie McCraw, the chairman and chief executive officer of Fluor Corporation, who also serves on the Investment Committee.Conrad Harper, a partner at the law firm of Simpson Thacher & Bartlett, left the Board three years ago to serve asa legal adviser to the Department of State and as a member of the Permanent Court of Arbitration at the Hague. Herejoined the Board in 1996. Mr. Harper is a member of the Executive & Insurance Committee. We should benefit greatly from the insight and years of experience each man brings to the Company. We want to take the opportunity of this letter to reaffirm the Company's traditional promises to you: to remain strong; to take every opportunity for prudent, managed growth; and above all, to be here for you when you need us. Whenyou dream a world -- for yourself or your children -- you may not hear our name or see our buildings, but we are there. We always will be. NYLCare Click here to go to the NYLCare web site. MainStay Funds Click here to go to the MainStay Funds Web site. Message to Policyowners|Board of Directors|Consolidated Financials Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-139IA046-000816-B016-333http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/psinmp.html 207.121.184.160 19970119014504 text/html 11031HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 01:44:13 GMTContent-type: text/html Modified Premium Whole Life Modified Premium Whole Life Modified Premium Whole Life (MPWL) is a permanent, participating life insurancepolicy thatfeatures alower initial premium that remains level for the policy's first five years, thenincreases toits ultimatepremium in year six, and remains at that level for life. It is best suited forestablishedindividualsseeking a large amount of insurance and moderate cash value accumulation at areducedpremium. The Benefits of Modified Premium Whole Life Provides permanent life insurance protection. Premiums are lower in the first five years. Accumulates tax-deferred, guaranteed cash value. Loan provision allows you to borrow from cash value. Eligible for dividends, if and when declared by the Company. Death benefit may increase annually with paid-up additions purchased fromdividends. Death benefit, in most instances, is free from federal income tax. Uses of MPWL Individual - MPWL can be an effective method of protecting your family's assets.Somepotential usesinclude: Traditional Insurance Protection - Provides thefinancialsecuritythatgives families thepeace of mind they deserve. Mortgage Protection - Can help pay off mortgages andotheroutstandingdebts in the eventof a premature death. Retirement Funding - Over the long-term, accumulatedcashvalue canbe accessed throughpolicy loans to help fund a comfortable retirement. Education Funding - Can help pay for children's andgrandchildren'seducation throughpolicy loans, or as named beneficiaries. Pension Maximization - A possible solution to thepensiondilemma,whereby a "single-life"pension option is chosen and life insurance proceeds are earmarked to replace thelostpensionbenefit in the event of pensioner's death. Estate Planning Tool - Can be an effective way ofproviding fundsforestate expenses, andhelping to avoid the sale of assets and/or the need to borrow. Charitable Giving - Bequesting life insurance to make alargerdonationto your favoritecharity. Business - MPWL can play many vital roles in the smooth operation of a business. Itcan beused asan attractive employee benefit, and as a means to assure the business's financialfuture.Below aresome examples of its use: Split Dollar Arrangement - Employee is covered by aninsurancepolicywhile premiums arepaid by the employer. The employer owns the policy, but the employee can name thebeneficiary. Uponthe death of the employee, the employer receives proceeds equal to the cash valueof thepolicy, whilethe beneficiary receives the remaining proceeds. Group Equity Carve Out - Offers employers theopportunitytoprovidepermanent, cash valuelife insurance to select employees, while keeping the costs low. Deferred Compensation - Offers employers theopportunityto providebenefits to employeesat a later date, such as at retirement. Salary Continuation - Offers employees supplementalretirement anddeath benefits. Buy/Sell Agreement - Funding a buy/sell agreementthroughlifeinsurance can be the smartchoice for protecting your business's assets. Available Riders You can choose from a widevariety of policy riders to meet your specific needs. Issue Ages Accidental Death Benefit (ADB) 40-65 Provides additional death benefit if the insured dies as a result of anaccident. Children's Insurance (CI) 40-502 Provides level term insurance on the children of the insured. Disability Waiver of Premium (WP) 40-59 Premiums are waived if the insured becomes permanently disabled for six monthsorlonger. Dividend Option Term (DOT) 40-85 A combination of a decreasing term insurance rider and base plan paid-up additions. Increasing Premium Term (IPT) 40-65 Additional coverage through low cost term insurance. Insurance Exchange (IE) 40-851 Provides for the transfer of policy coverage to a successor insured, subjectto evidence of goodhealth. Living Benefits Rider (LBR) 40-851 Gives policyowner access to a portion of the policy's eligible death benefit should theinsured bediagnosed with a terminal illness with a life expectancy of 12 months or less. One Year Term (1YT) 40-85 Uses policy's dividends to purchase one-year term insurance equal to the guaranteedcash value asof the policy's next anniversary. Option to Purchase Paid-Up Additions (OPP) 40-851 The right to purchase additional paid-up life insurance that has cash value and loanvalue and iseligible for dividends. Policy Purchase Option (PPO) 0-43 Guarantees the right to purchase additional insurance at crucial junctures inlife. Spouse and Children's Insurance (SCI) 40-502 Allows insured to purchase level term insurance for spouse and children. Spouse's Paid-up Insurance Purchase Option (SPPO) 40-851 Gives spouse/beneficiary the right to purchase a new paid-up whole lifepolicy onhis/her life withoutevidence of insurability. Survivor's Purchase Option (SPO) 40-75 Allows beneficiary to purchase a new life insurance policy on a designated insuredwithout providingevidence of insurability. 1 There is no charge for theseriders. 2 These ages refer to the age of theinsured under the Modified Premium Whole Life policy, not the ages of the spouse,and/orchildren. Dividend Options As a mutual insurance company, New York Life is owned by its participatingpolicyowners. Ifand whenthe Company declares dividends, MPWL policyowners are entitled to payment. New Yo WT02-B28-140IA046-000816-B016-368http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/cpbgci.html 207.121.184.160 19970119014520 text/html 6333HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 01:44:29 GMTContent-type: text/html NYL Good Corporate Citizen Good Corporate Citizen The Company's commitment to helping communities in which it does business can be traced backto1853 when it made its first contribution -- assisting the victims of yellow fever in NewOrleans. The Company's first formal contributions budget was established in 1951. Since then, theCompany and, subsequently, the New York Life Foundation -- which was created in 1979 and isnow the Company's main vehicle for charitable giving -- have contributed more than $63 millionto a variety of national and local organizations across the country. Today, the New YorkLife Foundation supports a wide range of health and human service agencies, educationalinstitutions, arts and cultural groups, as well as civic and community organizations. Periodically, the Foundation selects areas of special focus within one or more of thesecategories. Its current priority areas are AIDS and literacy. The Foundation makes annual grants to more than 150 United Ways across the country in citieswhere New York Life offices are located. In 1995, recipients of other major grants includedthe National AIDS Fund, Literacy Volunteers of America, the Life and Health Insurance MedicalResearch Fund, Black Leadership Commission on AIDS, and Literacy Volunteers of New YorkCity. New York Life doesn't view its contributions program as one that "gives away" money. Grantsare made as investments in organizations whose work enhances the quality of life of thepeople they serve, thus ensuring a better future for society as a whole. Frequently, the Foundation is able to combine its financial support with the Company'sgreatest asset -- the talent and expertise of its people. For example, the Foundation forIndependent Higher Education (FIHE), which represents 600 independent colleges across thecountry through its 38 state and regional associations, has received more than $5.2million in grants. In many instances, this support has been coupled with the involvement ofCompany officers, managing partners, and agents in both the national and local FIHEorganizations. Whether it's through the Foundation's matching gift program for colleges and universities, orits Local Volunteer Action Program, which makes grants to community groups where New YorkLife employees and agents volunteer their time, the New York Life family consistentlydemonstrates its commitment to community participation. Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-141IA046-000816-B017-2http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/cprenc.html 207.121.184.160 19970119014545 text/html 5155HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 01:44:49 GMTContent-type: text/html NYLCare Health Plans, Inc. NYLCare Health Plans, Inc. NYLCare Health Plans, Inc., is New York Life's health care and related employee benefits company. Through its subsidiaries, it serves 3.5 million people nationwide - including 16,000 employer groupsranging from neighborhood businesses to Fortune 500 companies. In 1995, revenue for the indemnity and unconsolidated managed care businesses was $2.5 billion. Health Maintenance Organization (HMO) membership passed the one million mark, and operations were expanded in the states of Maine, New Jersey, and Washington. NYLCare has a joint venture agreement with Duke University in the Carolinas. Thisalliance - called WellPath Community Health Plans - couples NYLCare's management experience with Duke'smedical expertise. Nearly 30,000 people are currently covered. NYLCare Health Plans of the Gulf Coast (Houston area) has been approved for a Medicare Choices Demonstration Project. Individual Operations|Asset Management|Investment|NYLCare Health Plans, Inc.|Special Markets|New York Life Worldwide Holding, Inc. Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-142IA046-000816-B017-27http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/psinanvr.html 207.121.184.160 19970119014617 text/html 12289HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 01:45:23 GMTContent-type: text/html NYLIAC Variable Annuity New York Life Insurance and Annuity Corporation Variable Annuity Plan for Your Retirement with NYLIAC Variable Annuity Retirement - spending time with family and friends, traveling, doing things youdidn't have a chance to do while you were working. But what if you're ready to retire and your finances won't let you? Will you be able toafford a comfortablestandard of living without the security of your paycheck? NYLIAC Variable Annuity can help you prepare for the type of retirement you've alwaysdreamedof. Withits tax-deferred growth, variety of investment options and professional fund managers,NYLIACVariable Annuity might be just what you're looking for. It can even help provide youwith anincome forthe rest of your life. When you're planning for retirement, you need all the help you can get. Since earningsgrowtax-deferred in NYLIAC Variable Annuity, your money may accumulate faster than it wouldin asimilarbut taxable investment. Your needs and goals are unique, and are likely to change throughout your lifetime. WithNYLIACVariable Annuity, you have the option of choosing from a variety of investment divisionsthat havevarying levels of risk. You also have the option of a Fixed Account with a guaranteedinterest rate.Managing your money can be extremely time consuming. It can also be difficult keepingtrackof marketchanges and interest rate fluctuations. With NYLIAC Variable Annuity, you can leave theinvesting toprofessionals. Fund managers with proven track records manage the portfolios. NYLIAC Variable Annuity is issued by New York Life Insurance and Annuity Corporation(NYLIAC), awholly owned subsidiary of New York Life Insurance Company and available through NYLIFESecurities Inc. (member NASD) 51 Madison Avenue, NY NY 10010. Benefits of Tax Deferral Earnings in NYLIAC Variable Annuity accumulate tax-deferred. In other words, you won'tpaytaxes onyour earnings until you decide to withdraw them. So, not only can your earnings compoundyearafteryear, but they also remain untouched by taxes until withdrawal. This could translate intoextra dollars inthe long run. (Remember, withdrawals prior to age 59 1/2 may be subject to a 10% IRSpenalty.) Controlling Your Taxes Since tax-deferral means that you won't be taxed until you withdraw your money, NYLIACVariableAnnuity can actually help you control your taxes. By planning your withdrawals, you canspread out yourtax liability so you are not pushed into a higher bracket. NYLIAC Variable Annuity can offer you the opportunity to better control taxes. It canhelpyour moneyaccumulate faster - and last longer. Flexibility With NYLIAC Variable Annuity you design an investment portfolio that is right for you.Basedon yourobjectives and risk tolerance, you can select among a variety of investment options,including stock,bond, international equity and a fixed account. The Fixed Account has an interest ratethatis periodicallyset and guaranteed by NYLIAC. Because your needs and objectives may change, you can redesign your portfolio by makingtax-freetransfers among investment options. It's even easier when you use NYLIAC's toll-freetelephonenumber. Professional Management Although you choose the investment divisions for your policy, professional fund managersatMacKayShields Financial Corporation, Monitor Capital Advisors, Inc., Calvert Asset ManagementCompany,Inc., and New York Life are responsible for managing the underlying portfolios of theinvestmentdivisions. Each portfolio is managed by experienced financial advisors who have proventrackrecordsin investment management. Dollar Cost Averaging Don't you wish you could predict the highs and lows of the market? Then you would be abletobuy whenprices were low and sell when prices were high. But who has a crystal ball? You can avoid a lot of the guesswork if you dollar cost average. With dollar costaveraging,you set up aprogram of scheduled investments - given dollar amounts invested at given points in time-and stickto it, regardless of the changes in the markets. This consistent, disciplined approachallowsyou to takeadvantage of market volatility by buying more investment units when prices are low andfewerwhenprices are high. Although dollar cost averaging does not ensure a profit nor protectagainsta loss in adeclining market, over time a sustained dollar cost averaging strategy can reduce yourtimingrisk andoptimize your return. Investors should consider their financial ability to continuepurchasesthroughperiods of low and high price levels. Dollar cost averaging is easy with NYLIAC Variable Annuity. Just select the automatedDollarCostAveraging feature, tell us how much to invest and how often, and we'll do the rest. Automatic Asset Reallocation You might want to maintain a particular allocation of your assets among certaininvestmentdivisions,for example, keeping 30% in Bond, 30% in Capital Appreciation and 40% in InternationalEquity. Sinceportfolio values change at different rates, you may need to move money between investmentdivisions tokeep your desired ratio. It's a popular investment strategy - but it requires a lot ofmaintenance. Fortunately, NYLIAC Variable Annuity offers an Automatic Asset Reallocation featurethatallowsyou to specify when - quarterly, semi-annually, or annually - NYLIAC will review youraccounts andautomatically make any necessary transfers to bring your distribution back into thebalanceyouselected. Payout at Retirement With NYLIAC Variable Annuity you choose how you want to receive your retirement income.Severaloptions include a guaranteed income that will last as long as you live. Withdrawals You may make withdrawals from your policy at any time, and NYLIAC Variable Annuityfeaturesattractivewithdrawal options. NYLIAC Variable Annuity's 10% Window allows you to withdraw 10% of your policy's cashvalueeach policy year (less any surrender-charge-free withdrawals you made during the year)without incurring surrender charges. And, if your policy has $100,000 or more inaccumulatedpremium payments, you can withdraw the greater of: the gain in your policy, or the 10%Windowamount, without incurring surrender charges. Certain withdrawals prior to age 59 1/2 maybesubject to a 10% IRS penalty. Loan Option for TSA Plans If you are investing in a NYLIAC Variable Annuity through a Tax Sheltered Annuity (TSA)program at work,there are certain loan provisions available. The loan options are available in TSAs only. Protection for Your Heirs With NYLIAC Variable Annuity your heirs are guaranteed to receive the greater of the cashvalue of yourpolicy, or any premiums paid less withdrawals. This means that even if the value of yourportfolio hasdecreased, your heirs are guaranteed to receive at least the amount of money that you hadinvested(less any withdrawals and taxes, of course). NYLIAC guarantees it! Request a NYLIAC prospectus package for more complete information including fees andexpenses.Read it carefully for complete information on all product features before you invest orsendmoney. The value of your investment, including the return of your principal, is subject tomarketrisk. New York Life Insurance and Annuity Corporation(NYLIAC) Variable Annuity LifeStages SM|Conservative|Moderate|Aggressive What Exactly is an Annuity?|Fixed Rate Annuities |Variable Annuities Securities offered through NYLIFE Securities Inc. (Member NASD) New York Life Insurance Company New York Life Insurance and Annuity Corporation (A Delaware Corporation) NYLIFE Securities Inc. & NYLIFE Distributors Inc. (Members NASD) 51 Madison Ave., NY, NY 10010 Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-143IA046-000816-B017-53http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/psinanag.html 207.121.184.160 19970119014635 text/html 8765HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 01:45:42 GMTContent-type: text/html NYLIAC Variable Annuity And LifeStages: Aggressive Investment Options NYLIAC Variable Annuity And LifeStagesSM: Aggressive InvestmentOptions Indexed Equity The Indexed Equity Portfolio invests in the stocks represented in the Standard&Poor's 500CompositePrice Index (S&P 500)1. Byinvesting inthe same stocks, and in the same proportion as the S&P 500,the portfolio seeks to achieve investment results that correspond to the totalreturn of thestock marketas represented by the S&P 500. This investment option may be right for youif youare willingto bear therisks associated with the stock market in exchange for a return that may mirrorthemarket's2. (Managedby MonitorCapitalAdvisors, Inc.) Growth Equity The Growth Equity Portfolio invests principally in common stock ofwell-established,well-managedcompanies. These stocks may have the potential for above-average growth. Thisportfolio seekslong-term growth of capital, with dividend income secondary to its objective.Consider thisinvestmentalternative if you want the opportunity for above-average capital growth, whileaccepting therisksassociated with the stock market. (Managed by New York Life Insurance Co.) Capital Appreciation The Capital Appreciation Portfolio seeks long-term growth of capital. Stocksexpected toappreciate invalue are selected for this portfolio. Dividend income, if any, is incidentaltothisportfolio's objective.This investment option may suit you if you are willing to assume greater riskfor apotentially greaterreturn on your investment. (Managed by MacKay-Shields Financial Corporation) High Yield Corporate Bond The High Yield Corporate Bond Portfolio seeks to maximize current income andsecondarilyseeksgrowth from capital appreciation. It invests in high yield debt securities thatare oftenrated in thelower categories by the rating agencies. These securities are commonly referredtoas highyieldsecurities or junk bonds. This portfolio may be appropriate if you are seekingahighpotential return andare willing to assume greater risk. (Managed by MacKay-Shields FinancialCorporation) International Equity The International Equity Portfolio seeks long-term growth of capital. Itinvests inaportfolio of primarilynon-U.S. equity securities. The portfolio tries to diversify across a varietyofcountriesand will beinvested in a minimum of five countries, exclusive of the United States.Considerthisinvestment optionif you wish to diversify by including non-U.S. investments in your portfolioand ifyou arewilling toassume the risks associated with international investing3. (Managed by MacKay-Shields FinancialCorporation) NYLIAC Variable Annuity and LifeStagesSM areissued by NewYork Life Insurance andAnnuity Corporation (a Delaware Corporation) and available through NYLIFESecurities Inc.(member NASD) 51 Madison Avenue, NY NY 10010. For Complete information, including charges and expenses, request a free NYLIACAnnuity orLifeStagesSM Variable Annuity prospectuspackage.Read itcarefully before youinvest or send money. The value of your investment, including the return of your principal, issubject tomarketrisk. 1 "Standard & Poor's 500CompositePrice Index"and "S&P 500" are registered trademarks of Standard & Poor'sCorporation.The S&P500 is anunmanaged index that is generally considered representative of the U.S. stockmarket. 2 Unlike other funds thatgenerallyseek to beatmarket averagesoften with unpredictable results, index funds seek to match the return of theirrespectiveindexes. 3 International investing involvesspecial risksthatare more volatile than those found in the U.S. markets, including foreigncurrencyfluctuations anddifferent government regulatory concerns. New York Life Insurance and Annuity Corporation(NYLIAC) Variable Annuity LifeStages SM|Conservative|Moderate|Aggressive What Exactly is an Annuity?|Fixed Rate Annuities |Variable Annuities Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-144IA046-000816-B017-96http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/psinanco.html 207.121.184.160 19970119014715 text/html 6607HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 01:46:25 GMTContent-type: text/html NYLIAC Variable Annuity And LifeStages: Conservative Investment Options NYLIAC Variable Annuity And LifeStagesSM: Conservative Investment Options Cash Management The Cash Management Portfolio invests in short-term U.S. Government securities,obligations ofbanks, commercial paper, short-term corporate obligations, and securities of foreignbranches of U.S.banks. This portfolio's returns are consistent with short-term interest rates. Meanwhile theshort-termnature of this portfolio's investments is expected to translate into minimal price volatility. Thisinvestment option1 may beright for youif you want to preserve capital and maintain liquidity. (Managed by MacKay-ShieldsFinancialCorporation) The Fixed Account The Fixed Account invests in the General Account of New York Life Insurance and AnnuityCorporation.NYLIAC credits the assets of this account with a fixed interest rate. The minimum guaranteedcreditingrate is 3.0%, and NYLIAC guarantees your principal as well as the interest. You shouldconsider thisaccount if you want these guarantees and the advantage of NYLIAC's conservativeinvestmentphilosophy. (Managed by New York Life Insurance and Annuity Corporation) NYLIAC Variable Annuity and LifeStagesSM areissued byNew York Life Insurance andAnnuity Corporation (a Delaware Corporation) and available through NYLIFE Securities Inc.(member NASD) 51 Madison Avenue, NY NY 10010. For complete information, including charges and expenses, request a free NYLIAC AnnuityorLifeStagesSM Variable Annuity prospectuspackage. Read itcarefully before youinvest or send money. The value of your investment, including the return of your principal, is subject to marketrisk. 1 An investment in the CashManagementPortfoliois neitherinsured nor guaranteed by the U.S. government, and there can be no assurance that thePortfolio will beable to maintain a stable net asset value of $1.00 per share. New York Life Insurance and Annuity Corporation(NYLIAC) Variable Annuity LifeStages SM|Conservative|Moderate|Aggressive What Exactly is an Annuity?|Fixed Rate Annuities |Variable Annuities Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-145IA046-000816-B017-124http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/psinanmo.html 207.121.184.160 19970119014726 text/html 8405HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 01:46:37 GMTContent-type: text/html NYLIAC Variable Annuity And LifeStages: Moderate Investment Options NYLIAC Variable Annuity And LifeStagesSM: Moderate Investment Options Government The Government Portfolio seeks a high level of current income consistent withsafety ofprincipal. Itinvests primarily in U.S. Government securities, including Treasury bills, notes,and bonds,andobligations of the U.S. Government or its agencies. Although the securities heldwithin thisportfolio areguaranteed by the U.S. Government or an agency, the value of the portfolio's sharesis notinsured andwill fluctuate. Choose this investment alternative if you seek a conservativeinvestment withrelatively lowrisk. (Managed by MacKay-Shields Financial Corporation) Bond The Bond Portfolio invests primarily in investment grade, fixed-income securitiesincludingU.S.Government bonds, U.S. Government agency obligations and corporate bonds. This fundmay alsoinvest in lower-rated securities, convertible debt, and preferred stock. Byinvesting invarious grades ofdebt securities, this portfolio seeks to earn long-term income while preservingcapital. Youshouldconsider this investment option if you want a relatively conservative approach toincome andcapitalpreservation and are willing to accept some market risk. (Managed by New York LifeInsuranceCompany) Total Return The Total Return Portfolio seeks to realize current income consistent withreasonableopportunity forfuture growth of capital and income. It invests in a combination of stocks, bonds,or moneymarketinstruments, depending on market conditions. By investing in a broad range ofsecurities,this portfolioseeks to reduce the risks associated with market volatility. This investmentalternative maybe right foryou if you want the opportunity for attractive growth and income while acceptingsome riskexposure.(Managed by MacKay-Shields Financial Corporation) Value The Value Portfolio seeks to realize maximum long-term total return from acombination ofcapitalgrowth and income investments. It invests in common stocks that are, in theportfoliomanager'sopinion, undervalued at the time of purchase. The portfolio typically invests individend-paying stocks,but will also invest in non-dividend paying stocks. This portfolio may be right foryou ifyou are seekingan equity investment that focuses on growth from both capital appreciation anddividendincome, and ifyou are willing to assume the associated risks. (Managed by MacKay-ShieldsFinancialCorporation) Socially Responsible The Socially Responsible Portfolio seeks capital growth through investment inenterprisesthat make asignificant contribution to society through their products, services, and the waythey dobusiness. Theportfolio seeks to achieve a total return above the rate of inflation through anactivelymanaged portfolioof stocks and bonds of socially responsible companies plus money marketinstruments. Youshouldconsider this investment option if you are seeking growth which may outpaceinflation and ifyou preferto invest in companies that show a concern for social issues. The SociallyResponsiblePortfolio is nota portfolio of the MFA Series Fund, Inc. (Managed by Calvert Asset ManagementCompany,Inc.) NYLIAC Variable Annuity and LifeStagesSM areissued by NewYork Life Insurance andAnnuity Corporation (a Delaware Corporation) and available through NYLIFESecurities Inc.(member NASD) 51 Madison Avenue, NY NY 10010. For complete information, including charges and expenses, request a free NYLIACAnnuity orLifeStagesSM Variable Annuity prospectuspackage.Read itcarefully before youinvest or send money. The value of your investment, including the return of your principal, is subject tomarketrisk. New York Life Insurance and Annuity Corporation(NYLIAC) Variable Annuity LifeStages SM|Conservative|Moderate|Aggressive What Exactly is an Annuity?|Fixed Rate Annuities |Variable Annuities Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-146IA046-000816-B017-152http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/psinvubg.html 207.121.184.160 19970119014742 text/html 10596HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 01:46:54 GMTContent-type: text/html NYLIAC's Variable Universal Life Insurance Ideas Variable Universal Life Insurance Ideas NYLIAC's Variable Universal Life Insurance Protection Plus Investment Opportunity All life insurance offers financial protection. And all permanent life insurance generates acash valuethat you can use to finance personal goals. But there's one thing most life insurance plansdon't offer:choice in how your money is invested. New York Life Insurance and Annuity Corporation(NYLIAC)offers a plan that does: Variable Universal Life (VUL).1 Variable Universal Life puts you in control of your life insurance. You can adjust yourpayments to suityourchanging needs. And you can even decide how your dollars will be invested - which means you have a say in howyourmoney may grow. Few traditional life insurance plans offer this kind of freedom. With VUL,you get boththe protection of life insurance and the potential for growth of investments. Flexible Protection and Flexible Payments With NYLIAC's Variable Universal Life, you have the freedom to choose the amount of lifeinsuranceprotection that best suits you. As your needs change, you have the option of increasing ordecreasingyour coverage.2 You can also control theamount and frequency of your payments. For example, if you're looking to accumulate as muchas youcan for the future, you can make a lump-sum contribution or increase your payments. Thatextra moneycan help increase the cash value of your policy, so when a personal or business opportunitypresentsitself, you'll have access to those funds.3Or if you need to temporarily cut back on your payments, youmay be able to pay less premium than usual and let the policy's accumulated cash value coverthe rest. Flexible payments let you make the choices. Flexible Investment Features With Variable Universal Life, you control how your money works for you. You can choose amongseveralfundingoptions, including stock, bond, balanced, or money-market accounts. There's also a FixedAccount witha minimum guaranteed rate of 4%. By contributing at regular intervals through "dollar cost averaging," you may get a loweroverall cost onthe units in which you're investing, without having to time the financial markets.4 What's more, you're never locked into yourinvestment choices - you can change them. You can also secure any gains you may make bytransferring them into the Cash Management portfolio or, on a limited basis, the FixedAccount.5 Those earnings can thenremain there tax-deferred. Whatever options you select, you control the investment choice. Customized Policy Design You can customize Variable Universal Life to fit your lifestyle. Ask your NYLIFE Securitiesregisteredrepresentative how you can add different policy features that can help you provide financialprotectionfor your spouse and children, keep the policy in force during disability, increase thebenefit if you dieaccidentally, or tailor the plan to cover other needs. Earnings That Grow Tax-Deferred Earnings on VUL grow tax-deferred and are re-invested, so your money may grow a lot fasterthan itwould in a taxable investment. And don't forget the benefits of compounding: earnings maygrow yearafter year - tax-deferred - and this could magnify your ultimate return! Reliable, Professional Management The professional fund managers at MacKay-Shields Financial Corporation Financial CorporationandMonitor CapitalAdvisors, Inc. manage VUL's portfolio accounts. Both are New York Life affiliates and arepremierfinancial advisors with proven track records in investment management. The Fixed Account ismanaged by NYLIAC - and backed by this New York Life subsidiary's superior financial strengthandstability. At Your Service Your NYLIFE Securities registered representative is always ready to help you and answer anyquestions. You can call atoll-free number to transfer funds between accounts or get up-to-the-minute information aboutyourpolicy. You'll also receive quarterly statements to give you a summary of your policy activity. For more complete information, including charges and expenses, contact your NYLIFE Securitiesregisteredrepresentative for a freeNYLIAC Variable Universal Life prospectus package. Read it carefully before you invest or send money. Neither New York Life nor the New York Life Insurance and Annuity Corporation guarantees theinvestmentperformance of the variable accounts, which will fluctuate with market conditions. 1 VUL is distributed byNYLIFE Distributors, Inc., member NASD. In most jurisdictions, VUL's policy formnumber is 793-90. 2 To increase your coverage, you mayneed to produce satisfactory evidence of insurability. Also, you willneed to meet any other applicable underwriting requirements. Increases and decreases in yourcoverage may be permitted in the first policy year. 3For details regarding policy loans, see theProspectus. 4Dollar cost averaging does not assure a profitnor does it protect against loss in declining markets. Investors should consider theirfinancial ability tocontinue purchases through periods of low and high price levels. 5Transfers from the Fixed Account to theInvestment Divisionsare subject to some restrictions. See the Prospectus for details. Subject to contractlimitations, you arepermitted twelve free transfers each year. NYLIAC reserves the right to charge $30 for eachtransferexceeding twelve each year. This offer may be modified or withdrawn at any time. NYLIAC's Variable Universal Life Insurance|Conservative|Moderate|Aggressive * NYLIAC Variable Annuity is issued by New York Life Insurance and AnnuityCorporation (a Delaware Corporation) and available through NYLIFE Securities Inc. (memberNASD)51 Madison Avenue, NY NY 10010. Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-147IA046-000816-B017-186http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/cyof.html 207.121.184.160 19970119014759 text/html 12771HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 01:47:11 GMTContent-type: text/html NYLife Office Finder To narrow down your search, choose the state in which you live, or closest to you. Press the "Search" button for a listing of NYLife offices within the state you select. Please choose a state to search: AlabamaAlaskaArizonaArkansasCaliforniaColoradoConnecticutDelawareFloridaGeorgiaHawaiiIdahoIllinoisIndianaIowaKansasKentuckyLouisianaMaineMarylandMassachusettsMichiganMinnesotaMississippiMissouriMontanaNebraskaNevadaNew HampshireNew JerseyNew MexicoNew YorkNorth CarolinaNorth DakotaOhioOklahomaOregonPennsylvaniaRhode IslandSouth CarolinaSouth DakotaTennesseeTexasUtahVermontVirginiaWashingtonWest VirginiaWisconsinWyoming (only states with NYLife offices are listed) Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-148IA046-000816-B017-213http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/cpreny.html 207.121.184.160 19970119014829 text/html 5290HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 01:47:29 GMTContent-type: text/html New York Life Worldwide Holding, Inc. New York Life Worldwide Holding, Inc. In 1995, New York Life Worldwide Holding, Inc., continued to grow its international insurance operations, with sales of $58.1 million. In Argentina, La Buenos Airs - New York Life Seguros de Vida S.A. now ranks number two in life insurance sales; in Indonesia, P.T. Asuransi Jiwa Sewu - New York Life climbed to number five. The Taiwan, South Korea, and Mexico operations exceeded 1995 sales objectives, while aggressive recruiting by our subsidiary in Hong Kong resulted in the doubling of its Agency Force. Inaddition, our new international brokerage subsidiary, New York Life Worldwide (Bermuda) Ltd.,appointed more than 20 gereral agents, which will increase its productivity. Our involvement in the United Kingdom insurance market, through the Life Assurance Holding Corporation Limited, continues to focus on the acquisition and management of existing insurance companies and their portfolios. And, in mainland China, we received governmental approval to open a second representative office. Individual Operations|Asset Management|Investment|NYLCare Health Plans, Inc.|Special Markets|New York Life Worldwide Holding, Inc. Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-149IA046-000816-B017-241http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/cprecfnt.html 207.121.184.160 19970119014854 text/html 15167HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 01:47:56 GMTContent-type: text/html Notes to Financial Statements Notes to Financial Statements for Annual Report Note A: The accompanying consolidated financial statements reflect the consolidation of New York Life Insurance Company (NYLIC) with its direct, wholly owned life insurance subsidiaries: New York Life Insurance and Annuity Corporation (NYLIAC), New York Life and Health Insurance Company (NYLHIC), and NYLIFE Insurance Company of Arizona (NYLAZ). NYLIC and such subsidiaries are hereinafter referred to collectively as "the Company". Separate unconsolidated financial statements are shown for NYLIC and NYLIAC. All significant intercompany transactions, primarily the net equity of the insurance subsidiaries, have been eliminated in consolidation. Other subsidiaries are recorded at their underlying net equity, with the exception of NYLIC's investment in Express Scripts, Inc., a 69% owned subsidiary, which is carried at market value as allowed under New York State law. NYLIC is a diversified financial services company which offers a wide range of insurance and investment products and services, including life and health insurance, pension products, mutual funds (through its broker-dealer subsidiary), and other investments, to a large cross section of the total insurance market. NYLIAC offers a wide variety of interest sensitive insurance and annuity products. Effective January 1, 1996, NYLIC merged its Health Maintenance Organization subsidiary, Sanus Corp. Health Systems, and its Group life and health indemnity operations (which will be transferred to NYLHIC via a reinsurance agreement) into an integrated health care subsidiary, NYLCare Health Plans, Inc. (NYLCare), whereby NYLHIC will be a downstream subsidiary of NYLCare. NYLAZ expects to offer a Corporate Owned Life Insurance/Variable Universal Life product for sale in 1996. Note B: The accompanying financial statements have been prepared on the basis of accounting practices prescribed or permitted by the New York and Delaware State Insurance Departments ("statutory accounting practices"). Presently, these statutory accounting practices are considered generally accepted accounting principles for mutual life insurance companies and their wholly owned life insurance subsidiaries. The Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) has issued an Interpretation, effective for 1996 financial statements, which establishes a different definition of generally accepted accounting principles. If the Company chooses to adopt the accounting changes required under this new definition, the effect of the changes would be reported retroactively through restatement of all previously issued financial statements presented for comparative purposes. The cumulative effect of adopting these changes would be included in the earliest year restated. Financial statements prepared in conformity with statutory accounting practices would continue to be required by insurance regulatory authorities. Under statutory accounting practices: (1) bonds and mortgage loans on real estate are stated principally at cost after amortization of premium and discount, preferred stocks are stated generally at cost, and common stocks are stated at market value; (2) the value of invested assets has been adjusted for impairments that are other than temporary; (3) an asset valuation reserve is reported as a liability; (4) an interest maintenance reserve is reported as a liability to capture interest-income over the estimated remaining lives of the investments sold; (5) premiums are taken into income over the premium-paying period of the policies; guaranteed investment contract funds are recorded as income when received; (6) matured guaranteed investment contracts are included in benefit payments; (7) commissions and other costs in connection with acquiring new business are charged to current operations as incurred; (8) pension costs are based on Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No.87, "Employers Accounting for Pensions"; (9) unfunded postretirement benefit costs other than pensions are based on National Association of Insurance Commissioners requirements, which include establishing a liability for retired and fully eligible active employees; (10) policy reserves are based on mortality tables and interest assumptions which are consistent with statutory requirements and are designed to be sufficient to provide for contractual benefits; (11) dividends to policyowners consist principally of dividends expected to be paid during the subsequent year; (12) provision is made for federal income taxes estimated to be payable; (13) certain assets designated as "non-admitted assets" are not included in the Statement of Financial Position; (14) in 1995, the Company changed its method of accounting for the equity base tax and as a result, federal income taxes were reduced by $46 million, $12 million and $58 million for NYLIC, NYLIAC and the Company, respectively. Note C: Bond investments in the Statement of Financial Position consist of the following (in millions): Chart for Note C: December 31, 1995 December 31, 1994 NYLIC NYLIAC Consolidated NYLIC NYLIAC Consolidated U.S. Treasury and U.S. Government Corporations and Agencies $5,537 $1,840 $7,403 $4,990 $1,679 $6,682 U.S. Agencies, State and Municipal 9,980 3,563 13,544 9,024 2,965 11,992 Foreign Governments 1,353 324 1,676 1,400 298 1,699 Corporate 18,857 5,846 24,748 17,062 5,670 22,740 Other 1,867 689 2,556 1,658 529 2,187 Total $37,594 $12,262 $49,927 $34,134 $11,141 $45,300 Note D: In 1995, NYLIC and NYLIAC settled a class action suit related to the sale of whole life and universal life policies from 1982 through 1994. In connection with this and other litigation, after-tax provisions of $30 million and $45 million have been recorded in 1994 and 1995, respectively. Also in 1995, NYLIC's investment in NYLIFE Inc. was reduced by $90 million after tax to reflect the potential discontinuance of NYLIFE Inc.'s proprietary partnership operations and certain claims made in connection therewith. Note E: In December 1993, NYLIC issued Surplus Notes with a principal balance of $450,000,000: $150,000,000, 6.40% Surplus Note, due 2003 and $300,000,000, 7.50% Surplus Note, due 2023. The Notes do not repay principal prior to maturity. Other adjustments in the Statement of Operations and Surplus include principally the effects of the following (in millions): Chart for Note E: Year ended December 31, 1995 Year ended December 31, 1994 NYLIC NYLIAC Consolidated NYLIC NYLIAC Consolidated Increase in non-admitted assets $(75) $(3) $(77) $(29) $(6) $(35) Cumulative effect of change in accounting for equity base tax (80) (18) (98) -- -- -- Reserve adjustments (200) (14) (214) 7 -- 7 Changes in separate account surplus -- 10 10 1 (2) (1) Decrease (Increase) in liability for federal income taxes of prior years 3 (3) -- 31 5 36 Dividends to stockholder -- -- -- -- (70) -- Other -- -- -- 41 -- 41 Total $(352) $(28) $(379) $51 $(73) $48 REPORT OF INDEPENDENT ACCOUNTANTS ON CONDENSED FINANCIAL INFORMATION To the Board of Directors and Policyowners of New York Life Insurance Company We have audited the consolidated statement of financial position of New York Life Insurance Company and its subsidiaries, the unconsolidated statements of financial position of New York Life Insurance Company and of New York Life Insurance and Annuity Corporation as of December 31, 1995 and 1994. We have also audited the related statements of operations, of changes in surplus and of cash flows (which are not presented herein) for the years then ended. Our audits were conducted in accordance with generally accepted auditing standards and in our reports dated February 16, 1996 we expressed unqualified opinions on those financial statements. In our opinion, the information set forth in the accompanying condensed financial statements, when read in conjunction with the financial statements from which it has been derived, is fairly stated in all material respects in relation thereto. 1177 Avenue of the Americas New York, NY 10036 February 16, 1996 Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-150IA046-000816-B017-275http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/nyl_of2.html 207.121.184.160 19970119014919 text/html 10668HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 01:48:26 GMTContent-type: text/html Office Finder Results ERROR: Designated state required Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-151IA046-000816-B017-312http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/bfgwos.html 207.121.184.160 19970119014936 text/html 10729HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 01:48:42 GMTContent-type: text/html Outsourcing Your Employee Benefits:  Pension and Health Care Outsourcing Your Employee Benefits: Pension and HealthCare "I felt like a rat caught in a maze," Frank recalled with a chuckle. He had retired lastyear after threedecades of loyal service with the same company. His benefit records haven't been rightsince. According to Frank's own notes, he was once transferred six times during a single phone call.. . afterwhich he was disconnected. He was told twice that there was no record of him on file; oncethat he wasdeceased; and more than a dozen times that never-received forms were about to be -- oralready hadbeen -- mailed to him. Sound familiar? The pension, health and other benefit programs for some companies are oftenlikeFrank's maze. Thanks to a do-it-yourself patchwork design, even routine administrative tasks- such asa marital name change or change of address - can involve days of telephone tag, followed bymonths ofstraightening out incorrect and incomplete records. That's just one reason thousands of companies have begun "outsourcing" their benefitsservices tospecialists such as New York Life Benefit Services Company. Since 1970, New York Life BenefitServicesCompany has been providing consulting, actuarial, administrative and communication servicesin thefield of employee benefits, retirement plans and related areas. Outsourcing, as the name implies, moves all or many aspects of yourcompany's benefit supervision to a benefit services company that focuses on providing justthoseservices. They do what they do best, and allow you to do the same. Outsourcing businesses have found that plan participants can update records for such "lifeevents" asmarriage, divorce, sick leave, return to work, birth or death in the family and retirement,in a few minutes.. . often with just one toll-free telephone call. They also receive convenient, one-stop service for their total benefit packages. Just asimportant, theyhave found that they can now dedicate all their resources to their own core businessactivities, and nothave to focus on benefit services. What types of services can you obtain from an outsourcing firm such as New York Life BenefitServicesCompany? Underwriting analysis and plan design. A full-service approachto outsourcing encourages continuity of service and pro-active consulting, starting with comprehensiveplandesign based on your company's unique needs. Legal, compliance and government reporting services. This caninclude information updates, legal interpretation of IRS regulations, preparation of forms and help in meeting COBRA and other compliance requirements. Full service administration. This can include such actuarialservices as valuations and calculation, as well as participant tracking and database management, termination processing, preparation and filing of government reports, trust services andmanagement, benefit payment and disbursement monitoring. Investment services for retirement packages. These include notonly New York Life investment options, but also a full spectrum of mutual funds from other leading fund families. Participant communications. A quality outsource vendor helpsyou "sell" your benefits packages through custom video programs, information handbooks, personalized benefit statements, newsletters and other support materials. Should your company consider outsourcing its benefit services? Yes, if you are interestedin learningabout: Opportunities to save time and money, especially on human resource personnel costsdevoted to recordkeeping and administration; Opportunities to provide efficient, convenient service to participants and sponsors; Opportunities to access administrative and recordkeeping technology that could be tooexpensive to duplicate internally; Opportunities to refocus our company's resources to maintain a competitive edge initscore business. Recommendation: Find out if outsourcing is the best-choice decision for your company. A good place to start: New York Life Benefit Services Company. Since 1970, NYLBShas taken afull-service, integrated approach to all aspects of benefit plans. . . from defined benefitpensions tohealth and welfare services. New York Life Benefit Services Company is a subsidiary of New York Life Insurance Company. NewYorkLife, founded in 1845 is one of the oldest and most respected life insurers in the U.S. How should you select your company's outsourcing vendor? There are some questions to ask: How solid is the company's reputation? Find out what other clients have to say aboutthem. Is the company committed to investing in technology? Benefit services is technologically driven. The firm's expertise in this area, aswell as itscommitment to investing in technology, are key factors in cost savings and responsive service. What is the company's attitude toward its own people? A positive corporate cultureis a good indication of the type of customer service your employees willexperience. Are they committed to their own employees' ongoing training? Do they treat their clients as partners and not just as customers? Do they demonstrate a strong commitment to service? Are they experienced in the benefit services field? It takes years of industryinvolvement todevelop the necessary expertise. New York Life Benefit Services Click here to get in touch with New York Life Benefit Services. Be sure to bookmark thispage so youcan return after exploring New York Life Benefit Services Web site. What is Your Business Worth?|Keeping Your Business in the Family|Taking Care of Business with Split-Dollar Life Insurance Outsourcing Your Employee Benefits: Pension and Health Care|The Advantages of a Bundled 401(k) Plan Can YouAfford Not to Have a Health Care Plan for Your Business?|ThreeDemographic Trends Reshaping The Workforce Securities offered through NYLIFE Securities Inc. (Member NASD) New York Life Insurance Company New York Life Insurance and Annuity Corporation (A Delaware Corporation) NYLIFE Securities Inc. & NYLIFE Distributors Inc. (Members NASD) 51 Madison Avenue, New York, NY 10010 Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-152IA046-000816-B017-349http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/pfwhpl.html 207.121.184.160 19970119014951 text/html 11978HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 01:48:59 GMTContent-type: text/html Permanent Life Insurance Permanent Life Insurance Good Property to Own When building for your family's financial future, a permanent life insurancepolicycanprovide a solidfoundation. Living the "American Dream" has been a goal for generations. Thelovingfamily,thebeautiful home ... this is the stuff dreams are made of. But protecting yourdreamsandcaring for lovedones goes back a lot further than the "American Dream" - those intentionsareprobably asoldasmankind itself. Providing for your family's financial well-being meansputtingtogether acomprehensiveprogram that will take care of today's needs, as well as plan for tomorrow.Thiscustomizedplan mightinclude a mix of bank accounts, health insurance, life insurance, annuities,mutualfunds,and an IRA.When considering the need for life insurance, it's wise to take a close lookat theadvantages ofpermanent life insurance. This type of policy not only offers financialprotectiontosurvivors but can alsobenefit a family during the insured's lifetime. Why Permanent Life Insurance is Unique Whole life is the traditional form of permanent life insurance. It is justthat -permanent -you'reinsured for your entire life, provided, of course, that you continue to paypremiums. Yourcoverage cannever be canceled, and the premiums are fixed - they can never be increased.It isalso afeature-rich,customizable plan that can be tailored to suit you and your family's needs. How Permanent Life Insurance Helps Beneficiaries To many, the primary reason for having life insurance is to protect theirfamily'sfinancialfuture. Shouldthe insured die, life insurance helps pay off mortgages, fund collegeeducations,take careof finalexpenses, offset the loss of the insured's income and allows a family tocontinueitsstandard of living.In most cases, insurance proceeds pass to beneficiaries free of probatecosts,legal fees,localinheritance tax, and federal income tax. To the extent permitted by statelaw,insurancebenefits areprotected from claims of the insured's creditors. Benefits are generallypaidpromptly tobeneficiariesthrough a convenient, interest earning, no-fee checking account. Or if youprefer,you candesignate apayment method in advance, choosing from a variety of settlement optionsthat offerperiodicpaymentsuntil the proceeds are paid in full. Not only does permanent life insuranceoffer aguaranteed paymentto beneficiaries at the death of the insured, but it also provides importantbenefits duringyour lifetime. Benefits of Permanent Life Insurance During YourLifetime Unlike term life insurance, permanent life insurance is a value builder.Bothguaranteedvalues andnon-guaranteed values build up, tax deferred, over the years, and you canput themto workfor you in anumber of ways. Accumulation of cash values - A permanent life insurancepolicybuildsguaranteed cash value as youpay your premiums when due. These values are further enhanced since taxes onthemoney'sgrowthare deferred. This cash value can be accessed through a valuable loanprovision. Tapping into your cash values - You can borrow from yourpolicy'saccumulatedcash value by taking aloan at competitive interest rates. You can use these funds any way you wish- makea downpaymenton a home, finance a new car, or even start a business (the J.C. Penney andDisneyempireswerestarted with loans from life insurance policies). The loan privilege is avaluablefeature ofpermanent lifeinsurance, but keep in mind that borrowing against your policy's valuereduces yourinsuranceprotection. In addition, any time you take money out of an insurance policy,youmay besubject to stateand federal taxes. It may be advisable to borrow only with the intention ofrepaying yourloan in full.Insurance companies offer several convenient repayment methods to restoreyourpolicy'sfullvalue. Eligible for dividends - As "participating" insurance, apermanentpolicy iseligible for dividends if andwhen the company declares them. Each year, insurers determine how muchincomeneedsto beretained to build surplus. The remaining balance, if any, is returned topolicyowners in theform ofdividends. As they are considered returned premiums, dividends are nottaxable.Youcanuseyourdividends in a number of ways. Options include: leaving them on deposit withthe insurancecompanyto earn interest; using them to purchase additional insurance coverage;applyingthem topayall or partof your premium; or taking them as cash. Unlike cash value, dividends arenotguaranteed. The Flexibility of Permanent Life Insurance As needs change, a permanent policy can be modified to reflect thosechanges.Mostinsurancecompanies make a wide range of optional benefits and riders available thatyou mayadd toyour policyto enhance your existing coverage, extend coverage to family members, andhelpoutindifficult times.Additional underwriting may be required to add benefits or riders. Enhancing your coverage - Along with the additionalcoverageavailablethroughdividend options, youcan increase your protection by adding a low-cost term insurance rider toyourpolicy. Anaccidentaldeath benefit provision can also be added, which doubles the insuranceproceeds iftheinsured diesas a result of an accident. With an OPP (Option to Purchase Paid-upadditions)rider, youmayadd,within limits, extra money to your policy to provide additional deathbenefits andincreasecash value ona tax-deferred basis. Extending coverage to family members - You may add aspouseand children'sinsurance rider toprotect those loved ones with term insurance. With a children's insurancerider,they will becoveredwith term insurance, and be guaranteed the right to purchase permanent lifeinsurance, inspecifiedamounts at specified times, as they grow up. Help in difficult times - With a waiver of premium rider,premiumsare paidbythe company during aperiod of disability, as defined in the rider. Cash value, dividends, anddeathbenefit growas if you werestill paying premiums. An automatic premium loan feature prevents yourpolicy fromlapsingshould youmiss a premium payment. If cash value is sufficient, it uses those values topaythe premium.New YorkLife now offers a living benefits rider, which pays a benefit should theinsuredbecometerminally ill.New York Life also pioneered the unemployment rider1. This provision waives one annual premiumshould the policyowner become unemployed for a predetermined period of time. Build Your House on a Sound Foundation When evaluating your family's financial needs, it's important not tooverlook lifeinsurance.A permanentlife insurance policy is a unique, highly flexible financial product thatcanprovide peaceof mind, as wellas help you meet important needs during your lifetime. It can be the soundfoundation uponwhich youbuild your financial house. In fact, it may actually help you purchase arealhouse! A lifeinsurance policycan be used as collateral for a loan or mortgage. It can also help establisha goodcreditrating. Inaddition, accumulated cash values can be borrowed to make a down payment onthatdreamhome. Whole Life Insurance For more information on whole life insurance offered by the New York LifeInsuranceCompany, click on this link. Life Insurance Calculator|Permanent Life Insurance Term vs. Permanent Life Insurance|What To Do When Someone Dies 1Theunemploymentrider is not available in all states. Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-153IA046-000816-B018-8http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/pfpiip.html 207.121.184.160 19970119015031 text/html 4840HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 01:49:41 GMTContent-type: text/html Personal Investing - Choosing the Right Investment Product Choosing the Right Investment Product Major events, such as buying a home, having children, sending your children to college, or startingtoplan for your retirement, may lie ahead. Of course, not every milestone is a major one. You may justwant to redecorate your living room or increase the amount you set aside each month. In any case, it isbest to start investing as soon as possible. For more specific information about the types ofinvestments you might consider, click on the links below. MainStay Mutual Funds New York Life Annuities MainStay 401(k) IRA Rollover Investment Tips|Investment Issues|Choosing the Right InvestmentProduct Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-154IA046-000816-B018-42http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/pfrpri.html 207.121.184.160 19970119015051 text/html 5698HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 01:49:59 GMTContent-type: text/html Retirement Issues Retirement Issues Retiring Parents: Are theyprepared? If your parents are nearing their retirement years, are they adequately prepared? If not, theburden of supporting them may fall on your shoulders. Find out what steps you cantake tohelp them prepare. Six Myths That Can Rob You of Your Retirement Plans IRAs: Still One of the Best Ways to Save Life Insurance for RetirementPlanning As you plan for retirement, life insurance is a consideration that cannot beoverlooked. Clickon this link to find out how you can maintain a life insurance policy during yourretirementyears and why you should. Long Term Care A retirement nest egg can be wiped out by both inflation and illness. Find outwhat you cando to protect yourself or your parents, if they are nearing retirement. Click onthis link to findout what the issues are. Your Spouse and Your Pension If you expect to receive a pension at retirement, you must also decide how you wantit paidout. You want to receive enough to maintain an adequate lifestyle, but you alsodon't wantto expose your spouse to unneccesary financial burden if you die. Find out how youcanmaximize your pension and your spouse's financial security. Why Retirement Planning is So Important|Fulfilling Your Retirement Goals|Retirement Issues|Choosing the Right Products Retirement Planning Calculator|Personal RetirementStrategies Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-155IA046-000816-B018-114http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/pfrpriis.html 207.121.184.160 19970119015152 text/html 9158HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 01:51:00 GMTContent-type: text/html Retiring Parents: Are they prepared? Retiring Parents: Are theyprepared? Many people face their parents' retirement and aging without a second thought,assuming thatMomand Dad are in good financial shape and ready for the golden years. Making thisassumptioncan be aserious mistake. You and your folks may think they are adequately prepared forretirement,but how fardown the road have they looked? With average life expectancy increasing, it's not uncommon for people to live 10 to20 years,or longer,after retiring. A great deal can happen in that time, and life's events don'talways workout as planned. Culprits such as inflation and illness can wipe out a nest egg and undermine thefinancialindependence of even the best-prepared retiree. Inflation and Illness Can Turn a Nest Egg into a Goose Egg Inflation can seriously erode money's purchasing power over time. Even with a lowinflationrate of 4%,retirees at age 60 with an income of $2,500/month will have the purchasing power of$1,388/month bythe time they're 75 years old. In other words, the standard of living will bevirtuallyhalved in just 15years. Many retirees today find themselves searching for part-time jobs, in orderto keep upwith therising cost of living. But no one can work forever. And, in mere months, majorillness canwipe out anest egg that took years to build. According to the Abstract of the United States, 45% of an individual's lifetimemedicalexpenses areincurred during a final illness. That's only half the story. Research figurespublished bythe NewEngland Journal Of Medicine indicate that 43% of those who turned age 65 in 1990will enter anursinghome at some time during their lifetime. As people get older, the probabilityincreases. With nursinghome costs averaging more than $30,000 a year, it's not uncommon for retirees to bereducedtopoverty. When retirees' savings are depleted, it adversely affects the next generation, too- usuallyat the worstpossible time. Frequently, adult children of senior citizens are working to providefor theirownhouseholds and futures. Too often, they become saddled with the cost of supportingtheirparentswhile still trying to meet their own household expenses. It's a tough balancingact. Plan in Advance As an adult son or daughter, you must get involved with your parents' financialaffairs, andthe soonerthe better. Start with a meeting of the generations to discuss everyone's plans,wishes, andconcerns. Here are some topics to tackle, and questions to ask: Will your parents' retirement funds be adequate? Inflation and longer lifeexpectancies maymake retirement costlier than they've anticipated. What supplemental funds areavailable? Who will manage your parents' finances if they cannot? Discuss long-termfinancialplans, thelocation of records, and the possibility of establishing a contingent power ofattorney tostep in and helpduring an emergency. What are your parents' estate plans? When and how will they distributetheir property,especiallyif they become incapacitated? Are there any charitable endeavors or causes theywish tocontribute to? Do they have updated wills and an executor who knows their wishes? Are your parents' risk management programs adequate? Without adequatehealth coverage,asingle illness could wipe out an otherwise ideal retirement plan. (Some childrencost-sharetheirparents' premiums for Medicare Supplemental or Long Term Care insurance. They seeit as awiseinvestment in their parents' future.) What about life insurance? Do your parents have special medical requests, such as living wills,trusts, lifetimegifts, etc.? Where would they want to live, if incapacitated? (You may wish to discuss nursinghome and homehealth careoptions.) Problem Generally, parents and children feel uncomfortable discussing these matters. It'simportantto do thisin a way that puts both generations at ease. One solution is to bring in theservices of aprofessional -such as an insurance agent - who knows about retirement and estate conservationissues andwhocan serve as an objective and knowledgeable source of information for thatdiscussion. Choosing the Right Products Consult this link to find out about various investment and insurance products you and yourparents should consider to ensure they are well prepared for retirement. Retiring Parents: Are they prepared?|Six Myths That Can Rob You of Your Retirement Plans|IRAs: Still One of the Best Ways to Save Life Insurance for Retirement Planning|Long Term Care|Your Spouse and Your Pension Securities offered through NYLIFE Securities Inc.(Member NASD), New York Life Insurance Company,New York Life Insurance and Annuity Corporation(A Delaware Corporation)NYLIFE Securities Inc. & NYLIFE Distributors Inc.(Members NASD),51 Madison Avenue, New York, New York 10010 Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-156IA046-000816-B018-152http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/pfpitprr.html 207.121.184.160 19970119015214 text/html 11027HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 01:51:15 GMTContent-type: text/html Risk & Return Risk vs Return You Can't Have One Without The Other Risk - Just the thought of it can give investors sleepless nights. However, through careful planning for your financial future, you can help manage risk. Risk is something you encounter everyday. Even crossing a busy street involves somerisk.Withinvestments, balancing risk and return can be a tricky operation. All investorswant tomaximize theirreturn, while minimizing risk. Let's face it, putting your hard earned dollars onthe linecan be downrightfrightening. Some investments are certainly more "risky" than others, but no investment is riskfree.Trying to avoidrisk by not investing at all can be the riskiest move of all. That would be likestanding atthe curb, neversetting foot into the street. You'll never be able to get to your destination ifyou don'taccept some risk. Ininvesting, just like crossing that street, you carefully consider the situation,accept acomfortable level ofrisk, and proceed to where you're going. Risk can never be eliminated, but it canbe managed.Let'stake a look at the different types of risk, how different asset categories perform,and theways andmeans to help manage risk. Types of Risk When most people think of "risk" they translate it as loss of principal. However,there aremany kinds ofrisk. Let's take a look at some of them: Capital Risk - Losing your invested monies. Inflationary Risk - Investment's rate of return doesn't keeppace withinflation rate. Interest Rate Risk - A drop in an investment's interest rate. Market Risk - Selling an investment at an unfavorable price. Liquidity Risk - Limitations on the availability of funds fora specificperiodof time. Legislative Risk - Changes in tax laws may make certaininvestments less advantageous. Default Risk - The failure of the institution where aninvestment ismade. How Do Different Assets Perform? It may seem that there are countless types of investment products to choose frombut,basically, thereare three types of core investments: cash (or cash equivalents), bonds, and stocks. Cash - Investments such as bank savings and checking accounts,Certificatesof Deposit (CDs), andTreasury Bills. The prices generally don't fluctuate very much. To investorsconcerned withloss ofcapital risk, cash would appear to be the most secure choice, as principal isguaranteedand/orinsured. Savings and checking accounts are highly liquid, as they can be readilyconvertedinto cash.With CDs, you may face liquidity risk, as they must be held for a predeterminedperiod oftime or may besubject to penalties for premature withdrawal. Although risk to principal may beminimal,loss ofpurchasing power, or inflationary risk, must be taken into consideration. Wheninflation andtaxation aretaken into account, returns can be considerably lower. Hypothetically, let's say in1981 youearned 14%in an investment. It sounds astronomical; however, the inflation rate at one pointthat yearsoared to15%. That's a net loss of value of at least 1% - and that's before taxes takeanother bite. The Consumer Price Index (CPI) measures a representative sample ofgoods andservices purchasedby American consumers. It is generally considered a primary measure of inflation.T-Bills arerepresented by the Salomon 1-3 year Treasury Index. It is an unmanaged indexgenerallyconsideredrepresentative of the U.S. short-term bond market. Bonds are represented by theSalomon HighGradeLong-Term Corporate Bond Index. It is a bond market indicator comprised of about800 bondswithmaturities of 12 years or more rated AA or AAA. Stocks are represented by S&P 500StockIndex, aregistered trademark of Standard & Poor's Corp. The Salomon and S&P Indexes areunmanaged anddo not include any charges or expenses that you may incur as a direct investor ofthesesecurities. Pastperformance is no indication of future results. Bonds - Commonly called "fixed income investments," they arebasically loansor "IOUs." Interest isearned on the money you lend. The prices of bonds do move up and down, but normallynot asmuchas stocks. Many people think of bonds as conservative investments, but the returnscan have ahighdegree of volatility. The fluctuation of interest rates is called interest raterisk, and adownturn in thebond prices could significantly decrease the overall return of any particular bond. Stocks - Represent equity in, or partial ownership of, acompany.An easywayto remember thedifference between stocks and bonds is: "With stocks, you own. With bonds, youloan." Theprice of astock or share can move up or down, sometimes a lot. The returns of stocks fromyear to yearcan bequite volatile, but, as the graph illustrates, the returnsfrom stockshavesignificantly outpaced inflation, and topped the returns from cash and bonds aswell, overthis twenty-year period. Finding Your Comfort Zone It's possible to achieve higher returns through stocks rather than bonds, andthrough bondsrather thanthrough cash, but you can't expect to get higher returns without taking on somedegree ofunpredictability. If you seek higher returns, you have to be willing to live withhigherrisk. "How much riskis right for me?" The answer will affect your investment decisions. Although pastperformanceis not aguarantee of what will happen in the future, historical results over a long periodof timecan help youmake your investment decisions. The Ways to Manage Risk There are a number of strategies that can help limit risk while offering thepotential ofhigher returns. Diversification - Investing in a variety of investments, orsimplyfollowingthe oldadage "Don't put allyour eggs in one basket." With a portfolio spread among several differentinvestments, youbenefit wheneach type is doing well, and also limit exposure when one or more investment isperformingpoorly. Asset Allocation - Building upon the diversification concept,withassetallocation you create acustomized portfolio consisting of several asset categories (cash, stocks, bonds)rather thanindividualsecurities. Changing economic conditions affect various types of assetsdifferently;consequently, eachasset category's return may partially offset the others'. Dollar Cost Averaging - Systematically investing a fixeddollaramount atregular time intervals. Whenthis disciplined program is adhered to and market fluctuations are ignored, itattempts to"smooth out"the ups and downs of the market over the long haul. Dollar cost averaging, however,cannotguaranteea positive return in a declining market and you must consider your ability tocontinueinvesting on aregular basis under all market conditions. The Means to Manage Risk Most investors find it difficult to diversify effectively across the full spectrumof cashand individual stocksand bonds. That is why so many investors have chosen variable products to apply thestrategiespreviously mentioned. Mutual funds, variable annuities, and variable universal lifeinsuranceproducts offer the potential for maximizing investmentperformance,investment flexibility, and convenience. They allow you to allocate investmentsamong s WT02-B28-157IA046-000816-B018-189http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/new_book.html 207.121.184.160 19970119015233 text/html 4020HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 01:51:39 GMTContent-type: text/html Save Page Confirmation You have saved the following page as a bookmark to your Personal Folder. Must be logged in to bookmark To get back to your Personal Page, Click on your name or the "Personal Folder" button. Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-158IA046-000818-B017-22http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/psinania.html 207.121.184.160 19970119015328 text/html 10023HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 01:52:20 GMTContent-type: text/html Single Premium Immediate Annuity (SPIA) Single Premium Immediate Annuity (SPIA) Income You Can't Outlive People are living longer and longer these days, but they haven't always made sure that theyhave thefinancial resources for an extended lifetime. New York Life's SPIA is a product that cantake away these worries. Here's how it works: you give New York Life a one-time premiumpayment,and in return you'll receive a steady stream of income payments for the rest of your life, nomatter howlong you live - guaranteed. SPIA gives you more security than a typical savings account, which you continuously drawupon, hopingit will last your entire lifetime. SPIA doesn't have an account value you can access, but theincome youreceive from New York Life's SPIA is guaranteed never to run out. That's something asavings accountcan't offer you. And SPIA also offers you alternatives that can provide a lifetime income forboth you andyour spouse or provide income to your loved ones if you die prematurely. Your SPIA income is a fixed amount of money based on your age, your gender, the amountof yourpremium payment, and the frequency with which you receive your income payments:monthly, quarterly,semi-annually, or annually. We can send your payments directly to you or, if you'd like, wecan evenhave them deposited directly into your bank account. Best of all, SPIA is guaranteed by New York Life Insurance Company. Safe From Market Fluctuations In addition to providing a guaranteed lifetime income, SPIA can also take away some of theworry aboutmanaging your money. Unlike income from stocks and bonds, your SPIA payments won't beaffectedby market swings. No matter what happens in the financial markets, you'll keep receiving your money from NewYork Life. Tax-Qualified Money, Too1 If you have money tucked away in tax-qualified plans, such as an IRA or 401(k) plan, thatmoney willbecome taxable once you receive it. Not only could that extra money throw you into ahigher taxbracket,it could even subject up to 85% of your Social Security benefits to taxation. But by putting that money into New York Life's SPIA and spreading your receipt of it overseveral years,you may avoid having that extra income put you into a higher bracket. You may even beable to prevent(or limit) the taxation of your Social Security benefits. Furthermore, if you place tax-qualified money in SPIA, you might not have to worry abouthow to satisfythe Internal Revenue Services' Required Minimum Distribution (RMD) requirements -because yourSPIA could automatically satisfy them. This is important, because the IRS imposes severepenalties ifthese requirements aren't met. Maximize Your Income You can receive the highest income for your premium amount, gender, and age if you selectour "lifeonly" SPIA. It guarantees that New York Life will pay you regularly for the rest of your life. Upon yourdeath, payments will cease. Protect Your Spouse Sometimes, income for one life isn't enough. Many couples want to make sure that theyhave enoughincome to last for both of their lifetimes. If you select a Joint & Survivor SPIA, you will receivepaymentsfor as long as either one of you is alive. This way, both you and your spouse will beprotected againstoutliving the savings you've amassed together. Provide For Your Beneficiaries None of us like to think that if we were to die shortly after giving a lot of money to aninsurance company,that money would be completely lost. New York Life offers alternatives to prevent this: Guaranteed Period Certain SPIA: With this SPIA, you choose a minimum period of timeduringwhich you will receive payments: either 5, 10, 15, or 20 years from the date that youpurchased yourSPIA policy. If you die before this guaranteed number of years has passed, New York Lifewill continuesending your payments to your chosen beneficiary(ies) for the duration of the guaranteeperiod.2 Guaranteed Total Amount SPIA: With this SPIA, New York Life guarantees to pay you atleast theamount of your original SPIA premium payment. If you die before the total money you'vereceivedequals the amount of your original premium payment, New York Life will continue to payyour chosenbeneficiary(ies) until the total amount paid to you and your beneficiaries matches your initialpremium. This way, you and your beneficiaries will at least "get back what you paid in." Of course, no matter which type of SPIA you choose, New York Life will keep paying you aslong as youlive. But these additional alternatives enable you to make sure that your money will gotoward providingfor your needs or those of your loved ones. These alternative SPIAs can also help ease the burden on your beneficiaries if you diebefore all of theguaranteed payments have been made. That's because New York Life's payments godirectly to yourbeneficiaries, unlike many other assets that may get tied up in probate. Your SPIA paymentscould behelpful to your beneficiaries at a very difficult time. 1Please discuss all matters relating totaxationwith your ownprofessional tax advisor. 2 If you choose a Joint & SurvivorSPIA, you mayelect a 10-yearor 20-year Period Certain or a Guaranteed Total Amount. The 5-year and 15-year PeriodCertainoptions are not available with a Joint & Survivor SPIA. Single Premium Retirement Annuity (SPRA2)|Single Premium Immediate Annuity (SPIA) What Exactly is an Annuity?|Fixed Rate Annuities |Variable Annuities Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-159IA046-000818-B017-65http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/psinsp.html 207.121.184.160 19970119015406 text/html 10861HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 01:52:56 GMTContent-type: text/html Single Premium Life Insurance:  One Payment, Many Benefits Single Premium Life Insurance: One Payment, Many Benefits Single Premium Life Insurance can provide the vital financial protection of life insurance andbe animportant source of capital, in a convenient "pay one time" package. SPL - A Unique Concept The Single Premium Life (SPL) Insurance concept is simple and straightforward: you pay asinglelump sum ($5,000 or more) for a paid-up, cash value life insurance policy. SPL can providethefinancial security that people seek from life insurance, along with an attractive means ofaccumulatingfunds for retirement or other long-term financial needs. SPL offers: A death benefit free from federal income tax (in some states it may also be freefrom statedeath tax, probate expense, and the claims of creditors). A competitive interest rate credited to the policy's cash value. Tax-deferred accumulation of the policy's cash value. The ability to access cash values through policy loans. The convenience of paying just one premium for a paid-up policy. "A Souped-Up Annuity"? No, SPL is not an annuity, even though many industry experts feel that it may be moreappropriate tocompare SPL to annuities than to traditional life insurance. SPL and single premiumdeferredannuities (SPDA) have many similarities: a single premium payment, tax-free accumulationof cashvalue, identical tax rules governing loans, and a guaranteed death benefit. But there arekeydifferences. The death benefit of SPL is usually a good deal larger than that of acomparable SPDA; infact, by tax law, the SPL death benefit must be considerably larger than its cash value. Also,in mostinstances, the death benefit of the SPL is free from federal income tax, while thebeneficiaries ofannuities incur taxable income on the gain in the contract. A Brief History of SPL In the mid-1980s, insurance companies introduced the innovative SPL policy designed tomaximizethree tax advantages of life insurance: generally no federal income tax on the death benefit,tax-deferredaccumulation of cash value, and tax-free borrowing from that cash value. Theseadvantages, along withcompetitive interest rates on the policy's cash value, made SPL a very popular product withsavvyconsumers. In 1988, Congress enacted legislation that affected the tax treatment of some life insurancepolicies,including SPL. It is now technically classified as a Modified Endowment Contract, whicheliminates thetax-free loan feature. Now, when you borrow from an SPL policy, it results in a taxabledistribution. Thelesser of the loan or gain is reported as a taxable gain. In addition, the IRS imposes a 10%penalty taxon the taxable gain distributed before the policy owner is age 59 1/2. To Whom is SPL Best Suited? While SPL is available to most ages (0 to 85), it can be a key part of the portfolio of mature,fairly affluentpre-retirees. It provides financial security and the potential for long-term capital growth. Under its current tax treatment, SPL may not be the mostappropriate productfor people with a need for current income. For those seeking tax-free policy loans as a toppriority in alife insurance product, a traditional permanent policy may be a better choice. With SPL, it isbest torestrict borrowing until after age 59 1/2, at which point the penalty tax would not apply. The Many Uses of SPL Providing a degree of financial security for yourself and your family remains a primaryadvantage of anSPL policy. SPL allows for only a single premium payment and generates an increasingdeath benefit. Beneficiaries of SPLproceedsreceive their funds free of federal income tax. Those funds can be used to pay off mortgagesand otherdebts, fund children's or grandchildren's educations, take care of final expenses, offset theloss of theinsured's income, and allow a family to continue its standard of living. To the extentpermitted by law,insurance proceeds are protected from the claims of the insured's creditors. Below areother benefitsand uses of an SPL policy: A Source of Retirement Income - Tax-deferred cash valueaccumulation can beconsiderable over the long-term. You can tap into that cash value through the valuable loanprovision tohelp fund a comfortable retirement. Since most policies will be classified as ModifiedEndowmentContracts, you would be taxed on these loans to the extent of gain in the policy, includingany unpaidloan interest. However, loans taken after age 59 1/2 would not be subject to the additional10% penaltyof the taxable amount. Outstanding loans are deducted from the death benefit. Gifts to Minors and Adults - A lasting legacy can be left to minorchildren andgrandchildren through the gifting of SPL. There is no gift tax due on SPL policies purchasedon achild'slife up to $10,000 of single premium. The children's parents should be made custodialowners of thepolicies. Parents can also make gifts to adult children. Using joint gifts or communityproperty gifts,parents can purchase SPL policies on each adult child for up to $20,000 with no gift taxconsequences. Withdrawals may be subject to a tax penalty if made before age 59 1/2. Charitable Giving Uses - Using an SPL policy, you can make alarger donationto your favorite charity. Over the long-term, SPL can multiply your single premium severaltimes over toprovide a generous donation to a worthwhile cause. Philanthropic bequests have becomeone of themost meaningful uses of life insurance. Lump-Sum Distribution Vehicle - If there's a substantial lump-sumdistributioncoming your way in the future, you might want to take a look at SPL. It can be a good placeto putinsurance proceeds, funds from the sale of a residence, an after tax distribution from aqualified plan,annual bonuses, or inherited funds. SPL is offered by New York Life Insurance and Annuity Corporation. For more information on SPL and its suitability to your needs, contact your New York Lifeagent. Whole Life|Modified Premium Whole Life|5 Year Term Insurance|Increasing Premium Term Insurance|Single Premium Life|Survivorship Whole Life|Employee's Whole Life|Employee's Adjustable Life|Universal Life*|Charitable Adjustable Life|Spectra Life|Variable Universal Life* ** Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-160IA046-000818-B017-111http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/psinanra.html 207.121.184.160 19970119015500 text/html 12697HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 01:53:47 GMTContent-type: text/html Single Premium Retirement Annuity (SPRA-2) Single Premium Retirement Annuity (SPRA-2) Are you concerned about having enough money when you eventually retire? Or, ifyou'vealready savedenough for your retirement, do you need a place to maintain that money until you'reready touse it? Aplace where that money can grow, tax-deferred? Either way, your New York Life agentmayhave theproduct for you: SPRA-2 (Single Premium Retirement Annuity), a competitive deferredannuity designedto satisfy your retirement needs. A Secure Retirement How will you spend your retirement years -financially secure, or struggling to meetbasicneeds? Evenif you haven't reached retirement, the time to begin shaping your financial futureis now. Adeferredannuity could provide you with the money you need, down the road. Or perhaps you're already retired. Are you tired of watching taxes eat away at theinterestyou earn onyour CDs? Are your earnings from CDs or other investments triggering taxes on yourSocialSecuritybenefits? A deferred annuity could provide the solution. If you're looking for a savings alternative that can take care of your financialneeds andperhaps evenprovide a legacy for your children or grandchildren, SPRA-21 may be the right choice for you. SPRA-2 allows your money to grow tax-deferred at competitive interest rates. AndSPRA-2'sliberalwithdrawal provisions offer you the flexibility to control your financialsituation. Later on, youcan evenuse the money you've accumulated to generate a retirement income you can'toutlive. The Power of Tax Deferral With SPRA-2, your money grows tax deferred -which means you won't pay taxes on yourmoney whileit's growing, only as you withdraw it.2Your money grows faster in SPRA-2 than it would in acomparable, currently-taxable investment -because in SPRA-2, money that otherwisewouldbe usedto pay taxes remains in the policy and earns interest, too. This graph illustrates how SPRA-2 can help your money grow faster. It charts thegrowth of atax-deferred vehicle at 8%, compared to a similar, currently-taxablevehicle.3 With SPRA-2, you can get more mileage out of money that's currently sitting in a CDor othercurrently-taxable investment. You can also use it to consolidate several smallerIRAs. And ifyou'reretiring, changing jobs, or if your company's pension plan is terminating, you cantakeadvantage ofSPRA-2 and continue growing your pension money in an IRA rollover. Competitive Rates, Plus First Year Enhancement SPRA-2 offers a competitive base interest rate and it also has a 1% interestenhancement on that rate for the first policyyear.4 Each year thereafter,on yourpolicy anniversary, you'll receive NYLIAC's competitive base interestrate. Historically, NYLIAC's base interest rate has been consistently higher thanthe averageone-yearCD rate5 and is guaranteednever to beless than 3%. And with SPRA-2, higher amounts earn evenhigher interest rates.6 Also,unlike manyfinancial alternatives, SPRA-2 doesn't have up-front salescharges or annual maintenance fees that can hinder your money's growth. Access To Your Money SPRA-2 is a product for building money over the long term, and withdrawals duringthe firsteight policyyears may be subject to a surrender charge as follows: Year 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 and later Surrender Charge7 7% 7% 7% 7% 6% 5% 4% 3% None However, emergencies do arise, so SPRA-2 has a 10% "window" that allows you to takeupto 10% ofyour money, each year, without any surrender charges. And after eight years, youcan takeout as muchmoney as you want, at any time, without any surrender charges.8 Compare this with a typical CD, where twenty yearsfromnow you'llstill face a penalty when you withdraw your money (except on the maturitydate).9 With SPRA-2, you can request withdrawals as often as you'd like. If you want steadypayments, we cansend your interest, your 10% window, or any other amount on a regular basis -monthly,quarterly,semi-annually, or annually.10 We caneven have it deposited directly into your bank account. Flexibility and Control Unlike many financial products, SPRA-2 offers you flexibility and control over whenyoureceive income-and when you pay taxes on it. You can wait until you're retired and in a lower taxbracketbefore youbegin to withdraw money. You can also spread your withdrawals over several years,to evenout yourtaxburden and avoid throwing yourself into a higher tax bracket or increasing thetaxation ofyour SocialSecurity benefits. With SPRA-2, you're in control. Of course, you should consultyourprofessional taxadvisor. Guaranteed Death Benefit If you die prematurely, the total accumulation value of your policy is paiddirectly to yournamedbeneficiary(ies), avoiding the costs and delays of probate. These funds couldprovidemuch-neededcomfort to your beneficiaries during a stressful time, when other monies may beunavailabletothem.11If your spouse is your primary beneficiary, he or she even has the option ofbecoming thenew owner ofthe annuity, and continuing to build your money, tax-deferred. 1 SPRA-2 is issued by New York LifeInsuranceand Annuity Corporation (A Delaware Corporation). Consult the contract or yourinsuranceagent for allterms and conditions. 2 Withdrawals prior to age 59 1/2 maybe subject toa10% early withdrawal penalty. 3 Accumulation values arepre-withdrawal. Amountswithdrawn may be subject to taxation. This graph is for illustration purposes onlyand is notintended toshow the actual rate of growth that will be experienced. 4 Three-year initial interest rate alsoavailable,except in New York. The 1% first-year interest rate bonus in only available topurchasers (upto age 85)electing a one-year initial interest rate guarantee. 5 Average one-year rate onCertificates ofDeposits, as published weekly in The Wall Street Journal. 6 Higher rates are based on youraccountbalance. Consult your agent for band breaks. 7 In Maryland and Pennsylvania,surrendercharges are 8%, 8%, 7%, 6%, 5%, 4%, 3%, 2%. 8 The 10% surrender charge-freewindow isbasedon the policy's cash accumulation value on the previous policy anniversary, andcovers allwithdrawalsmade during that policy year. Withdrawals in excess of the 10% window will incursurrendercharges. Allwithdrawals (even those not subject to surrender charges) may generate taxableincome. 9 Withdrawals prior to age 59 1/2 maybe subject toa 10% early withdrawal penalty. 10 Each withdrawal must be for atleast $100. 11 In many states, death benefits from a deffered annuity are excluded from the probate process, although such proceeds remain part of the deceased's taxable estate. Please consult your tax and legal advisors for the laws as they apply in your state. Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-161IA046-000818-B017-160http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/pfrpri6m.html 207.121.184.160 19970119015522 text/html 8998HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 01:54:30 GMTContent-type: text/html Six Myths That Can Rob You Of Your Retirement Plans Six Myths That Can Rob You Of Your RetirementPlans Like many people, you may have thought about retirement planning without actuallydoing as much asyou'd like to do - at least not yet. Even if you have been financially preparingand have amassed whatyou think is an adequate retirement income, think again. Often, people will basetheir retirementestimates on several mistaken, but commonly-held, assumptions regarding retirementand whatvariousresources will provide. In many cases, the reality of retirement turns out to bequite different from whatthese common "retirement myths" would lead one to believe. 1. Myth: I'll have Social Security to support me. Reality: Wrong. Social Security was never designed to cover income needs, butrather tosupplement your pension and personal savings. Here's an idea of what you canexpect from SocialSecurity: if your annual earnings are $25,000, $40,000, $60,000, Social Securitycan provide 50%,27%, 23% of your annual income, respectively. At least, that's what you can expect if you retire now. However, some experts haveestimated that by thetime today's working baby boomers are ready to retire next century, there may notbe enough people leftin the work force to fully fund Social Security benefits. That's all the morereason to look into building upyour retirement savings. 2. Myth: My living costs will be lower when I retire, so I'll need lessmoney. Reality: Many times, just the opposite is true. The only costs that may endare mortgage paymentsand the college tuition you may now be paying. Health care costs could rise,especially if you no longerhave employer-sponsored medical/dental coverage. Also, many retirees frequentlyeat out, which couldincrease food bills. And you'll probably want to pursue your favorite hobbies,recreational activities, and"dream" vacations. 3. Myth: I'll have my company pension to tide me over. Reality: Don't count on a pension as your main source of income. Most defined benefit plans are geared toward providing a replacement ratio of between 40% - 60%of your finalaverage salary. This amount generally will be paid only if the employee has 25 ormore years of servicewith the employer. Also, defined benefit pensions are often reduced for paymentsto Social Security. Under typical circumstances, the actual replacement ratio can drop to between 20%and 30% of thefinal average salary for a rank-and-file employee. Naturally, each situation is different for each person. But many retirees havemade the mistake ofcounting on their pension, only to have to find part-time jobs to pay the bills. With the right planning, thiswon't happen to you. 4. Myth: I'm too old to begin planning for retirement now. Reality: Not true. Maybe you can't make up for lost time and opportunity butit's never too late tostart saving. Someone who takes early retirement at age 55 may still be goingstrong after 30 years. So, while you'll have to contribute more to your retirement savings account than ifyou had startedearlier, you can still be ready for your retirement - if you start now, and do whatneeds to be done. 5. Myth: The equity in my home is my retirement fund. Reality: While a house may be your largest investment, residential real estatedoes not alwaysappreciate. Even when home prices do rise, they usually increase along with allother living expenses. Even if you sell and move to a smaller home, you may wind up with far less money,after paying capitalgains taxes, than you expected. And, when all your savings have been depleted, youcan't sell yourhouse, piece by piece, in order to eat. That's why it's important to have liquidassets that will be therewhen you need them. 6. Myth: My main goal should be to preserve my savings. Reality: Inflation is a money-killer, and it will deplete your principal. Tostay ahead of inflation, youshouldn't seek to preserve money, but to build on it. Did you know that aretirement income of $20,000in 1970 would have to increase to $67,000 in 1990 to have the same purchasingpower? A solidfinancial plan allows your assets to grow, so that you can keep up with the risingcost of living. Retiring Parents: Are they prepared?|Six Myths That Can Rob You of Your Retirement Plans|IRAs: Still One of the Best Ways to Save Life Insurance for Retirement Planning|Long Term Care|Your Spouse and Your Pension Securities offered through NYLIFE Securities Inc.(Member NASD), New York Life Insurance Company,New York Life Insurance and Annuity Corporation(A Delaware Corporation)NYLIFE Securities Inc. & NYLIFE Distributors Inc.(Members NASD),51 Madison Avenue, New York, New York, 10010 Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-162IA046-000818-B017-183http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/pfrpimso.html 207.121.184.160 19970119015539 text/html 9550HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 01:54:45 GMTContent-type: text/html Sooner Than You Think Sooner Than You Think Here Today...Gone Tomorrow? If you are 43 years old today and expect to begin receiving Social Security benefits atage 66,your"normal retirement age" under present law, you may be in for a surprise. In the year2016 theSocialSecurity program will begin running cash deficits. At first, the problem will be manageable: benefit payments and administrative costs willexceedincomeby only $13 billion. Within five years, however, the shortfall will be $200 billionannually. Tenyears later,it will be nearly $1 trillion. By the early 2020's, if not earlier, Social Securitybenefits will almostcertainlyhave to be reduced, if the program is to have any hope of meeting its obligations. Social Security's Board of Trustees, whose financial projections are the basis for thisanalysis,saysnot to worry, the system won't go broke until 2036. They estimate that the trust fundswill rise to ahealthy nest egg of $5.6 trillion in 2024, two and a half times the projected annualpayout at thattime. According to the trustees, benefits will then be assured for another 12 years, as theassets in thetrustfund are sold off. There is a major problem, however, with the trustees' projection of a40-yearmarginof safety: there may be no money in those trust funds when it is time to draw them down.Themoneymay have already been spent on other government programs. When Social Security's income exceeds its expenses, the surplus is retained by theTreasury andusedto meet the government's non-Social Security expenses. For example, the recent gradualrise inSocialSecurity payroll taxes, from 10.8 percent of wages and salaries in 1983 to 12.4 percenttoday, hasled toannual surpluses that went to finance B-2 bombers, farm subsidies, savings and loanbailouts,andother general federal expenditures. In return for using these funds, the Treasury issuesspecialbondsto the trust funds. When Social Security's expenses exceed its income, theoretically these bonds can beredeemedtomeet current obligations. Beginning in 2016, the Treasury will need to begin redeemingthesebonds.They will have to find the cash somewhere else. Unfortunately, the choices are limited,and nonearepolitically attractive. The Treasury has three options: Sell bonds to the public. Whether the public has sufficientappetite to buy additional bonds at an average rate of $500 billion per year, even in the inflated dollars of 2025-2035, remains to be seen. Raise taxes. Policymakers can raise taxes to provide theTreasury with the necessary money. More directly, they could raise Social Security taxes, reducing the need for bond redemptions. Print money. This would increase the inflation rate. BecauseSocial Security benefit increases are tied to changes in the Consumer Price Index, inflation would result ineven higher benefit costs and the need to redeem bonds more rapidly, not to mention otherdeleteriouseconomic effects. Rather than trying, probably unsuccessfully, to redeem the trillions of dollars in bondsaccumulatedover several decades, policymakers would likely enact a package of revenue increases andbenefitreductions that would bring Social Security's income and outgo into balance in 2016, orshortlyafter.The following big ticket items are likely to be included in such a package: Increased Social Security taxes. Tax increases are easy toexplain, and most workers pay the additional amounts through withholding from wages and salaries. Increased taxation of benefits. Since 1984, beneficiaries withmoderately high incomes ($25,000 for individuals, $32,000 for married couples filing joint returns)have paid federal income taxes on up to 50% of their Social Security benefits. The 50% figure can be raised easily. In fact, this has already been proposed so often that it is likelyto occur long before 2016. Reductions in COLAs. Social Security's cost-of-livingadjustments were delayed 6months by legislation in 1983. They could be delayed again, reduced, or frozen temporarily. Increase the Normal Retirement Age (NRA). The 1983 legislationraised the NRA gradually, from 65 for workers born before 1938, to 67 for those born after 1959. These changes are present law, not just proposals. Congress has already demonstrated that itcan raise the NRA, and there is no reason to believe that they will stop at age 67. It certainly appears that the Social Security program will not be as rich for tomorrow'sretirees as itis fortoday's. People who hoped to be enjoying their retirement after 2016 should start savingmorenow ifthey want to maintain a comfortable standard of living after retiring. The necessaryamountscannot besaved during the last few working years; they must be accumulated over a much longerperiod oftime.Even if the trustees are correct, Social Security will have serious problems beginningin 2036 andwillneed to change. Today's workers need to know that now, while they still have time tomodify theirretirement planning. Choosing the Right Products Consult this link to find out about various investment and insurance products you shouldconsiderto fulfill your retirement lifestyle goals. Sooner Than You Think|Why Is Time So Important When It Comes To Saving? Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-163IA046-000818-B017-220http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/cpresm.html 207.121.184.160 19970119015600 text/html 5519HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 01:55:11 GMTContent-type: text/html Special Markets Special Markets Special Markets is a combination of the three lines of Group business not includedin the formation of NYLCare-New York Life operations for AARP members, Membership Association, and NYLIFE Administration Corp. (NYLACOR). In 1994, the Company became the provider for the AARP Life Insurance Program. Since then, we have established a dedicated office in Tampa, Florida, to service the program. Our efforts in 1995 resulted in sales totaling $53 million. We arepresently receiving 5,000 applications a week from AARP members, with an excellent forecast for steady growth. Membership Association, which markets group insurance products to large, professional organization., posted sales of $29 million in 1995. New clients include the National Basketball Association, the Air Line Pilots Association, and The American Institute of Architects. NYLACOR - which markets group life and health coverage to contractors working for the federal government, as well as Long Term Gare sales exceeded the 1994 level by nearly 80 percent. And,in December, after receiving an endorsement from the American Bar Association, NYLACOR began marketing its Group Long Term Care insurance through the American Bar Insurance Plans Consultant, Inc. Individual Operations|Asset Management|Investment|NYLCare Health Plans, Inc.|Special Markets|New York Life Worldwide Holding, Inc. Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-164IA046-000818-B017-259http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/psinmms1.html 207.121.184.160 19970119015626 text/html 5376HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 01:55:24 GMTContent-type: text/html Spectra 1 Spectra 1 Built for the Long Term Spectra 1 is a plan that can grow as you do. As your needs change over the nextseveralyears, you canconvert the term portion into Whole Life insurance. This will help boost the totalcash valueaccumulation, which can help you further down the road for college funding andsupplementingretirement income. Spectra 1 The insurance protection of Spectra 1 consists of a base plan of 25% Whole Lifeinsurancewith 75% Five Year Term rider. This particular mix allows you to keep the premiumswithinyour budget,while adding the advantage of cash value accumulation. The Features of Spectra 1 Include: A guaranteed death benefit, generally free from federal income tax A lower initial premium than a comparable policy of 100% Whole Lifeinsurance The privilege to convert the term portion into permanent insurance,generally for 10years Tax-deferred cash value accumulation The ability to borrow from cash value Eligibility to earn dividends on the Whole Life base plan, as declared bytheCompany Generally includes the Waiver of Premium rider, which waives premiumsshouldyou becometotally disabled as defined by the rider The ability to customize the plan by adding optional riders Spectra 1|Spectra 2|Spectra 3 Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-165IA046-000818-B017-293http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/psinmms2.html 207.121.184.160 19970119015736 text/html 5012HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 01:56:10 GMTContent-type: text/html Spectra 2 Spectra 2 Spectra 2 The insurance protection of Spectra 2 consists of a base plan of 50% Whole Life insurancewith 50%Five Year Term rider. This equal mix allows you to keep the premiums within your budget,while addingthe advantage of cash value accumulation. The Features of Spectra 2 Include: A guaranteed death benefit, generally free from federal income tax A lower initial premium than a comparable policy of 100% Whole Life insurance The privilege to convert the term portion into permanent insurance, generally for 10years Tax-deferred cash value accumulation The ability to borrow from cash value Eligibility to earn dividends on the Whole Life base plan, as declared by theCompany Generally includes the Waiver of Premium rider, which waives premiums shouldyou becometotally disabled as defined by the rider The ability to customize the plan by adding optional riders Spectra 1|Spectra 2|Spectra 3 Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-166IA046-000818-B017-331http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/psinmms3.html 207.121.184.160 19970119015822 text/html 5041HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 01:57:24 GMTContent-type: text/html Spectra 3 Spectra 3 Spectra 3 The insurance protection of Spectra 3 consists of a base plan of 50% Whole Life insurancewith 50%Dividend Option Term (DOT) rider and the Option to Purchase Paid-Up Additions (OPP)rider. Thisparticular mix allows you to keep the premiums within your budget, while adding theadvantage of cashvalue accumulation. The Features of Spectra 3 Include: A guaranteed death benefit, generally free from federal income tax A lower initial premium than a comparable policy of 100% Whole Life insurance A level premium Tax-deferred cash value accumulation The ability to borrow from cash value Eligibility to earn dividends on the Whole Life base plan and the paid-up additions,asdeclaredby the Company Generally includes the Waiver of Premium rider, which waives premiums shouldyou becometotally disabled as defined by the rider The ability to customize the plan by adding optional riders Spectra 1|Spectra 2|Spectra 3 Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-167IA046-000818-B017-365http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/psinmm.html 207.121.184.160 19970119015906 text/html 6089HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 01:58:05 GMTContent-type: text/html Spectra Life Overview Spectra Life Overview New York Life's Spectra Life is an innovative plan carefully crafted to meet the financial needs of today's growing families. It blends the guaranteed protection and cash value of whole life insurance with the affordability of term insurance. The Benefits of Spectra Life Provides a guaranteed death benefit, generally free from federal income tax Lower initial premiums than a comparable policy of 100% whole life insurance Tax-deferred cash value accumulation The ability to borrow from cash value through policy loans Eligible for dividends, as declared by the Company Includes the Waiver of Premium rider (for eligible applicants), which waives premiums should you become disabled, as defined by the rider The Spectrum of Plans Spectra Life features three distinct plans tailored to meet a family's insurance needs and budget. Your agent can help you choose the one that's right for you. The total death benefit offered for each plan is made up as follows: Spectra 1 - 25% Whole Life insurance with 75% 5 Year Term rider Spectra 2 - 50% Whole Life insurance with 50% 5 Year Term rider Spectra 3 - 50% Whole Life insurance with 50% Dividend Option Term rider and Option to Purchase Paid-Up Additions rider For more information on the Spectra Life plans, click on the links above. Whole Life|Modified Premium Whole Life|5 Year Term Insurance|Increasing Premium Term Insurance|Single Premium Life|Survivorship Whole Life|Employee's Whole Life|Employee's Adjustable Life|Universal Life*|Charitable Adjustable Life|Spectra Life|Variable Universal Life* ** Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-168IA046-000818-B018-12http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/pfstri.html 207.121.184.160 19970119015928 text/html 4527HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 01:58:37 GMTContent-type: text/html Starting Out - Choosing the Right Investment Product Choosing the Right Investment Product New York Life and its subsidiaries offer a variety of financial products and services tohelp someone who is starting out. For more information, please explore the following: MainStay MutualFunds NYLIAC Annuities MainStay401(k) IRA Rollover Investment Tips |Investment Issues |Choosing the Right Investment Product Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-169IA046-000818-B018-50http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/pfstch.html 207.121.184.160 19970119015946 text/html 5055HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 01:58:53 GMTContent-type: text/html Starting Out - Choosing the Right Life Insurance Choosing the Right Life Insurance Life Insurance Issues There are many issues you need to consider before purchasing life insurance. This link willintroduce some of these issues to you. It will also offer you the opportunity to obtain more in-depth information to help you make your choice. Find out why life insurance is important forsomeone who is starting out. What About Life Insurance? This link will introduce you to some of the different types of life insurance products offered bythe New York Life Insurance Company and its subsidiaries. Once you understand your lifeinsurance needs,you can make an educated decision about the coverage that is right for you. Life Insurance Needs Calculator Use this tool to help you determine your personal life insurance needs, and the product thatmay be right for you. Don't forget to store and update your results in your Personal Folder. Choosing the Right Life Insurance | Investing for Your Future Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-170IA046-000818-B018-78http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/pfstchho.html 207.121.184.160 19970119020012 text/html 7955HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 01:59:13 GMTContent-type: text/html Starting Out - How Much Life Insurance Do You Need? How Much Life Insurance Do You Need? The main purpose of life insurance is to provide financial security for yourfamily. It helps to ensure thatwhen you die your family will have the financial resources it needs to provide foryour spouse, children,an elderly parent or some other dependent. However, life insurance also may beused to meet a varietyof long-term financial goals. It can help provide educational funds for yourchildren or funds for yourown retirement. The question that most families and individuals have, then, is"How much lifeinsurance do I need?" The answer depends largely on your family's individualcircumstances. There are no hard and fast rules for determining how much life insurance is enough,because no twoindividuals have exactly the same needs. You may be single, supporting no one butyourself. Or, you maybe supporting an elderly mother or father. You may have several children, but alsotwo incomes andconsiderable net worth. Whatever your situation, if you are providing financial support for people who aredepending on you, youneed life insurance. However, there are several things to consider when you buylife insurance, sincethe proceeds can be used with several goals in mind. For example, proceeds can: Provide ready cash for final expenses: These could include funeral costs,medical expenses,probate fees, and estate taxes. Pay off outstanding debts: not only hospital bills, for example, but a mortgageor an auto loan. Provide replacement income in amounts necessary to cover: A readjustment period of two or three years after your death. If you are a two-income family, it takestime to adjust to one paycheck instead of two. If you are the sole wage earner,with young childrenathome, your spouse's need for a readjustment period is obvious. The period while children under age 18 still are at home and dependent. (Social Security benefits that may be available supply only part of your family's income needs.) The college years, when Social Security benefits for dependents come to an endjust as expensesgrow. The years between the time the youngest child becomes independent and thesurvivingspouse reaches retirement age. The period after the survivor retires and receives Social Security or apension. In general, determining how much life insurance you need means deducting the sumtotal of theincome that would be lost upon the insured's death from the sum total of yourfamily's ongoingfinancial need. It also means calculating the impact of inflation (usuallyassuming 5% per year) andbuilding in enough "extra" to counteract inflation's effects. It may seemcomplicated, but it is an exercisethat is well worth doing. It is also one that you do not have to tackle alone. A life insurance agent can help determine how muchlife insurance yourfamily will need over time, based on the extent of your financial responsibilitiesand the kinds andamounts of your other resources. It may be that the solution to your insurance needs entails using a combinationof several plans,and the combination may need to be changed as your situation changes. Fortunately, life insurance is flexible - with several types of plans available -and an agent can work withyou to determine what products will best fit your ongoing needs and future goals. Individual Life Insurance To find out more about which individual life insurance product offered by the New York LifeInsuranceCompany may best suit your needs, click on the link above. Tips on Purchasing Life Insurance|How Much Life Insurance Do You Need?|Feathering a Nest of Your Own How Younger Consumers Can Benefit From Whole Life|Five Insurance and Financial Mistakes Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-171IA046-000818-B018-112http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/pfstchis.html 207.121.184.160 19970119020028 text/html 5963HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 01:59:38 GMTContent-type: text/html Starting Out - Life Insurance Issues Life Insurance Issues Many people think that life insurance is only for those with families. While it is true that lifeinsurance can help provide for the needs of dependents when you pass away, it is alsoimportant for someone starting out. Although you may not have children at this point in yourlife, you still have obligations. Adequate life insurance can ensure that these obligations are met once you've passed on. Your obligations may include a student loan or a car loan. Credit cards, phone bills andother regular payments may need to be settled. If your parents are financially dependent onyou, life insurance can help meet their needs. Even if your parents are not financiallydependent on you, life insurance can help pay for your funeral costs, relieving your parentsof this expense. As you can see, there are many reasons why someone starting out should consider buyinglife insurance. No one expects to die when they are young and healthy. But isn't it nice toknow that if anything should ever happen to you, the people who care about you won't bearan additional financial burden? Use the links from this page to help you select life insurancethat is right for you. Tips on Purchasing Life Insurance How Much Life Insurance Do You Need? Feathering a Nest of Your Own How Younger Consumers Can Benefit From Whole Life Five Insurance and Financial Mistakes Life Insurance Issues | What About Life Insurance? | Life Insurance Needs Calculator Securities offered through NYLIFE Securities Inc.(Member NASD), New York Life Insurance Company,New York Life Insurance and Annuity Corporation(A Delaware Corporation)NYLIFE Securities Inc. & NYLIFE Distributors Inc.(Members NASD),51 Madison Avenue, New York, NY 10010 Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-172IA046-000818-B018-152http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/psinsw.html 207.121.184.160 19970119020044 text/html 10955HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 01:59:52 GMTContent-type: text/html Survivorship Whole Life Insurance Ideas Survivorship Whole Life Insurance Ideas Take a Closer Look Achieving your personal and financial goals didn't happen overnight. It took hardwork and dedication.Protecting those years of hard work is a right you have earned and deserve. Properestate planning canhelp accomplish this goal. A properly structured estate plan builds security for you and your family today andassures that yourestate will be transferred according to your wishes after you are gone.Unfortunately, many individualsare unaware that over half the value of their estate could be lost to federalestate taxes at death. In otherwords, without proper planning, the IRS could be the single largest beneficiary ofyour estate. What is Your Estate Worth? Do you need to worry about estate taxes? It depends upon your estate's value. The tablebelow lists some of the assets used to determine your estate tax exposure. If married, remember to include the assets that you and your spouse jointly own. Keep in mind that the estate tax bill is due within nine months after your death.This time constraintcould force your heirs to sell valuable assets, often at a discount, to raise thecash needed to pay estatetaxes. So in a short period of time, a large percentage of your estate coulddisappear. How Big is Your Estate? Home 0/TD> Cash/Money Market Accounts 0/TD> Stock/Bond Portfolios 0/TD> Pension/IRA Accounts 0/TD> Business Interests 0/TD> Other Real Estate 0/TD> Life Insurance Proceeds 0/TD> Automobiles/Artwork/Other Collectibles 0/TD> Gross Estate 0/TH> How Do You Pay Estate Taxes? Now that you know the importance of properly structuring an estate plan, let's takea look at four fundingmethods. Cash - With this method, your heirs may be forced to sell stocks,bonds, andother investments to paythe estate tax bill. However, selling in a down market could result in substantialeconomic loss. Estateassets will be depleted and future investment opportunities foregone. Credit - In some instances, your beneficiaries will need to obtaina bank loan topay estate taxes.Unfortunately, this is only a short-term remedy. Eventually, your heirs must repaythe loan plusinterest. Sale of Illiquid Assets - In some instances, your heirs will needto sell anybusiness interest, personalresidence, or other real estate possessions to raise the funds to pay the estatetax bill. The sale of abusiness could leave your heirs without a potential source of livelihood. Life Insurance - Purchasing life insurance can be a cost-effectivefundingvehicle for an estate plan.Your heirs may use the life insurance proceeds to pay the estate tax bill, withoutdepleting the estate'sassets. Life insurance proceeds can also be received free from federal income taxand estate tax if theestate plan is properly structured. Survivorship Whole Life: A Solution To Your Estate Needs Survivorship Whole Life insurance from New York Life uses today's dollars to makesure your estate has the liquidity needed to pay estate taxes tomorrow. Survivorship Whole Life insures two individuals in one insuranceplan and pays the death benefit after the death of the second insured. Asa result, the cost is more affordable than purchasing two separate life insurancepolicies. A Valuable Addition To Your Portfolio Survivorship Whole Life offers much more than a funding vehicle for an estate plan. It can help meet your business continuation, wealth replacement, charitable giving,estate creation and dependent care needs-- whichever is more important to you. Inthis respect, Survivorship Whole Life is not just for older, affluent couples withestate tax problems. Survivorship Whole Life can also be a valuable addition toyounger couples' or business owners' portfolios. Will your child or grandchild be protected if you and your spouse should dieunexpectedly? Would you like to leave an asset or a business to one child, butwonder how to provide equally to other children? Will your business survivewithout you or your partner? Survivorship Whole Life can solve these and otherfinancial concerns. Why Choose New York Life? At New York Life, we realize that no two individuals are alike. For this reason,our Survivorship Whole Life offers the flexibility to choose a method of paymentthat best fits your situation. In our Level Premium plan, the base premium remains fixed throughout the insureds'lifetimes. If rising costs and increased premiums down the road are a concern,this option provides you with the security that comes from knowing your basepremium will never increase. The Modified Premium plan has a fixed premium for the first fifteen yearsof your policy. In year sixteen, the base premium doubles and remains fixedthroughout the life of your policy. This plan effectively minimizes currentpremiums and allows you to prepare properly for future premium payments-- anattractive feature particularly for younger policyowners. We also offer a number of affordable riders that allow you to further tailor theSurvivorship Whole Life policy to meet your specific needs and objectives. Forextra protection, term insurance may be available to increase your coverage at acompetitve cost. Or, if you or your spouse or business partner will need cash whenone of you dies, riders that pay a death benefit after the first death maybe available. Your New York Life agent will help you design a plan that meets yourspecific needs. Whole Life|Modified Premium Whole Life|5 Year Term Insurance|Increasing Premium Term Insurance|Single Premium Life|Survivorship Whole Life|Employee's Whole Life|Employee's Adjustable Life|Universal Life*|Charitable Adjustable Life|Spectra Life|Variable Universal Life* ** Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-173IA046-000818-B018-196http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/pfobsd.html 207.121.184.160 19970119020100 text/html 9062HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 02:00:12 GMTContent-type: text/html Taking Care of Business with Split-Dollar Life Insurance Taking Care of Business with Split-Dollar LifeInsurance Split dollar is not a special life insurance policy; rather, it is a specialwayto purchasepermanentinsurance. It is used widely to solve business buyout and executive benefitproblems. Forsplit dollar towork, two parties are required who "split" premiums and benefits. In the IRSdefinition, splitdollar "isan arrangement whereby the party with the need and the party with the ability topaypremiums join inpurchasing an insurance contract in which there is a substantial investmentelement." (Rev.Rule.64-328) How Split-Dollar Insurance Works In one typical arrangement, a corporation will purchase an insurance policy onthe lifeof an ownerorkey employee, and will pay 100 percent of the premiums. The insured can own thepolicyand name apersonal beneficiary. The cash value and a portion of the death benefit will beowned as"collateral" bythe corporation to the extent of the premiums paid. The terms of the corporation'sinterestare spelledout in a "collateral assignment form" and a separate legal agreement. If theinsured dieswhile thecollateral assignment is in effect, the corporation recovers premiums paid from thedeathbenefit. Theremainder goes to the insured's personal beneficiary. If the insured lives for anumber ofyears, theinsurance cash value may be sufficient to repay the corporation for its entireoutlay. Thepolicy may thenbe "rolled out" to the insured, who can continue the plan as a personal insurancepolicy. For tax treatment, the corporation cannot deduct its premiums, nor is theemployeetaxed on thosepremiums. Rather, the employee is taxed on what the IRS calls "the economicbenefit,"which is thecost of insurance benefit as defined by the IRS. A "tax wise" variation of split dollar works as outlined above, with oneadditionalwrinkle. Here theinsured pays a portion of the premium out of his or her own pocket; the corporationpays thebalance. Inthis variation, called "contributory split dollar," the insured is not taxed onthat part of theeconomicbenefit paid with personal funds. The employee's share of the premium can equalorexceed theeconomic benefit. Uses of Split-Dollar Insurance Business buyout: Al and Luiz are co-owners of Computer Works, Inc. Bothseethevirtue of abuy-and-sell agreement and the logic of funding that permanent need with permanentlifeinsurance. Neither Al nor Luiz, however, wants to pay permanent insurance premiums from hisownpocket. Hereis what they do. Al and Luiz apply for insurance, each on the life of the other,in an amountsufficient tofund the buy-and-sell agreement, and they name themselves beneficiary. The bulk ofthepremiums arepaid by the corporation on a split dollar basis. Al and Luiz contribute only anamount equalto theeconomic benefit, roughly the same amount that they would have spent on a standardtermpolicy. Eventually, Computer Works, Inc. will recover its premiums from either the cashvalue or thedeathbenefit in accordance with the split-dollar agreement and collateral assignmentform. Splitdollarenables Al and Luiz to achieve an important business continuation objective in away that isfair andeffective. Executive Benefits: Goodman, Inc. is wholly owned by an architect, EllenGoodman. Inaddition toseveral other employees, Ellen employs a skilled thirty-five year old designer,Karl Schmidt. Ellenwould like to retain Karl's services, but is not eager to install a benefitsprogram for allemployees. After considering a number of alternatives, Ellen, on the advice of her CPA,chooses asplit-dollar planfor Karl. Split dollar provides Karl with a significant death benefit. Equallyattractive are thecashvalues. Even after repaying Goodman, Inc. for its premium contribution, the policy maybuildsignificantcash values by the time Karl is sixty-five. The plan is just too good forKarl to walkaway. ForGoodman, Inc., split dollar is a cost-effective way to retain a valued employee. Split dollar can also be an estate planning tool. Properly structured, thepolicyproceeds from theplancan be kept out of the insured's estate. Those contemplating a split-dollar planshouldcontact theirNew York Life agent, as well as their own legal and financial advisors. Split dollar is not something for nothing, but for the insured it can be agreatdeal forvery little. What is Your Business Worth?|Keeping Your Business in the Family|Taking Care of Business with Split-Dollar Life Insurance Outsourcing Your Employee Benefits: Pension and Health Care|The Advantages of a Bundled 401(k) Plan Can YouAfford Not to Have a Health Care Plan for Your Business?|ThreeDemographic Trends Reshaping The Workforce Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-174IA046-000818-B018-232http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/pfpiintd.html 207.121.184.160 19970119020110 text/html 9662HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 02:00:21 GMTContent-type: text/html Tax Deferral - What it can do for You Tax Deferral... What It Can Do For You What it Can Do for You Let's face it - you work hard for your money, and that's why you need your money towork hardfor you. Of course, income tax is a fact of life - and it's not something you have a greatdeal ofcontrol over. However, there is a way to accumulate money without having to pay taxes on it - atleast notuntil youuse it. It's called tax deferral, and several types of insurance and financialproductsoffer it. What is Tax Deferral? With tax-deferred products, you don't pay taxes on accumulated funds, interest ordividendsuntil youactually withdraw the money. Since the gain in a tax-deferred product isn't taxeduntil it'swithdrawn, itusually accumulates at a faster rate. For this reason, tax-deferred accumulationcan providea powerfulfinancial edge. If you participate in a 401(k) plan offered by your employer or if you own anIndividualRetirementAccount (IRA), you're already enjoying the benefits of tax-deferred accumulation. Manyinsurance andannuity products also offer this advantage. Even the interest and dividendsgenerated bytheseproducts generally avoid current income taxes! The Power of Tax Deferral The following chart shows the tremendous difference tax deferral can make in therate atwhich yourmoney grows. If we assume that a single sum of $50,000 will be invested for 30years at ahypotheticalinterest rate of 8%, we see that the tax-deferred vehicle provides better long-termaccumulation. If youare in the 31% tax bracket, you may be able to accumulate about $250,620 in ataxableaccount. However, if you used a tax-deferred account for the same investment, you mayaccumulate over$503,100. (Please note that a 10% IRS tax penalty may be imposed on withdrawalsfromannuities,some insurance products, IRAs, or 401(k) plans, when these withdrawals are madebefore thepurchaser has reached age 59 1/2.) *Hypothetical rate used for illustrative purposes only. Not intended to predictnor guarantee any actual product results. This amount does not reflect the effect of applicable feesand/or charges. Let it Accumulate Tax-deferred products offer you control over your financial situation. Not onlydoes yourmoneyaccumulate but, if you are selective in your withdrawals and plan them accordingly,you canavoidgetting "hit" with too many tax consequences when you do withdraw the money. Here's why: Tax deferral strategies work best for long-term planning, usually retirementplanning.The idea is toleave the money where it is for a long time - to let it go and let it grow. Sureyou'll betaxed on the moneyyou start to withdraw after you've retired - but you may be in a lower tax bracketby then,which wouldserve to soften the tax blow. You can be selective in your withdrawals and plan them so that you do notsufferunnecessary taxconsequences. The tax system has "thresholds" (tax brackets) that will help youdetermine howmuchof these funds you can withdraw during a given year. If you are prudent with yourwithdrawals- and youdon't break into a higher tax threshold - then the effect of these withdrawals onyour taxeswill beminimal. Remember, you're only taxed on what you withdraw. Tax-Deferred Insurance Products The cash values in life insurance and annuities accumulate tax deferred. Anannuity offersyouprotection so you don't outlive your savings. It does this by generating a steadystream ofincome thatwill be taxed as you receive it - a little at a time. As for whole life insurance,the mainfeature is the deathbenefit protection it provides, but it also offers the additional benefit of cashaccumulation. (Note:Another major tax advantage of life insurance is that, in most instances, thepayout to yourbeneficiariesis income tax free!) For people who want to combine tax deferral with the potential growth from adiversified portfolio, there are variable universal life insurance and variableannuityplans. Both of theseoffer the opportunity to participate in investment accounts - and the associatedhigher levelof risk.However, like all tax-deferred products, they accumulate gradually over time. Thatis whyinsurance andannuity products - like most tax-deferred vehicles - may work best as long-termfundingvehicles. Only you can determine what your financial needs are - right now and later in your life. But it's important to remember that sooner or later, many of us canbenefit from tax-deferred products. Talk to your New York Life insurance agent oryour NYLIFE Securities registered representative, and examine your needs -- notjust your immediate goals but your long-term goals. You'll see whether tax-deferredproducts could be right for you. This discussion is not intended to portray the features of any particular product,but simply to illustrate the concept of tax deferral. Securities offered throughNYLIFE Securities Inc. (member NASD) 51 Madison Avenue, NY NY 10010. Tax-Deferral Calculator Click on this link to open the Tax-Deferral Calculator. The Ins and Outs of Annuities|Tax Deferral... What It Can Do For You|Why Is Time So Important When It Comes to Saving? Securities offered through NYLIFE Securities Inc.(Member NASD), 51 Madison Ave., NY, NY 10010 Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-175IA046-000818-B018-301http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/pfpitptx.html 207.121.184.160 19970119020147 text/html 7339HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 02:00:58 GMTContent-type: text/html Taxes Taxes Is Your Tax Bite Growing? While a discussion about taxes may not be a topic of your nightly dinner conversation, it is an issue that concerns us all, and with good reason. In 1996, we spent over one-third of our time working for the government. Tax Freedom Day According to an annual report issued by the Tax Foundation, Americans worked the first 127 days of 1996, from January 1 to May 6, just to pay taxes. In theory, this means that on May 7 your job began toproduce spendable income and your taxable investments became profitable. Thisrepresents the latest Tax Freedom Day ever. The Tax Foundation, a nonprofit, nonpartisan research organization, took itsanalysis one step furtherand broke down the tax implications for each state. Connecticut was the unluckywinner, bearing the nation's largest tax burden in 1996 with a Tax Freedom Day of May 31. Alabama saton the opposite end of this spectrum with a Tax Freedom Day of April 23. The Eight Hour Work Day To put a different spin on the way Americans see their tax burden, the TaxFoundationexamined theportion of each eight hour working day necessary to pay federal, state, and localtaxes. In1996, theFoundation discovered that the average American spends 2 hours and 47 minutes eachworkingday topay the necessary federal, state, and local taxes. This is more time than it takesto pay forfood, shelter,and clothing combined. Most of this time, 1 hour and 50 minutes, covers the federaltaxportion. Theremainder, 57 minutes, covers state and local taxes. What Are Your Options? How can you reduce the time it takes to reach Tax Freedom Day next year? Askyourself threesimplequestions related to your financial situation in 1996: Did I receive 1099s from my bank accounts? Did I receive 1099s from other investments? Did I spend or reinvest the interest? If you earned taxable interest on investments that you expect to hold for the longterm, thenyou had topay current taxes on it. With taxable investments, the reality is that you don'talwaysliquidate yourholdings to pay taxes. In all likelihood, you pay the tax out of current income orout ofwithholding fromother income sources. This technique reduces your spendable income today, and mayreduce itin thefuture. Fortunately, there are sensible strategies that will help you maximizelong-termreturns whilepotentially reducing your tax bill. With investments like annuities, your earnings have the ability to accumulate on atax-deferred basis.Simply put, you don't have to pay current taxes on money that is ear-marked for thelongterm. Instead,all earnings are reinvested and continue to accumulate on a tax-deferred basisuntilwithdrawn. Ofcourse, withdrawals of earnings from annuities are taxable and, if you are underage 591/2, may besubject to a 10% tax penalty. Taxes|Inflation|CD vs. Deferred Annuity Securities offered through NYLIFE Securities Inc. (Member NASD) New York Life Insurance Company New York Life Insurance and Annuity Corporation (A Delaware Corporation) NYLIFE Securities Inc. & NYLIFE Distributors Inc. (Members NASD) 51 Madison Avenue, New York, NY 10010 Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-176IA046-000818-B018-347http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/psinilti.html 207.121.184.160 19970119020230 text/html 5324HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 02:01:18 GMTContent-type: text/html Term Insurance Ideas From New York Life Term Insurance Ideas From New York Life Versatile Plans to Suit Your Changing Needs Pure Protection Term insurance plans from New York Life offer death benefit protection at a competitive costto fit yourlifestyle. And, with innovative policy riders, you can also help protect your spouse andchildren, keep thepolicy in force if you become disabled, and access the death benefit if you become terminallyill. The Right Amount of Insurance With term insurance, you can afford to purchase an amount of coverage that's right for you.Lookingtowards the future? When you have more disposable income, we can help you make the transitionto apermanent life insurance plan that builds cash value. You have the option toconvert some or all of your termcoverageto one of ourpermanent plans. To convert your term coverage to apermanentplan ofinsurance, you must meet certain age and face amount requirements. A Variety of Plans New York Life offers various term insurance plans with several payment schedules to give youoptionsto meet your immediate needs. You can choose a plan where you pay a level premium for someperiodof time or one where the premium increases annually. For costs and complete details of the coverage, including any limitations, contact yourlife insurance agent. Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-177IA046-000818-B018-382http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/pfwhtp.html 207.121.184.160 19970119020259 text/html 10527HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 02:02:09 GMTContent-type: text/html Term vs. Permanent Life Insurance Term vs. Permanent LifeInsurance A Fresh Look At An Age-old Question The term versus cash value life insurance debate has gone on for years, as if itwerepossible to saythat one type of coverage is all good, the other all bad. Sorry, it's just notthatsimple. Term life insurance has its place. If you're young or cash shy, term can be anideal stopgapsolution; itcan provide you and your family with maximum coverage for the lowest immediatepremiumoutlay. If thechoice is an adequate amount of term coverage versus no protection at all, terminsurance maywell bethe best choice. It is also very often the product of choice when protection needs may be high for aperiod oftime, thendrop back, such as when your family is growing. Term insurance can also be aneffective waytosupplement permanent insurance during high-need years, such as when family andotherfinancialresponsibilities are outpacing income. In these situations, term coverage allows you to obtain crucial death benefitprotectionwithout breakingyour budget. Also, if the coverage is convertible (the coverage can be "converted"to acomparable cashvalue policy, without the need to provide evidence of insurability), you can getthe coverageyou needtoday...with the ability to obtain permanent coverage in the future. In thisrespect, terminsurance meetsa valuable need. The True Cost of Term Life Insurance However, term insurance has its drawbacks. It certainly isn't right for all peopleor underallcircumstances. Among its weaknesses, be aware of the following: You do have to die to "win." As unpleasant as that sounds, it's true. Term lifeinsuranceprovides adeath benefit only, and only for a specific period of time. When the term ofcoverageexpires, so doesyour protection. Also, if you stop paying premiums, the coverage ends. Period. Let's say that you own $500,000 of term insurance. You've kept the coverage inforce forten years,andthe policy expires at midnight on December 31. If you die at 11:59 on New Year'sEve, yourfamilyreceives the full $500,000 in death benefit proceeds. However, if you die at 12:01on January1, yourfamily receives nothing under the policy, since the contract has expired. Purchasing term insurance has often been compared to renting a house. When yourent, yougetthefull and immediate use of the house and all that goes with it, but only for as longas youcontinue payingrent. As soon as your lease expires, you must leave. Even if you rented the housefor 30years, you haveno "equity" or value that belongs to you. There is the very real danger of becoming uninsurable when the term coverageexpires.Whilemanyterm policies are convertible to permanent coverage, others may not be. Most ofall, even ifthe coverageis convertible, there are time limits. If the policy is allowed to expire, you mayberequired to reapply. Ifyou are found to be uninsurable at that time, you will be without coverage. The long-term cost of term can become increasingly burdensome. Premiumsincrease at eachrenewal, with the price per thousand dollars of coverage becoming prohibitive formany peopleas theyget older. Many people buy term coverage when they're in their 20s because it seemsdownrightcheapcompared to a cash value policy with the same death benefit amount. By the timethey're intheir 40s,the coverage seems a bit pricey, as the rate goes up. In their 50s, the cost hasgenerallywelloutstripped the cost of permanent coverage. Finally, in their 60s, if not sooner,they dropthe policy - notbecause they no longer need the protection, but because they can't afford it.Meanwhile, theperson whomay have paid more for that permanent policy in his or her 20s may still be payingthe samepremium. The Value of Permanent Life Insurance Cash value life insurance is still the best long-term solution for many people. Thereasons: It always pays. Cash value life insurance provides life-long insuranceprotection. With fewexceptions,once you have been approved for the coverage, your policy cannot be canceled by thecarrier,providedyou pay all required premiums. Regardless of your health or other factors, theinsurance willremain inforce. Higher initial premiums can actually be less expensive than term in the longrun. Infact, the policymaybe able to "pay for itself." Most permanent policies are eligible for dividends,which arenot guaranteed,if and when they are declared by the insurance company. Many companies offer theoption toapplyaccumulated dividends towards payment of all or part of the premiums. If values aresufficient,out-of-pocket premium payments may end after several years, yet coverage cancontinue forlife. Solong-term net cost can be quite low compared to the total cost for a term policy. It can eliminate the problem of future insurability. Cash value life insurancedoes notexpire after acertain period of time. It does not need to be renewed. Also, some policies containguaranteedpurchase options, which allow you to buy additional coverage at specified times,regardlessof yourhealth. It builds cash value. These dollars - which, under many policies, areguaranteed - can beused inthefuture for any purpose you wish. If you like, you can borrow cash value for a downpayment ona home,to help pay for your children's education or to provide income for your retirement.(Note:Borrowing cashvalue from your policy will affect your total policy values.) Plus, if you decideto stoppaying premiumsand surrender your policy, the guaranteed policy values are yours. Recommendation: When purchasing coverage - or renewing a term policy - look at morethan justthepremium. To help you select the best-choice coverage for you, contact your New YorkLifeagent. Youragent is a licensed professional who can discuss your goals, analyze your needs andreviewthe prosand cons of the various options available to you, all at no cost or obligation. Individual Life Insurance To find out more about both term and permanent individual life insurance productsofferedby the New York Life Insurance Company, click on the link above. Life Insurance Calculator|Permanent Life Insurance Term vs. Permanent Life Insurance|What To Do When Someone Dies Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-178IA046-000818-B019-321http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/bfgwb4.html 207.121.184.160 19970119020554 text/html 10121HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 02:05:06 GMTContent-type: text/html The Advantages of a Bundled 401(k) Plan The Advantages of a Bundled 401(k) Plan Has your company's 401(k) pension plan become difficult to manage? It started out as a niceidea, butit has since grown into an administrative nightmare. If so, why not consider going from an"unbundled"to a "bundled" plan design? If yours is a classic "unbundled" plan, chances are you're quarterbacking a diverse team ofoutsidevendors: obtaining investment services from one vendor, recordkeeping from another, and plancommunications from yet a third, while your plan trustee involves yet still another contact. Or perhapsyou keep some services in-house, while outsourcing others. One problem: It can be confusing and inefficient. Your plan may have little, if any,systems integration. As a plan sponsor, you may have to make several contacts to conduct plan changes or obtaininformation. Plus, because noboby is responsible for the entire plan, there may be limitedaccountability among vendors. Not only are errors more likely, but the task of sorting themout will likelyfall back on your shoulders. A second problem: It can be unnecessarily expensive. Because you have hired separate"experts" foreach component of your plan, you should expect to pay more. Each "expert" comes with its ownprofitmargin requirements, which you will have to pay for. Additionally, since you have to managethedifferent players, your retirement plan can divert precious resources away from the businessofrunningthe business. An attractive alternative: "bundling" your pension plan. Bundling enables you toconsolidate, orbundle, as many aspects of your pension plan under one vendor as you deem necessary. As a result, you can offer your employees a quality 401(k) plan, for instance, that canreduce yourrecordkeeping costs by as much as 50%; provide enhanced benefit flexibility and service forparticipants and let your human resource people focus on human resource issues - not pensionplanmanagement. Ten good reasons to learn more about what a bundled plan can offer. Companies that have gonetobundled plans often enjoy... Enhanced overall flexibility and operational efficiency. While many companies elect to purchase turnkey, full-service bundling options, in today'smarketyou can decide to "bundle" part of your plan, and keep a portion of your plan with otherproviders. Forinstance, many service providers offer bundled programs that offer investment options frommultiplefund managers. What types of services can you expect from a bundled program? Companies using NewYork Life Benefit Services Company 401(k) Complete® enjoy such servicesas... Plan design consulting Recordkeeping and administration Trustee services Investment management Employee communications Fully-integrated systems. All aspects of your retirement plan are consolidated under one common source. Thisallowsfor lesshuman intervention resulting in more accurate, streamlined administration. Potential out-of-pocket cost savings. Many companies using New York Life Benefit Services Company's 401(k)Complete®, for example, havereduced their recordkeeping costs alone as much as 25%. Consultative services. Including ERISA consulting, as well as compliance and Federal reporting advisories. A central point of contact. One integrated source provides all your services. Professional asset and investment management services. Streamlined, professional administrative services andrecordkeeping. Convenience. Participants can generally obtain daily valuation information and account reports, aswell as learnabout other investment options and make plan changes with one phone call. Investment flexibility. With 401(k) Complete®, for example, you are not locked into one source offunds. Youcan selectfrom funds offered through New York Life Insurance Company, The MainStayFunds, Bankers Trust, Fidelity Advisor Funds, and more. Full accountability. All responsibilities and accountabilities are defined in advance. If you want to learn more about how your company can save money and reduce its day-to-dayinvolvement, while enhancing the quality of the services offered to your employees, contactNew York Life BenefitServices today for information. The New York Life Benefit Services Company Advantage: 401(k) Complete® ispart of New York Life Benefit ServicesCompany, a leader in benefits consulting and recordkeeping for over 25 years. Please contactNew York Life Benefit Services for a free prospectus(es)containingmore complete information, including charges and expenses. Read carefully before investingor sending money. MainStay Mutual Funds Click here to go to the MainStay Mutual Funds Web site. New York Life Benefit Services Click here to get in touch with New York Life Benefit Services. Be sure tobookmark thispage so youcan return after exploring the New York Life Benefit Services Web site. What is Your Business Worth?|Keeping Your Business in the Family|Taking Care of Business with Split-Dollar Life Insurance Outsourcing Your Employee Benefits: Pension and Health Care|The Advantages of a Bundled 401(k) Plan Can YouAfford Not to Have a Health Care Plan for Your Business?|ThreeDemographic Trends Reshaping The Workforce Securities offered through NYLIFE Securities Inc.(Member NASD), 51 Madison Avenue, New York, NY 10010 Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-179IA046-000818-B019-363http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/pfpitpcw.html 207.121.184.160 19970119020624 text/html 10980HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 02:05:27 GMTContent-type: text/html The Cost Of Waiting The Cost Of Waiting Procrastinating Can Be Expensive There are plenty of excuses for not setting financialgoals; "I don't understandinvesting," "I don't have the time to plan," "I can't afford to invest." Well, thetruth of the matter is, you can'tafford to delay. Early planning can help to maximize the power of time, and canhelp you reach yourfinancial goals. Time is on Your Side The concept of the power of time is a simple one: The sooner you begin to save foryour future financialneeds, the greater the wealth you can accumulate. Although the idea isstraightforward and logical,most people fail to recognize the enormous increase in value that can result frombeginning to saveearly. The best way to demonstrate the power of time is by way of example. Let'stake a look at thedifferent approaches to investing taken by twin brothers, Ken and Ray. Starting Early Ken, looking to build a large nest egg for his retirement, chose to invest $1,000per year in an IndividualRetirement Account (IRA), starting at age 30. He continued his payments for tenyears until age 40,earning an average of 8% per year on his investments 1. At age 40, he stoppedcontributing to the IRA,but left his $11,000 of contributions in the account, plus earnings, untilretirement at age 65. 1 8% interest is for illustrative purposes onlyand is not intended to predict nor guarantee the results of any security product. Starting Late Ray, the second twin, was a bright guy but a bit of a procrastinator. He too sawthe need to put moneyaway for his retirement but didn't begin his investment plan until age 41. At thatpoint he began investing$1,000 a year into an IRA. He also averaged an 8% annual return,1 but he continuedto make $1,000investments for 25 years until he retired at age 65. His contributions over theyears totaled $25,000. The Dramatic Difference Given the fact that Ken contributed $11,000 while Ray contributed $25,000, youmight expect that thesecond twin would have a significantly greater total for retirement at age 65.Surprisingly, just theopposite is true! Assuming the tax-deferred IRA of each twin earned 8% a year, at age 65 the accountbalance for thefirst twin would be $123,000, while the second twin would have $79,000. Thepreceding hypotheticalchart vividly illustrates the dramatic difference in the accumulated wealth for thetwo. The Cost of Waiting Ray was on the right track. He invested steadily and wisely, earning good returns -his only mistakewas getting a late start. Ray invested more than twice the amount his brother did,yet had less money toenjoy at retirement. By getting an earlier start, Ken benefited from more years ofcompounding. Left toaccumulate in his account, the earnings from his early years earned additionalreturns. In other words,"earnings earn earnings." The Impact of Time and Life Insurance Postponing the purchase of life insurance to a perceived "better time" can alsohave a definite cost ofwaiting. For example, let's take a look at Trish's quandary. She's identified theneed for $250,000 ofpermanent life insurance coverage. Trish is considering buying a $250,000 wholelife policy, whichwould provide immediate insurance protection, and offer guaranteed cash valueaccumulation thatcould, in the long term, be borrowed against to fund a child's college education orhelp supplementretirement income. At age 40, her annual premium would be $4,000, but she's debatingwhether or notto wait five years, at which point her premium would be $5,000. Looking at bothscenarios over the longterm, total premium paid would balance out by age 65 ($4,000 for 25 years, and$5,000 for 20 yearsboth equal $100,000). How Waiting Can Affect Cash Value, Death Benefit, andInsurability Waiting would have a negative effect on several key areas. A whole life policyoffers the benefit oftax-deferred accumulation of cash value. Generally speaking, the sooner you start,the faster your cashvalue will grow over the long term. These cash values can be accessed throughpolicy loans to helpmeet financial needs. In addition, a whole life policy is eligible to earn dividends, if and when theyare declared by thecompany. Unlike cash values, dividends are not guaranteed. Trish could use herdividends in a varietyof beneficial ways including using them to purchase additional insurance to enhanceher total deathbenefit. Waiting means missing five years of potential dividends and theopportunity to increase thebenefit paid to her beneficiaries. Waiting five years can also place Trish's insurability in jeopardy. She's insurableat age 40, but may beuninsurable due to a health condition at age 45. Perhaps the greatest risk inwaiting is if she were todie in the next five years. In that case, the cost would be the $250,000 deathbenefit her beneficiarieswould not be paid. Purchasing this policy now would cost no more than waiting five years. Cash valueand death benefit,however, should be higher. Most importantly, insurance protection would begin now.So why shouldTrish wait? It's Never Too Early to Start Although expenses like the kids' college tuition and your own retirement may seemlike distant images,it pays to face up to the future today. With college tuition rising at a rate of 6%to 8% a year (the CollegeBoard, September 1993), you'll need all the time you can muster to meet thosespiraling costs. Lookingfarther down the road, a company pension and Social Security payments may notafford the lifestyle youdesire in retirement. Your financial future is your responsibility, and with early,careful planning, you canmake for a brighter one. As Ray discovered, waiting just a few years can meanthousands of dollarsless waiting for you. Time can be an important investment ally. You should considerplanning andinvesting, and put the power of time on your side. For ideas on putting your goalsinto action, contactyour New York Life agent or NYLIFE Securities registered representative. The examples discussed above are for informational and illustrationpurposes. Theyare not intendedto predict nor guarantee the performance of any particular insurance or financialproduct. What Are Your Goals?|What Are the Obstacles?|The Cost of Waiting|Risk vs. Return Dollar Cost Averaging... A Time-Tested Approach Securities offered through NYLIFE Securities Inc.(Member NASD), 51 Madison Avenue, New York, NY 10010 Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-180IA046-000818-B019-394http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/pfepiw.html 207.121.184.160 19970119020656 text/html 11817HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 02:06:04 GMTContent-type: text/html Welcome to the NYLCare Web Site! Site Navigation Tips Home · Contact NYLCare · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal · Provider List WT02-B28-217IA046-000818-B023-102http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/mainstay/index.html 207.121.184.160 19970119022038 text/html 3693HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 02:19:49 GMTContent-type: text/html MainStay Funds - Financial and Investment Information Welcome Aboard MainStay Funds for Individuals MainStay Funds for Businesses Retirement Services for Businesses Personal Retirement Strategies Investment Education Center MainStay Financial Forum Personal Folder Site Navigation Tips The mutual funds referred to may be offered and sold only topersons in the United States. Securities products are offered by NYLIFE Securities Inc., memberNASD. Please call 1-800-MAINSTAY for a free MainStay Funds prospectus and/or a MainStay Institutional Funds prospectus, or download either or both now. The prospectuses containmore complete information on applicable fees, charges and expenses and share classes for each mutual fund. Please read it carefully before you invest or send money. These products are not federally insured or guaranteed by the U.S. Government, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation or similar agency. Distributed by NYLIFE Distributors Inc., Member NASD. WT02-B28-218IA046-000818-B023-135http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/mainstay/cm.html 207.121.184.160 19970119022051 text/html 4108HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 02:19:59 GMTContent-type: text/html Contact MainStay You may contact MainStay via e-mail at infomain@nyl.e-mail.com, orcall 1-800-MAINSTAY. Home · Contact MainStay · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-219IA046-000818-B023-209http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/mainstay/sm.html 207.121.184.160 19970119022120 text/html 5075HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 02:20:26 GMTContent-type: text/html Site Search The MainStay Web site is fully integrated with two other Web sites: New York Life and NYLCare Health Plans, Inc. You may choose to search just one - or all three - sites using the Keyword Search. Keyword Search Enter your search string below and click on search: Search All SitesSearch New York LifeSearch MainStay FundsSearch NYLCare Maximum Number of Hits: 5102030405075100 You may also search the MainStay Web site in one of the following two ways: View Site Map To see a graphical representation of the MainStay Web site, click here. Alphabetical Index You can also browse through the MainStay Web site index alphabetized by page title. Home · Contact MainStay · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-220IA046-000818-B023-248http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/mainstay/lm.html 207.121.184.160 19970119022207 text/html 6007HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 02:21:05 GMTContent-type: text/html Legal Copyright © 1996 New York Life Insurance Company While New York Life Insurance Company and its affiliates provide the information on thisserver to anyone, we retain copyright on all text and graphic images. This means thatyou may not: distribute the text or graphics to others or "mirror" thisinformation on your own server or modify or re-use the text or graphics on this system without the prior express written permission of New York LifeInsurance Company. You MAY: print copies of the information or store the files on your own computer for your personal use only or reference this server from your own documents. New York Life Insurance Company reserves all other rights. The logo and the logo and the logo and The Company You Keep and New York Life and MainStay andNYLCare and NYLIFE and New York Life Asset Management areregistered trademarks or servicemarks of New York Life Insurance Company. SpectraLife is a trademark of New York Life Insurance Company. Products andservice names profiled herein are marks of New York Life Insurance Company. Othermanufacturers' products profiled herein are trademarks of their respective companies. Please Read This Disclaimer The information, text, graphics and links provided herein are provided by New York LifeInsurance Company as a convenience to its customers. New York Life Insurance Company does not warrant the accuracy or completeness of theinformation, text, graphics, links, and other items contained on this server or any otherserver. New York Life Insurance Company makes no representation about the suitability of thisdocumentation for any purpose. It is provided as is without express or implied warranty. Home · Contact MainStay · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-221IA046-000818-B023-290http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/mainstay/rb.html 207.121.184.160 19970119022228 text/html 4853HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 02:21:33 GMTContent-type: text/html Retirement Services For Businesses A financially-secure retirement is of paramount importance for every one of your employees. MainStay Retirement Services for Businesses offers you an array of products and services to help you meet the retirement planning needs of your employees. Home · Contact MainStay · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-222IA046-000818-B023-327http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/mainstay/rbppsx.html 207.121.184.160 19970119022242 text/html 8309HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 02:21:53 GMTContent-type: text/html Which MainStay Retirement Program May Be Right for You? Which MainStay Retirement Program May Be Right for You? The employee benefits you provide are only as valuable as the services behind them. Our RetirementPrograms have been designed from the ground up to provide a cost effective answer to your needs as aplan sponsor. At the same time, the Programs offer the services and support your employees need to effectivelypursue their retirement goals. Insist on the latest technology, investments, convenient administration, and effectivecommunications. Choose a MainStay Retirement Program for yourself, and your employees today. Plan Types IRA SEP Profit Sharing 401(k) Money Purchase 403(b) Tax-Sheltered Account (Profit Sharing & Money Purchase Plans may be combined, with certain limitationsfor added flexibility) Suitable For Individual Small employers desiring the simplest type of plan, with minimal cost and filing requirements. Employers with a need for contribution flexibility. (e.g. due to large fluctuations in annual profits orotherwise unwilling to commit to a specific amount of contributions to the plan on an ongoing annualbasis). Employers desiring to provide employees with the opportunity to put their own money into a plan, withthe option to provide employer contributions in the form of matching or profit sharing contributions. Employers able to make a recurring annual contribution commitment. Businesses with generally stableprofits. Employees of non-profit organizations and public schools who want to put their own money into aretirement plan. Eligible Employees Must have received earned income and be less than 70 1/2 for the deduction year. Employees age 21 or over, who earned at least $400 and were employed for 3 out of the last 5 years. All employees meeting minimum age and service requirements stated in the plan. Generally age 21and 1 year of service. At employee's discretion Plan Set-Up & Contribution Deadlines April 15th Tax filing due date, including any extensions. Must adopt by last day of employer's tax year Employer contribution to be made by tax filing due date N/A to salary reductions, which are effective once enrollment forms are signed Salary reductions are effective once appropriate forms are signed. Annual Contribution Maximum Lesser of 100% of compensation or $2,000. Special rules apply to participants in qualified plans). 15% of employee compensation, up to $150,000 ($22,500 effective maximum). 15% of covered payroll, up to $30,000 per participant. Employee Salary Deferrals - Lesser of $9,500 or 15% of Compensation. Employer Contributions - 15% of covered compensation, up to $30,000 perparticipant. 25% of covered payroll, up to $30,000 per participant. Lesser of exclusion allowance calculation or $9,500, with a 20% of compensation maximum. Home · Contact MainStay · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-223IA046-000818-B023-366http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/mainstay/rbppbn.html 207.121.184.160 19970119022313 text/html 9848HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 02:22:06 GMTContent-type: text/html University of Kansas Medical Center and Dykes Library http://www.kumc.edu This University of Kansas Medical Center site provides information on hospitals, clinics,andsupport groups, as well as full access to the library catalogue, including an electronicrequest service for journal articles and books. Health Vision: The diet and weight loss / fitness home page http://www1.mhv.net/~donn/diet.html This home page is designed in an easy-to-follow manner. It offers users facts, tips andinformation regarding dieting, weight loss and fitness. The site never over-sells users onits ideas. Equipped with a comprehensive list of comparable links, the site reveals acommitment to aid users on how to learn more about their health. Duke University Medical Center http://www.mc.duke.edu/index.html In the Carolinas, where NYLCare maintains a joint venture agreement with Duke UniversityMedical Center, we operate under the name "WellPath Community Health Plans". Home · Contact NYLCare · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal · Provider List WT02-B28-236IA046-000818-B025-66http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/mainstay/mfbg.html 207.121.184.160 19970119022934 text/html 5767HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 02:28:42 GMTContent-type: text/html Mutual Funds Background Mutual funds are among the most popular ways to invest - and for good reason. When you invest in a mutual fund, you join other investors, pooling your money to purchase securities and pursue a specific objective. If you don't have the time to follow the markets, the experience to manage a portfolio, or the resources to diversify on your own, mutual funds may offer you four important advantages. Diversification By pooling the resources of many investors, mutual funds are able to purchase a broader range of securities than most individuals can afford on their own. While the types of securities a fund may purchase will depend on its investment objective, diversification is widely recognized as a way that may help reduce investment risk. Flexibility Mutual fund "families" offer investors the ability to stick with their original investment or move some of their money among various funds when markets shift or their personal circumstances change. Professional management Mutual funds are managed by experienced investment professionals, who continually monitor the economy, the markets, and individual securities to free you from having to make complex day-to-day investment decisions. Convenience Mutual funds are a convenient and affordable way to invest. In many cases, the minimum investment may be less than the cost of a single security in the fund's portfolio. Depending on your needs, you can arrange to have any income or capital gains automatically reinvested or sent directly to you. Home · Contact MainStay · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-237IA046-000818-B025-136http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/mainstay/mfgf.html 207.121.184.160 19970119023026 text/html 5474HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 02:29:28 GMTContent-type: text/html Growth Funds A growth fund seeks to increase your capital investment over the long term, with a greater risk to principal. MainStay offers three different types of growth funds. For more detailed information on the MainStay Growth Funds, click on the links below. Capital Appreciation Fund Equity Index Fund International Equity Fund The mutual funds referred to may be offered and sold only to persons in the United States. Securities products are offered by NYLIFE Securities Inc., member NASD. Please call 1-800-MAINSTAY for a free prospectus, or download it now. The prospectus contains more complete information on applicable fees, charges and expenses and share classes for each mutual fund. Please read it carefully before you invest or send money. These products are not federally insured or guaranteed by the U.S. Government, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation or similar agency. Distributed by NYLIFE Distributors Inc., Member NASD. Home · Contact MainStay · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-238IA046-000818-B025-179http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/mainstay/mfgi.html 207.121.184.160 19970119023048 text/html 5504HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 02:29:58 GMTContent-type: text/html Growth & Income Funds The MainStay Growth & Income Funds offer a combination of income and growth potential while striving to manage risk through diversification. The Funds may be appropriate for investors with a medium or long-term investment horizon. For more information on these Funds, click on the links below. Total Return Fund Value Fund Convertible Fund The mutual funds referred to may beoffered and sold only topersons in the United States. Securities products are offered by NYLIFESecurities Inc., memberNASD. Please call 1-800-MAINSTAY for a free prospectus, or download it now. The prospectuscontainsmore complete information on applicable fees, charges and expenses andshare classes for eachmutual fund. Please read it carefully before you invest or send money. These products are notfederally insured orguaranteed by the U.S. Government, the Federal Deposit InsuranceCorporation or similar agency. Distributed by NYLIFE Distributors Inc., Member NASD. Home · Contact MainStay · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-239IA046-000818-B025-222http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/mainstay/mfif.html 207.121.184.160 19970119023105 text/html 5613HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 02:30:14 GMTContent-type: text/html Income Funds An income fund seeks to generate income from investments, with little or some risk to the principal invested. MainStay offers a variety of different income funds. The fund that may be right for you will depend on your investment objectives and tolerance for investment risk. The links below will introduce you to each of the MainStay Income Funds. Government Fund High Yield Corporate Bond Fund International Bond Fund Money Market Fund The mutual funds referred to may beoffered and sold only topersons in the United States. Securities products are offered by NYLIFESecurities Inc., memberNASD. Please call 1-800-MAINSTAY for a free prospectus, or download it now. The prospectuscontainsmore complete information on applicable fees, charges and expenses andshare classes for eachmutual fund. Please read it carefully before you invest or send money. These products are notfederally insured orguaranteed by the U.S. Government, the Federal Deposit InsuranceCorporation or similar agency. Distributed by NYLIFE Distributors Inc., Member NASD. Home · Contact MainStay · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-240IA046-000818-B025-248http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/mainstay/mftf.html 207.121.184.160 19970119023124 text/html 5505HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 02:30:31 GMTContent-type: text/html Tax Free Income Funds MainStay Tax Free Income Funds seek to provide current income free from regular Federalincome tax. The California Tax Free Fund and the New York Tax Free Fund also provideadditional tax savings for the residents of these states. For more information, clickon the links below. California Tax Free Fund New York Tax Free Fund Tax Free Bond Fund The mutual funds referred to may beoffered and sold only topersons in the United States. Securities products are offered by NYLIFESecurities Inc., memberNASD. Please call 1-800-MAINSTAY for a free prospectus, or download it now. The prospectuscontainsmore complete information on applicable fees, charges and expenses andshare classes for eachmutual fund. Please read it carefully before you invest or send money. These products are notfederally insured orguaranteed by the U.S. Government, the Federal Deposit InsuranceCorporation or similar agency. Distributed by NYLIFE Distributors Inc., Member NASD. Home · Contact MainStay · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-241IA046-000818-B025-280http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/mainstay/mfnv.html 207.121.184.160 19970119023152 text/html 18828HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 02:30:56 GMTContent-type: text/html Daily Net Asset Values - Funds For Individuals This up-to-date fund value chart is an online, anytime, resource for tracking the net asset value of TheMainStay Funds. Updated daily, it provides you with the current information you require to makeday-to-day investment decisions. For more complete Fund performance, including Average Annual Total Returns, click on any of the Fund name links below. Daily Net Asset Values for Jan 17, 1997 Name of Fund Ticker Current NAV Change % Change Dividend Yield Growth Funds Capital Appreciation Fund Class A MCSAX 31.86 0.25 0.79 N/A Capital Appreciation Fund Class B MCSCX 31.53 0.24 0.77 N/A Equity Index Fund MCSEX 24.49 0.2 0.82 N/A International Equity Fund Class A MSEAX 10.48 0.01 0.1 N/A International Equity Fund Class B MINEX 10.38 0.01 0.1 N/A Growth & Income Funds Convertible Fund Class A MCOAX 14.04 0.01 0.07 N/A Convertible Fund Class B MCSVX 14.03 0.01 0.07 N/A Total Return Fund Class A MTRAX 20.59 0.11 0.54 N/A Total Return Fund Class B MKTRX 20.59 0.1 0.49 N/A Value Fund Class A MVAAX 20.94 0.13 0.62 N/A Value Fund Class B MKVAX 20.93 0.14 0.67 N/A Income Funds Government Fund Class A MCVAX 8.02 0 0 N/A Government Fund Class B MCSGX 8 0 0 N/A High Yield Corporate Bond Fund Class A MHCAX 8.3 -0.01 -0.12 N/A High Yield Corporate Bond Fund Class B MKHCX 8.29 0 0 N/A International Bond Fund Class A MKHCX 10.94 -0.02 -0.18 N/A International Bond Fund Class B MFIBX 10.96 -0.03 -0.27 N/A Money Market Fund Class A MMAXX 0 0 0 N/A Money Market Fund Class B MKMXX 0 0 0 N/A Tax Free Income Funds California Tax Free Fund Class A MSTAX 9.73 0.01 0.1 N/A California Tax Free Fund Class B N/A 9.7 0.01 0.1 N/A New York Tax Free Fund Class A MSNAX 9.85 0.01 0.1 N/A New York Tax Free Fund Class B N/A 9.78 0.01 0.1 N/A Tax Free Bond Fund Class A MTBAX 9.77 0.01 0.1 N/A Tax Free Bond Fund Class B MKTBX 9.78 0.01 0.1 N/A The mutual funds referred to may beoffered and sold only topersons in the United States. Securities products are offered by NYLIFESecurities Inc., memberNASD. Please call 1-800-MAINSTAY for a free prospectus, or download it now. The prospectuscontainsmore complete information on applicable fees, charges and expenses andshare classes for eachmutual fund. Please read it carefully before you invest or send money. These products are notfederally insured orguaranteed by the U.S. Government, the Federal Deposit InsuranceCorporation or similar agency. Distributed by NYLIFE Distributors Inc., Member NASD. Home · Contact MainStay · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-242IA046-000818-B025-347http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/mainstay/mffq.html 207.121.184.160 19970119023233 text/html 9009HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 02:31:39 GMTContent-type: text/html Frequently Asked Questions - MainStay Funds for Individuals MainStay is committed to keeping you informed and up-to-date. Here MainStay answers your frequentlyasked questions. Who is MainStay? The MainStay Funds were established in May 1986 as a registered open-end investmentcompany. Who manages the MainStay Funds? MacKay Shields Financial Corporation serves as an investment adviser to twelve of TheMainStay Funds. MacKay Shields' fundamental approach uses qualitative and quantitativemethods to select individual securities with growth, value, or income characteristics suitedto individual Fund objectives. The firm has specialized in money management for over 35years, and in 1984, became an independently managed subsidiary of New York Life. Monitor Capital Advisors, Inc., is an independently managed subsidiary of New York Life. and servesas investment adviser to the MainStay Equity Index Fund. What types of MainStay Funds are available? MainStay Funds offer investors a wide range of alternatives to meet different investmentobjectives including long term growth, current income, growth and income, and othercommoninvestment objectives. What is the minimum initial investment? You can invest in The MainStay Funds with an initial investment of $500. For The MainStay Equity IndexFund and Money Market Fund, the minimum initial investment is $1,000. Once you haveopenedyour account with the minimum initial investment, you can add as little as $50. For theEquity Index Fund, minimum additional investments must be at least $1,000. Do the Funds offer liquidity? Yes, the Funds can be redeemed or exchanged each day the New York Stock Exchange isopen forbusiness. However, the Funds are not designed or managed as short-term investments. For convenience, investors may redeem or exchange by telephone or by written request.Redemptions are paid at their current net-asset value which may be different from youroriginal investment. Are there any special features of the MainStay Funds? If you invest directly, The MainStay Funds offer a wide array of services such as automaticinvestment and systematic withdrawal programs,checkwriting privileges on Money Market accounts to make investingeasy and convenient. For full details on TheMainStay Funds, please see the prospectus or call 1-800-MAINSTAY. Please read it carefully,including changes and expenses, before you invest or send money. If you invest through abrokerage account, the Fund features may vary. Do the Funds pay dividends? For any MainStay Fund, you may elect to take your dividends in cash or have themreinvestedwithout a sales charge in additional Fund shares. The payment of dividends varies for eachfund depending on its objectives. If you are interested in current income, many of the MainStay Funds provide monthly incomeinthe form of a dividend. Those Funds include the High-Yield Corporate, Government,International Bond, Tax-Free Funds and Money Market. Funds for which income is not the singular investment objective, such as the Value, TotalReturn, Convertible, and International Equity Funds, all pay a quarterly dividend ifdeclared. Certain Funds do not seek income as an objective, but if a dividend is declared the Fund willdistribute it annually. Those funds include the Capital Appreciation and Equity IndexFunds. How do I keep track of my account? Account statements are sent to shareholders anytime there is activity in an account and consolidated statements are mailed for all Funds on a quarterly basis. Suppose my investment goals change? MainStay offers free exchanges between different Funds so investors may update theirportfolio as their goals and objectives change. How do I open an account? Account applications may be obtained by calling 1-800-MAINSTAY (1-800-624-6782) or by contactingyourlocalRegistered Representative. What if I still have questions? Call the above number and our Marketing Representatives will answer your questions andconcerns. The mutual funds referred to may beoffered and sold only topersons in the United States. Securities products are offered by NYLIFESecurities Inc., memberNASD. Please call 1-800-MAINSTAY for a free prospectus, or download it now. The prospectuscontainsmore complete information on applicable fees, charges and expenses andshare classes for eachmutual fund. Please read it carefully before you invest or send money. These products are notfederally insured orguaranteed by the U.S. Government, the Federal Deposit InsuranceCorporation or similar agency. Distributed by NYLIFE Distributors Inc., Member NASD. Home · Contact MainStay · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-243IA046-000817-B002-373http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/mainstay/mfpr.html 207.121.184.160 19970119023246 text/html 5689HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 02:31:57 GMTContent-type: text/html MainStay Funds Kit and Prospectus We invite you to download a copy of our prospectus for viewing. You may also request a copy by mail if you do not wish to download it. The prospectus is available as a Portable Document Format (PDF) file. In order to view a PDFfile, you must have a copyof Adobe Acrobat. To find out howtoobtain the software and view a PDF file, visit the Adobe Acrobat Web Site. When you visit Adobe's Web site, select the Released Software applicable to your type ofcomputer. Follow the instructions presented on the subsequent Adobe Web page(s). Before downloading the Prospectus... MainStay Funds are authorized for distribution to prospective investors only when precededor accompanied by an effective MainStay Funds Inc. prospectus. You agree to receive the following prospectus electronically and to read and agree to itsterms before investing. These funds may not be offered or sold to persons outside the U.S. The following prospectus is not an offer to sell or a solicitation of an offer to buy sharesin the fund nor shall any such shares be offered or sold to any person in any jurisdiction inwhich such offer, solicitation, purchase or sale would be unlawful under the securities lawsof such jurisdiction. I Agree. Proceed to download prospectus Home · Contact MainStay · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-244IA046-000817-B002-398http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/mainstay/prkrov.html 207.121.184.160 19970119023310 text/html 6064HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 02:32:14 GMTContent-type: text/html Rollover IRA Overview Overview You are not alone if you find certain investment and tax decisions intimidating.You understand the needto re-invest the retirement plan money that is yours to take when you leave yourcompany. However, likemany people, you may be unsure where to start. What you decide will affect yourcurrent and futureincome, your tax obligations and your short- and long-term financial security. For a century and a half, New York Life and its subsidiaries have providedinvestment assistance andproducts to people like you. To help you make informed decisions the New York Life Rollover IRA Program offers: A team of highly experienced retirement specialists to helpyou negotiate the investment, IRA and tax maze step-by-step, andmake informed decisions. A wide range of stocks, bonds,and mutual funds, including the MainStay Family of Funds andNew York Life annuities, all in one convenient account.1 Specialists who can help you every step of the way Our Retirement Specialists have years of experience answering investor questionsand providingadvice. When you call to ask a question, you'll speak to an experienced investmentprofessional whoknows your account and the financial products. They do not work on commission andare not looking tomake a quick sale. They're looking to provide investors with the help they need. What you need to know to make the right decision We have provided four informational brochures to help you address the issues regarding your retirement savings. Each ofthese brochures is written in clear, easy to understand language. 1 Securitiesofferedthrough NYLIFE Securities Inc., Member NASD Why New York Life? Benefits of the Program Home · Contact MainStay · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-245IA046-000817-B003-17http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/mainstay/prkrop.html 207.121.184.160 19970119023339 text/html 4892HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 02:32:36 GMTContent-type: text/html Deciding What To Do With Your Retirement Money Deciding What To Do With Your Retirement Money How Should You Receive Your Money When You Leave a Company? Protect Your Money Against Current Taxes What's a Rollover IRA? What Are Your Options? What Are the Tax Consequences? If You Don't Take Your Money Now Age May Play a Role in Your Tax Planning Home · Contact MainStay · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-246IA046-000817-B003-50http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/mainstay/prkric.html 207.121.184.160 19970119023424 text/html 5400HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 02:33:18 GMTContent-type: text/html Basic Investing Concepts Basic Investing Concepts How should you invest your money? Whether you are retiring, accepting a job with another company, or leavingyour company forsomeother reason, the money you have "built up" in your company retirement planis yours to take.This lumpsum of money is called a distribution, and may be the single largest sum youwill everreceive. Whenyou become eligible to receive a distribution, you must make two veryimportant decisionsabout how tohandle it for your long-term best interest: How should you take your money from your employer? What should you do with it then? This section explains and explores the second question and the factors youshould considerwhen planning your financial future. What Are Your Sources of Income? Estimate Your Income Needs The Basics Matching Your Needs and Objectives with the RightInvestments Different Types of Investments Meet DifferentNeeds What is Return? Risk? Diversification? Try To Protect Your Principal The Solution Home · Contact MainStay · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-247IA046-000817-B003-75http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/mainstay/prkran.html 207.121.184.160 19970119023501 text/html 5289HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 02:34:04 GMTContent-type: text/html Annuity - Your Guaranteed Income Option Annuity - Your Guaranteed Income Option An annuity is an investment that can provide you with a fixed monthly incomefor the remainder of yourlife. Some types of annuities can also continue the monthly payments for aspouse or anotherbeneficiary. An annuity is generally purchased by a lump sum premium that you pay once,before the annuity takeseffect. This premium entitles you to the income that you'll receive in the future.Once your annuity hasbeen purchased, the fixed payments will not change. The monthly payments areguaranteed, and theamount is based on the size of the premium, options and life expectancy. Annuities are sold mainly by insurance companies and are either "immediate"or "deferred." An"immediate annuity" begins paying monthly benefits shortly after the premium isreceived by theinsurance company. A "deferred annuity" starts paying benefits later, often manyyears after you payyour premium. Immediate GuaranteedAnnuity Why a New York Life Annuity? A Wide Range of Annuity Benefits What's My Next Step? Home · Contact MainStay · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-248IA046-000817-B003-117http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/mainstay/prkrkm.html 207.121.184.160 19970119023537 text/html 5399HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 02:34:35 GMTContent-type: text/html Keeping More of What You've Worked For Keeping More of What You've Worked For About Your New York Life Rollover IRA Frequently Asked Questions One Account, Many Choices What's My Next Step? The mutual funds referred to may be offered and sold only topersons in the United States. Securities products are offered by NYLIFE Securities Inc., memberNASD. Please call 1-800-MAINSTAY for a free MainStay Funds prospectus and/or a MainStay Institutional Funds prospectus, or download either or both now. The prospectuses containmore complete information on applicable fees, charges and expenses and share classes for each mutual fund. Please read it carefully before you invest or send money. These products are not federally insured or guaranteed by the U.S. Government, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation or similar agency. Distributed by NYLIFE Distributors Inc., Member NASD. Home · Contact MainStay · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-249IA046-000817-B003-153http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/mainstay/fbpr.html 207.121.184.160 19970119023615 text/html 5628HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 02:35:08 GMTContent-type: text/html MainStay Institutional Funds Kit and Prospectus MainStay Institutional Funds Inc. We invite you to download a copy of our MainStay Institutional Funds Inc. prospectus for viewing. You may also request a copy by mail if you do not wish to download it. The prospectus is available as a Portable Document Format (PDF) file. In order to view a PDF file, you must have a copy of Adobe Acrobat. To find out how to obtain the software and view a PDF file, visit the Adobe Acrobat Web Site. Before downloading the Prospectus... MainStay Institutional Funds are authorized for distribution to prospective investors only when preceded or accompanied by an effective MainStay Institutional Funds Inc. prospectus. You agree to receive the following prospectus electronically and to read and agree to its terms before investing. These funds may not be offered or sold to persons outside the U.S. The following prospectus is not an offer to sell or a solicitation of an offer to buy shares in the fund nor shall any such shares be offered or sold to any person in any jurisdiction in which such offer, solicitation, purchase or sale would be unlawful under the securities laws of such jurisdiction. I Agree. Proceed to download prospectus Home · Contact MainStay · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-250IA046-000817-B003-187http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/mainstay/rbor.html 207.121.184.160 19970119023633 text/html 5198HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 02:35:45 GMTContent-type: text/html Which Plan May Be Right for Your Organization? Retirement Realities and U.S. SavingsTrends Retirement Services forOrganizations With Fewer Than 500Employees Retirement Services for Organizations With More Than 500Employees HealthCare Plans forBusinesses In addition to a pension plan, employee health benefits are an integralcomponent of your organization's total compensation program. NYLCare, awholly owned subsidiary of New York Life Insurance Company, offers a full range of integratedhealth benefit services. This link will connect you to the section of theNYLCare Web site dedicated to employers. Home · Contact MainStay · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-251IA046-000817-B003-217http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/mainstay/rborunoo.html 207.121.184.160 19970119023650 text/html 5127HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 02:35:55 GMTContent-type: text/html Northwest | Pacific | Southwest | Gulf Coast | Central | Midwest | New England New York/Atlantic | Mid-Atlantic | Carolinas Home · Contact NYLCare · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal · Provider List WT02-B28-262IA046-000817-B004-162http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/bfmcqc.html 207.121.184.160 19970119024231 text/html 164HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 02:41:39 GMTContent-type: text/html link '/nyl/bfmcqc.html' not foundWT02-B28-263IA046-000817-B004-196http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/bfmcwc.html 207.121.184.160 19970119024247 text/html 164HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 02:42:00 GMTContent-type: text/html link '/nyl/bfmcwc.html' not foundWT02-B28-264IA046-000817-B004-223http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer_dev/wsh-nyl.hts/mainstay/index.html 207.121.184.160 19970119024307 text/html 3693HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 02:42:14 GMTContent-type: text/html MainStay Funds - Financial and Investment Information Welcome Aboard MainStay Funds for Individuals MainStay Funds for Businesses Retirement Services for Businesses Personal Retirement Strategies Investment Education Center MainStay Financial Forum Personal Folder Site Navigation Tips The mutual funds referred to may be offered and sold only topersons in the United States. Securities products are offered by NYLIFE Securities Inc., memberNASD. Please call 1-800-MAINSTAY for a free MainStay Funds prospectus and/or a MainStay Institutional Funds prospectus, or download either or both now. The prospectuses containmore complete information on applicable fees, charges and expenses and share classes for each mutual fund. Please read it carefully before you invest or send money. These products are not federally insured or guaranteed by the U.S. Government, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation or similar agency. Distributed by NYLIFE Distributors Inc., Member NASD. WT02-B28-265IA046-000817-B004-258http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer_dev/wsh-nyl.hts/mainstay/cm.html 207.121.184.160 19970119024321 text/html 4108HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 02:42:29 GMTContent-type: text/html Contact MainStay You may contact MainStay via e-mail at infomain@nyl.e-mail.com, orcall 1-800-MAINSTAY. Home · Contact MainStay · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-266IA046-000817-B004-330http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer_dev/wsh-nyl.hts/mainstay/sm.html 207.121.184.160 19970119024415 text/html 5075HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 02:43:18 GMTContent-type: text/html Site Search The MainStay Web site is fully integrated with two other Web sites: New York Life and NYLCare Health Plans, Inc. You may choose to search just one - or all three - sites using the Keyword Search. Keyword Search Enter your search string below and click on search: Search All SitesSearch New York LifeSearch MainStay FundsSearch NYLCare Maximum Number of Hits: 5102030405075100 You may also search the MainStay Web site in one of the following two ways: View Site Map To see a graphical representation of the MainStay Web site, click here. Alphabetical Index You can also browse through the MainStay Web site index alphabetized by page title. Home · Contact MainStay · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-267IA046-000817-B004-366http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer_dev/wsh-nyl.hts/mainstay/lm.html 207.121.184.160 19970119024511 text/html 6007HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 02:44:06 GMTContent-type: text/html Legal Copyright © 1996 New York Life Insurance Company While New York Life Insurance Company and its affiliates provide the information on thisserver to anyone, we retain copyright on all text and graphic images. This means thatyou may not: distribute the text or graphics to others or "mirror" thisinformation on your own server or modify or re-use the text or graphics on this system without the prior express written permission of New York LifeInsurance Company. You MAY: print copies of the information or store the files on your own computer for your personal use only or reference this server from your own documents. New York Life Insurance Company reserves all other rights. The logo and the logo and the logo and The Company You Keep and New York Life and MainStay andNYLCare and NYLIFE and New York Life Asset Management areregistered trademarks or servicemarks of New York Life Insurance Company. SpectraLife is a trademark of New York Life Insurance Company. Products andservice names profiled herein are marks of New York Life Insurance Company. Othermanufacturers' products profiled herein are trademarks of their respective companies. Please Read This Disclaimer The information, text, graphics and links provided herein are provided by New York LifeInsurance Company as a convenience to its customers. New York Life Insurance Company does not warrant the accuracy or completeness of theinformation, text, graphics, links, and other items contained on this server or any otherserver. New York Life Insurance Company makes no representation about the suitability of thisdocumentation for any purpose. It is provided as is without express or implied warranty. Home · Contact MainStay · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-268IA046-000817-B004-396http://www.newyorklife.com:80/mainstay/images/smsmim.map 207.121.184.160 19970119024527 text/html 315HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 02:44:39 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 180 Imagemap Error Imagemap Error Your client did not send any coordinates. Either your client doesn't support imagemap or the map file was not accessed as a map.WT02-B28-269IA046-000817-B005-24http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer_dev/wsh-nyl.hts/nyl/sysm.html 207.121.184.160 19970119024558 text/html 4605HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 02:44:55 GMTContent-type: text/html Site Map Below is a graphical representation of the sections in the New York Life site. You can usethissite map to quickly navigate to a section of the site you are interested in. Just move yourmouse over a section and click. MainStay Funds NYLCare Home · Contact NYL · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-270IA046-000817-B005-58http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer_dev/wsh-nyl.hts/nylcare/index.html 207.121.184.160 19970119024617 text/html 3967HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 02:45:28 GMTContent-type: text/html NYLCare Health Plans - Health Benefits Information Welcome to the NYLCare Web Site! Site Navigation Tips Home · Contact NYLCare · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal · Provider List WT02-B28-271IA046-000817-B005-84http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer_dev/wsh-nyl.hts/nylcare/cn.html 207.121.184.160 19970119024636 text/html 4521HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 02:45:45 GMTContent-type: text/html Contact NYLCare You may contact NYLCare in one of two ways: Email Contact NYLCare via email at info@corporate.nylcare.com Office Finder You may also contact NYLCare by finding the office nearest you. Home · Contact NYLCare · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal · Provider List WT02-B28-272IA046-000817-B005-149http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer_dev/wsh-nyl.hts/nylcare/sn.html 207.121.184.160 19970119024718 text/html 5364HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 02:46:20 GMTContent-type: text/html Site Search The NYLCare Health Plans, Inc. Web site is fully integrated with two other Web sites: New York Life and MainStay Mutual Funds. You may choose to search just one - or all three - sites using the Keyword Search. Keyword Search Enter your search string below and click on search: Search All SitesSearch New York LifeSearch MainStay FundsSearch NYLCare Maximum Number of Hits: 5102030405075100 You may also search the NYLCare Health Plans, Inc. Web site in one of the following two ways: View Site Map To see a graphical representation of the NYLCare Health Plans, Inc. Web site, click here. Index You can also browse through the NYLCare Health Plans, Inc. Web site index alphabetized by page title. Home · Contact NYLCare · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal · Provider List WT02-B28-273IA046-000817-B005-193http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer_dev/wsh-nyl.hts/nylcare/ln.html 207.121.184.160 19970119024748 text/html 6983HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 02:46:56 GMTContent-type: text/html Legal Please Read This Disclaimer Indemnity, insurance coverage under NYLCare benefit plans is provided by New York LifeInsurance Company or one of its affiliated insurance companies. HMO coverage (and HMO dental coverage)is provided by subsidiaries of NYLCare Health Plans, Inc. except as listed below. In the Carolinas NYLCare Health Plans is known as Wellpath. In Oklahoma, HMO benefit plans are offered and issued by CommunityCare. In California, HMO benefit plans are offered and issued by BPS HMO. In Kansas City, HMO benefit plans are offered and issued by HealthNet. Some coverages and plans are not available to all group sizes. Not all coverages or plansare available in all markets. Contact your NYLCare representative for moreinformation. Copyright © 1996 New York Life Insurance Company While New York Life Insurance Company and its affiliates provide the information on thisserver to anyone, we retain copyright on all text and graphic images. This means thatyou may not: distribute the text or graphics to others or "mirror" thisinformation on your own server without the prior express written permission of New York LifeInsurance Company or modify or re-use the text or graphics on this system. YouMAY: print copies of the information or store the files on your own computer foryour personal use only or reference this server from your own documents. New York Life Insurance Company reserves all other rights. The logo and the logo and the logo and The Company You Keep and New York Life and MainStay andNYLCare and NYLIFE and New York Life Asset Management areregistered trademarks or servicemarks of New York Life Insurance Company. SpectraLife is a trademark of New York Life Insurance Company. Products andservice names profiled herein are marks of New York Life Insurance Company. Othermanufacturers' products profiled herein are trademarks of their respective companies. The information, text, graphics and links provided herein are provided by New York LifeInsurance Company as a convenience to its customers. New York Life Insurance Company does not warrant the accuracy or completeness of theinformation, text, graphics, links, and other items contained on this server or any otherserver. New York Life Insurance Company makes no representation about the suitability of thisdocumentation for any purpose. It is provided as is without express or implied warranty. Home · Contact NYLCare · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal · Provider List WT02-B28-274IA046-000817-B005-290http://www.newyorklife.com:80/nylcare/images/snsmim.map 207.121.184.160 19970119024851 text/html 315HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 02:48:03 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 180 Imagemap Error Imagemap Error Your client did not send any coordinates. Either your client doesn't support imagemap or the map file was not accessed as a map.WT02-B28-275IA046-000817-B005-323http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/mainstay/rborunsp.html 207.121.184.160 19970119024903 text/html 9249HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 02:48:13 GMTContent-type: text/html Simplified Employee Pension Plans (SEP) Simplified Employee Pension Plans(SEP) An Ideal Plan For Small And Medium SizedBusinesses A SEP is a simplified retirement plan, which allows employers tomake contributionsdirectly to theiremployees' own Individual Retirement Accounts (IRAs). Employersreceive a taxdeduction for the fullamount of each contribution. Because of its simplicity, the SEP is an excellent low-costalternative to apension or profit sharing plan,allowing small and medium-sized businesses to control the cost ofproviding aretirement plan. The IRS provides an approved document and there is no expensive,time consumingannual reportingto either the IRS or the Department of Labor. But what are thespecific benefitsto you? Your Benefits With A SEP All contributions you make to your employees' SEP, up to thelesser of 15% of eachemployee'scompensation or $30,0001, aretaxdeductible business expenses. As an employee of your company, you are also entitled to set up aSEP for yourbenefit. Each year, you determine the amount, if any, to be contributed tothe plan for thatyear. All earnings in a SEP accumulate tax-deferred and provide retirementincome in additionto Social Securitybenefits. A SEP is an excellent incentive for attracting qualifiedemployees, reducingturnover, and retainingthosewith proven ability and experience. A SEP is easy to establish and understand, with minimalrecordkeeping andgovernment reporting. 1 Only the first$150,000 of compensation is considered, limiting the maximumcontribution to $22,500. The SEP Advantage - Reduced Corporate Taxes A SEP can help you save money on your corporate taxes. Savingmoney on corporatetaxes can directlyimprove your bottom line, as the following chart shows: Reduce Corporate Taxes Company A Company B Corporate Income $250,000 $250,000 SEP Contribution 0 50,000 Taxable Income 250,000 200,000 Taxes at 34% 85,000 68,000 Tax Savings 0 17,000 Assumes $250,000 corporate income, 34% taxrate. Company Amakes no SEPcontribution. Company B makes a $50,000 SEP contribution. As you can see, with the $17,000 tax savings, a $50,000 SEPcontribution actuallycosts only $33,000. Fund Your SEP With Mutual Funds Mutual funds can be excellent investments for your SEP. Manymutual fund familiesoffer a widerange of investment opportunities, designed to meet the financialgoals ofvirtually every type of investor. Since a SEP allows employees to select their investments, thewell-definedinvestment objectivesand flexibility of mutual funds make them an ideal investmentoption for a SEP. Moreover, mutual fundsareprofessionally managed and provide you with diversifiedinvestments. SEP Highlights Employer Eligibility Incorporated or unincorporated businesses of self-employedindividuals can set up aSEP. Employee Eligibility Employees 21 years or older with any service in 3 of theimmediately preceding 5years and whoearnedat least $400 (indexed annually). Tax Deductible Contributions You can deduct up to the lesser of 15% of includible compensationor $30,0001 perparticipant. IRS Reporting Requirements There are none, providing you give all eligible employees certaininformation. Set Up, Initial Funding and ContributionDeadline The employer tax filing due date (or later if granted anextension for filing thetax return). 1 Only the first$150,000 of compensation is considered, limiting the maximumcontribution to $22,500. SEP Q&A Retirement Plans Overview | Program Options | Keys to aSuccessful Plan | Plan Types Simplified Employee Pension Plans (SEP) | Plan Investments Home · Contact MainStay · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-276IA046-000817-B005-362http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/mainstay/prst.html 207.121.184.160 19970119024923 text/html 5032HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 02:48:34 GMTContent-type: text/html Starting an IRA Whether you plan to open an IRA, transfer existing IRA assets, or are entitled to adistributionfrom anemployer pension plan, MainStay can help you plan for an independent retirementwithdiversifiedinvestments, quality service, and professional management. What is an IRA? Your Advantages With a MainStay IRA Transfers and Rollovers Are You Retiring or Changing Jobs? Save on Taxes Today Can I Deduct my IRA Contributions? Home · Contact MainStay · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-277IA046-000817-B005-397http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nylcare/an.html 207.121.184.160 19970119024947 text/html 5933HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 02:48:55 GMTContent-type: text/html About NYLCare NYLCare is a national, multi-billion dollar health and employee benefit company that offers a full complement of health benefitplans in the United States, including: Managed Indemnity Programs Health Maintenance Organizations (HMOs) Preferred Provider Organizations (PPOs) Point-of-Service (POS) Plans Multi-Option Benefit Plans Managed Medicare Plans Millions of Americans trust the NYLCare name (pronounced "nile-care") when it comes to health care. Organizations that selectNYLCare to meet their employee health benefit management needs enjoy a full range of integrated health benefit services. To meet the needs of our members from coast to coast, NYLCare is divided into eleven regional organizations. Each regionalorganization has a full range of product delivery and service capabilities to respond to local market conditions. A nationalstructure - with a local focus - ensures the highest level of service possible. NYLCare is a wholly-owned subsidiary of the New York Life Insurance Company. The NYLCare name reflects the importantrelationship that exists between NYLCare and New York Life. NYLCare Vision NYLCare History NYLCare Scope of Operations Home · Contact NYLCare · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal · Provider List WT02-B28-278IA046-000817-B005-434http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nylcare/mc.html 207.121.184.160 19970119024959 text/html 5352HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 02:49:09 GMTContent-type: text/html For Members and Consumers About This Section Home · Contact NYLCare · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal · Provider List WT02-B28-279IA046-000817-B006-1http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nylcare/ip.html 207.121.184.160 19970119025010 text/html 5099HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 02:49:21 GMTContent-type: text/html For Insurance Producers This link connects you to the benefit needs assessment tool inthe"For Employers" section of this Web site. About ThisSection Home · Contact NYLCare · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal · Provider List WT02-B28-280IA046-000817-B006-29http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nylcare/pv.html 207.121.184.160 19970119025027 text/html 4953HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 02:49:36 GMTContent-type: text/html For Providers About ThisSection Home · Contact NYLCare · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal · Provider List WT02-B28-281IA046-000817-B006-57http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nylcare/wn.html 207.121.184.160 19970119025037 text/html 4301HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 02:49:49 GMTContent-type: text/html What's New At present, this site is brand new. Check back in the future to find out What's New at ThisSite - and at NYLCare! Home · Contact NYLCare · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal · Provider List WT02-B28-282IA046-000817-B006-92http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nylcare/in.html 207.121.184.160 19970119025138 text/html 7108HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 02:50:44 GMTContent-type: text/html Welcome to NYLCare Welcome to the NYLCare Web Site! If you are new to NYLCare, this site will introduce you to one of the largest health andemployee benefit companies in the United States. If you are already familiar with NYLCare, either as a member, employer, health serviceprovider, agent, or broker, this site has been designed to help meet your information needs. This site will grow and evolve over time. If the information you are looking for is nothere, it will likely be added at some point in the future. In fact, we encourage you to makesuggestions for content that you would like to see included on this site. Click on the"Contact NYLCare" button to get in touch with us! Here's a guide to help you navigate Tthrough our site: About NYLCare Click on this category to find out who we are, where we came from, and what we do. NYLCare offers services throughout the United States. If you live in the Carolinas, you knowus as "WellPath Community Health Plans". For Members and Consumers Select this category for information to help you get the most out of NYLCare. Thissection of the site has been designed primarily for NYLCare members. Non-members will alsofind much of our health care information interesting and useful. For Employers Information of interest to employers, whether or not you are currently associated withNYLCare. If you are an employer that is considering the introduction of a health benefitsplan in your organization, click on this link to help you assess your benefit needs. For Insurance Producers Updates and information for New York Life agents and independent brokers. Excerpts fromthe "Agent Contact" and "Producer Focus" newsletters can be found here. For Providers Information designed with NYLCare health service providers in mind. If you providehealth care services to NYLCare members, this area of the site will provide you with tools tohelp you serve our members. If you are interested in joining the NYLCare network as a healthcare provider, click on this link to get in touch with a NYLCare representative in your area. NYLCare Products and Services General information on the vast range of products and services offered through NYLCare. Personal Folder Open your own Personal Folder. Customize your Personal Folder to help you achieve yourpersonal and business goals. What's New Press releases and company developments. Also includes additions to this site. Welcome to the NYLCare WebSite! | Site Navigation Tips Home · Contact NYLCare · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal · Provider List WT02-B28-283IA046-000817-B006-125http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/nylcare/innt.html 207.121.184.160 19970119025207 text/html 5774HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 02:51:11 GMTContent-type: text/html Site Navigation Tips Site Navigation Tips We have incorporated several features that make it easy for you to navigate your way around this site. Relative Location Within the Site Most pages in this site have headers and, in some cases, subheaders, as in the example below. A subheader will be located directly beneath the header (this page has no subheader). The header and subheader indicate your relative location in the site. Returning to the Top of a Section or Subsection If the headers or subheader is bright blue, as in the example above, it is an active "hyperlink".If you click on a blue header title, the top level page for that section will be displayed.If you click on a smaller blue subheader title, the top level page for that particular subsection will be displayed. Navigating Within a Section or Subsection At the bottom of most pages within a section, you will also see lateral links to other pages within that section. The page you are on will be displayed in bold type, but will not be active. For example, at the bottom of this page, you can see that you are on the "Site Navigation Tips" page. Any other pages listed are active links. For example, you can click on the "Welcome to the NYLCare Web Site!" link below to connect to that page. Try it now! Welcome to the NYLCare WebSite! | Site Navigation Tips Home · Contact NYLCare · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal · Provider List WT02-B28-284IA046-000817-B006-155http://www.newyorklife.com:80/mainstay/images/index.map 207.121.184.160 19970119025222 text/html 315HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 02:51:32 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 180 Imagemap Error Imagemap Error Your client did not send any coordinates. Either your client doesn't support imagemap or the map file was not accessed as a map.WT02-B28-285IA046-000817-B006-193http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/mainstay/wl.html 207.121.184.160 19970119025232 text/html 6097HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 02:51:44 GMTContent-type: text/html Welcome to MainStay If MainStay is new to you, this site is a way toget to know our broad range of products and services, and for you totell us what you think. You can e-mail us from any screen in this site by clicking on the"Contact MainStay"button. If you're one of the more than 650,000 MainStayshareholders, this site is a new way for you to getinformation about MainStay, 24 hours a day, seven days a week,whether you invest personally, through an organization, or both.Shareholder satisfaction is MainStay's number one priority. Weappreciate your trust and confidence in MainStay and look forward toserving your investment needs for many years to come. If you're an investment professional who sells theMainStay Funds, this site represents a new medium youcan easily use to expand your working knowledge about MainStay, inorder to better assist your MainStay customers and prospectiveMainStay investors. MainStay is committed to the Internet as a communications tool. Visit this site often. New features and functionality will be added on a regular basis. MainStay's site is designed for both individuals and businesses. For individuals we provide: The MainStay Funds Personal Retirement Strategies Investment Education Center For businesses and retirement plan participants we provide: MainStay Funds for Businesses Retirement Services For everyone, MainStay suggests youexplore: MainStay Financial Forum Your Personal Folder MainStay is dedicated to providing you with the choices, the options and the comprehensive information appropriate for your investment needs, at every turn, on every screen. Home · Contact MainStay · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal WT02-B28-286IA046-000817-B006-232http://www.newyorklife.com:80/viewer/wsh-nyl.hts/mainstay/fb.html 207.121.184.160 19970119025242 text/html 6090HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 02:51:53 GMTContent-type: text/html MainStay Funds for Businesses With experience, deep commitment and high-calibre expertise, MainStay Institutional Funds Inc. provides you with arange ofmutual fund options. You have the flexibility to choose the fund or funds that are bestsuited to your particular needs. Dig deeper with thelinks below and explore your options in detail. The mutual funds referred to may beoffered and sold only topersons in the United States. Securities products are offered by NYLIFESecurities Inc., memberNASD. Please call 1-800-MAINSTAY for a free prospectus, or download it now. The prospectuscontainsmore complete information on applicable fees, charges and expenses andshare classes for eachmutual fund. Please read it carefully before you invest or send money. These products are notfederally insured orguaranteed by the U.S. Government, the Federal Deposit InsuranceCorporation or similar agency. Distributed by NYLIFE Distributors Inc., Member NASD. Home · Contact MainStay · Personal Folder · Site Search · Legal