WT02-B35-1IA095-001021-B003-163http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/ch15.html 205.156.212.5 19970121223434 text/html 19793HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Tuesday, 21-Jan-97 22:32:43 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:41:58 GMTContent-length: 19608Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ch15.html Sample Issue Copyright THE CHEMICAL MONITOR via NewsNet January 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES >>>>>>>>>>>>>>> BIGGER MAY NOT BE BETTER (322 words) >->->->->->->->->->->->-> SILICON SENSORS (207 words) MICROMACHINING TECHNOLOGY MAKES SMARTER USEFUL SENSORS (180 words) -<-<-<-<-<-<-<- DIODE-BASED DETECTOR SPEEDS DNA ANALYSIS (186 words) PHOTOMULTIPLIER TUBES TO STUDY COSMIC RAYS AND NEUTRINOS (197 words) IIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIII ACCESSING SENSORS USING INTERNET (261 words) [[[[[[[[[[[[[[[[[[[[[[[[[[[[[[[[ DETECTING CRYPTOSPORIDIUM (165 words) ||||||||| IMPROVED METHOD OF FABRICATION OF NICKEL-METAL HYDRIDE BATTERY (242 words) <><><><><><><><><><>< MODEL FOR METALLIC ELECTROMIGRATION FAILURE (222 words) !!!!!!! NEW AND INTERESTING U.S. PATENTS (558 words) CopyrightTHE CHEMICAL MONITOR via NewsNetJanuary 1996BIGGER MAY NOT BE BETTERThe general condition of the U.S. chemical industry in 1995 showsa pattern of slight production growth, substantially increasingcorporate earnings growth and an equally consistent decline inemployment. This pattern shows certain corporate operatingprinciples that deserve critical judgement. These are as follows.     1) Profits will be higher if you pay fewer people.     2) A declining dollar can create a market without investment     in the human resource for process improvement and change.     3) It is possible to meet market demand without production and     process improvement by expanding older system and design     concepts. The steel industry is a historical precedent.     4) The investment in human capital can be forfeit now to be     recovered in the future at a lower price.The following reference expresses concern for the next year. Thedollar is gaining value and controls are being relaxed. There aremany  talented people in the marketplace. It should not be longbefore "mom and pop" operations can distribute rubbing alcohol tothe local pharmacies at half the price. Microbrewries are now acommonplace on the east coast. At a price they offer quality andchoice not available since before prohibition. Long Island now hasits own wine industry. It will soon recognize that its potato cropwould be useful for production and pipeline delivery of vodka to bedrunk in Manhattan and shipped world wide from the Port of NewYork. A right-of-way along the Long Island Railroad will do.Most of the processes operating in the chemical industry now canand will be copied and improved by the Chinese. Chemical productionis an ongoing process of growth based on improvement. There aremany aspects to improvement. Purity, safety, reliability, speed,applications of new materials and computer resources are examples.The present state of affairs is a one way ticket to obsolescence.**Storck, W.J., Chemical and Engineering News, Vol. 73, No. 50, pp.46-48, December 11, (1995)**Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE CHEMICAL MONITOR via NewsNetJanuary 1996SILICON SENSORSFew materials can compare to silicon for its usefulness in sensordesign. The first commercial use of the material was in preparationof photosensors in 1960. In the last 35 years silicon has notchanged but there have been numerous changes in technology andmarket demand that increases its usefulness to the measurement andinstrumentation field.The following reference describes improvements and devices thatserve new demands. There are 10,000 researchers operating in 200laboratories that continue the study of silicon sensor devices.Recent improvement in technology makes controlled doping possible.It is now possible to make multiwavelength sensor that limitresponse as a function of the depth of penetration of thestimulated carriers.In addition there are demands that appear out of environmentalmonitoring needs and biosensing systems. Surface acoustic waves andmicrocalorimetric enzyme catalyst measuring systems are twoexamples of these applications. The reference contains many more.Anyone interested in silicon devices should see this paper. It is18 pages long with about 100 references. Most of them are to recentpapers.**Middelhoek, S., Bellekom, A.A., Dauerstadt, U., French, P.J.,In'tHout, S.R., Kindt, W., Riedijk, F., and Vellekoop, M.J.,Measurement Science and Technology Vol. 6, No. 12, pp. 1641-1658,December (1995)**Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE CHEMICAL MONITOR via NewsNetJanuary 1996MICROMACHINING TECHNOLOGY MAKES SMARTER USEFUL SENSORSDevelopments in micromachining show considerable advancement in thefabrication of complex sensors. Earlier work was limited to siliconoptical and pressure sensors. Now there are demonstrations of gaschromatography on a chip. These devices include valving, a flowchannel and a detector.There are various applications for these devices, but one of themore important is biological and biomedical sensing. Oneapplication is the monitoring of biological cells individually. Anexample is the observation in vitro of the responses of a cardiaccell under the influence of various chemicals.On the small scale of these sensors it is necessary to rethink thephysical properties of familiar materials. The surface tension ofwater can have a sealing action on a piston cylinder array.Chemical sensors based on these devices are currently in commercialdevelopment. Taguchi type sensors on micromachined silicon have anincreased level of versatility. The response time can be controlledby heaters designed into the system with a fast response andminimum power.**Leonard, M., Electronic Design, Vol. 43, No. 25, pp. 35-42,December 4, (1995)**Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE CHEMICAL MONITOR via NewsNetJanuary 1996DIODE-BASED DETECTOR SPEEDS DNA ANALYSISAllen Northrup of Lawrence Livermore laboratories describes acompact assembly that performs the polymerase chain reaction. Thisreaction is important in cloning DNA to increase its concentrationfor more precise and more rapid detection. It is useful indetecting viruses, bacteria, mutations associated with cysticfibrosis and Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV).The unit is much smaller than the hardware presently available forthese measurements and promises to be an order of magnitudecheaper. It replaces a laser with a diode in the detectioncircuitry. It uses semiconductor fabrication techniques to preparethe thermal cycling process. This technology incorporates heatersand controllers in the silicon chambers. The small size and thermalmass permits rapid heating and cooling.The technology duplicates a process developed by Kary Mullis thatreceived the Nobel prize in 1993. Hardware available before thisdevelopment to process samples for cloning was between $7000 and$14,000, requiring hours of processing. This hardware does theoperation in minutes.The following reference is descriptive. It  would be improved witha drawing.**Robinson, G., Electronic Engineering Times, Issue 881, pp. 33-35,December 18, (1995)**Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE CHEMICAL MONITOR via NewsNetJanuary 1996PHOTOMULTIPLIER TUBES TO STUDY COSMIC RAYS AND NEUTRINOSPhotomultiplier tubes were among the first photosensors. Mostreplacements now are the simpler, cheaper and lower voltage solidstate devices. Photomultipliers have not disappeared. They areparticularly well suited for high sensitivity at high energybecause they depend on charges transported in a vacuum. Theirapplication seems to be increasing. They are particularly usefulfor the detection of charged particles in space and on the ground.Cosmic ray detection is an example.Cosmic rays exist in showers that bombard the outer atmosphere.Some of them reach the surface. There is an active interest inmodelling these showers at various places on earth. These chargedspecies have significant influence on the chemistry of theatmosphere. An example is the loss of ozone at the poles.Photomultiplier tubes serve this need.There also is an interest in using photomultiplier tubes for thedetermination of muons and neutrinos under water. This revivedinterest by astronomers and physicists is driven by newapplications of an old detector. New designs include devices thatare about the size of a TO-5 can. They still require high voltage.**Messenger, H.W. Laser Focus World, Vol. 31 No. 12 pp. 100-104,December (1995)**Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE CHEMICAL MONITOR via NewsNetJanuary 1996ACCESSING SENSORS USING INTERNETA project at the Winooski One hydroelectric dam is operated by theUniversity of Vermont. It uses the Internet as a sensor interfaceto measure multiple parameters such as flow and pressure. Thecomputers on line can bring generators on line when the waterlevels are high enough to drive them effectively. The systemcontains 85 fiber optic sensors embedded in the structure.Maintenance personnel monitor these sensors remotely to provideservice as required.This is a considerable economy over a system that requiresindividuals to be on site to record measurements as needed. Thesystem is useful for control functions and also informationgathering. Apart from the analog-digital boards that are part ofany instrument measuring system, the computer hardware is in everyway the same as other computer systems. It uses software that isavailable for the Apple or the PC system.There are the usual traffic delays that are part of the operationof Internet during periods of high usage. These are difficultiesthat are not as likely to occur if one limits operations to lowusage intervals, such as between 4 and 6 AM eastern standard time.The authors advise that it is possible to access the installationon Internet. The Web address is http://issri.emba.uvm.edu/. ThisInternet address contains drawings and data from the installation.In addition it is possible to download a publication submitted tothe Journal of Smart Materials and Structures that contains moreinformation.**Fuhr, P.L., and Mowat, E.F., Sensors, Vol. 12, No. 12, pp. 25-31,December (1995)****http://issri.emba.uvm.edu/ **Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE CHEMICAL MONITOR via NewsNetJanuary 1996DETECTING CRYPTOSPORIDIUMIn 1993 cryptosporidium slipped into Milwaukee's water supplysickening 400,000 people and killing 104. There remains a need fornew methods of detection and control of these pathogens. Thecurrent law requires a turbidity standard for potable waterdelivery. That does not distinguish the viable from the non-viable5 micron size cryptosporidia.There are manual test systems for filtration and tagging of thefiltrate with fluorescent materials. These have about 30% error.Algae and other materials bind with the fluorescent dye and tend togive false positive results. There are other methods discussed.Most do not have a measurement capability for use in protecting thepublic health.All the proposed methods are laboratory intensive. They do notappear to be suitable for continuous analysis. The problem isfurther complicated because the intrusion may only occurperiodically, when there is heavy rain. This is a condition thatinspires complacency.**Newman, A., Analytical Chemistry, Vol. 67, No. 23, pp. 731A-734A,December 1, 1995**Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE CHEMICAL MONITOR via NewsNetJanuary 1996IMPROVED METHOD OF FABRICATION OF NICKEL-METAL HYDRIDE BATTERYThe demand for cheap portable power continues to stir developmentof economic processes of producing batteries. A current focus is onnickel-metal hydride systems in which energy is produced byreacting the hydride on a catalytic surface exposed to oxygen orair. Among other applications the large economic interest is inclean energy sources for automobiles.These systems are of particular interest because they can berecharged electrically by discharging oxygen and reforming hydride.They also can be charged by supplying gases. They are inherentlyclean sources of energy and light in weight. The followingreferences are to work being done in SwedenAn element of cost in fabricating a metal hydride system is in thefabrication of the electrodes. The second reference describes acontinuous process to do this. This process involves the rollingfabrication of a band with one side of nickel hydroxide and theother of mischmetal required to form the hydride.The following papers describe the performance characteristics ofthe prototype devices. Summaries include changes that will benecessary to accommodate this technology to electric vehicleapplications.**Sakai, T., Iwaki, T., Ye, Z., and Noreus, D., Journal of theElectrochemical Society, Vol. 142, No. 12, pp. 4040-4045, December(1995)** discusses the basic design and performance.**Sakai, T., Noreus, D., Rosen, E., and Barring, N.E., Journal ofthe Electrochemical Society, Vol. 142, No. 12, pp. 4045-4050,December (1995)** discusses the fabrication of the electrodematerials.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE CHEMICAL MONITOR via NewsNetJanuary 1996MODEL FOR METALLIC ELECTROMIGRATION FAILUREWhy would a circuit board that has operated within specificationfor a long time fail after six years? There may be several answersto this question but one may be metallic electromigration betweenadjacent anodic and cathodic conductors on the board. Thephenomenon has been recognized since the 70s. It promises to becomea more important concern as multilayer boards find application.The electromigration phenomenon depends on voltage, humidity,contamination, distance between electrodes and temperature. Tocollect data rapidly observations are generally made at highvoltages, (typically 100 volts). The process occurs more slowly at10 volts.The following reference is part of a larger tutorial effort tofocus interest on failure processes. It provides documentedinformation on the factors that influence the processes involved inthe dendritic growth resulting from metallic electromigration. Ina given application environment these failure processes shouldfollow a Weibull distribution.**Krumbein, S.J., IEEE Transactions on Reliability, Vol. 44, No. 4,pp. 539-549, December (1995)**NOTE: On page 602 of IEEE Transactions on Reliability, Vol. 44, No.4, we are advised that much of the federal funding for the veryuseful MIL-STD (Military Standards on reliability) is beingtransferred to other sources or abandoned. This will be a change inaccess and should be examined by those interested in maintainingaccess to this information.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE CHEMICAL MONITOR via NewsNetJanuary 1996NEW AND INTERESTING U.S. PATENTS**U.S. Patent 5,475,372** December 12, 1995 to Burke, R.L. 11870Rustic Pl. Fontana, Calif. 72337Earthquake DetectorThis is a pendulum suspended in a tube. At the bottom of thependulum is a metal weight that swings as the earth vibrates. Anadjustable electrical contact is placed in the wall of the tube.When the pendulum swings it closes the contact and sounds an alarmfor an interval after the vibration.**U.S. Patent 5,474,938** December 12, 1995, to Jadesjo. G.,Magnusson, B., and Sundstrand, S., all of Sweden assignors to EkaNobel AB, Bohus, SwedenPeroxide DetectorThis is an assembly that delivers an iodide solution to a samplethat has a pH adjusted to 3. A filtered light passes through thesolution to give a colorimetric measurement. The absorbance is ameasure of the peroxide present in the sample.**U.S. Patent 5,474,664** December 12, 1995 to Thompson, H.,Slimbridge, United Kingdom, assignor to ABB Kent Plc. Bedfordshire,EnglandCleaning of Sensor Surfaces in a Flow StreamThis is an assembly that contains a measuring electrode and abrush, forward of the electrode, in a flow stream. The brush isarranged so that the action of the flow oscillates it against theelectrode surface. This removes debris that usually builds up onthese surfaces.**U.S. Patent 5,474,660** December 12, 1995 to Robins, I., andShaw, J.E.A., both of England, assignors to Central ResearchLaboratory Ltd. Middelsex, United KingdomApparatus to Determine AmmoniaThis is an electrochemical cell with an anode that generates oxygenat a semipermeable membrane. It generates hydroxyl ions at acathode. When ammonia is present in solution it passes through thesemipermeable membrane where it can be measured directly using a pHsensor or conductivity.**U.S. Patent 5,473,314** December 5, 1995 to Mochizuki, M., Ito,H., Kobayashi, R., and Morita, T., all of Tokyo, assignors to NohmiBosai, Ltd., Tokyo, JapanSmoke detector based on Opacity MeasurementThis is an automated smoke alarm that contains no radioactivecomponents. It is a transmission measurement that depends on theability of smoke to disperse light. It has considerable circuitryand computer resource that includes a sample and hold circuit andanalog digital conversion.**U.S. Patent 5,472,590** December 5, 1995 to Yamashitta, K., etal. all of Japan assignors to Hitachi, Ltd., Tokyo, JapanA Metal Electrode DesignThis is a metal electrode similar to a Ag/AgCl electrode, in whichthe ions that participate in the exchange process are embedded ina membrane. The membrane is held against a metal electrode. Themembrane designed for this purpose has a hydrophobic side exposedto the solution and a hydrophylic side impregnated with inorganicions held against the metal.**U.S. Patent 5,472,577** December 5, 1995 to Porter, M.D.,Hoffman, D.K., and Zhong, C-J. all of Ames, Iowa,  assignors toIowa State University Research Foundation, Ames, IowaElectrochemical PumpThis is a tube containing a liquid metal and branch of a T-tubeinserted in the liquid metal tube. A conducting liquid rests abovethe metal and around the branch. When a potential is place betweenthe liquid metal and the conducting solution there is a change inthe surface tension of the liquid metal causing a pumping action asa result of the moving liquid metal surface displacement.Back to Headline List WT02-B35-2IA095-001021-B004-6http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/ch16.html 205.156.212.5 19970121223447 text/html 2555HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Tuesday, 21-Jan-97 22:32:58 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:41:58 GMTContent-length: 2371Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ch16.html Sample Issue Copyright COMLINE JAPAN DAILY: CHEMICALS via NewsNet JANUARY 08, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES Teikoku Sen-i Posts First Profit in 7 Terms (89 words) Mitsui Mining Ups Copper Foil Production (111 words) CopyrightCOMLINE JAPAN DAILY: CHEMICALS via NewsNetJANUARY 08, 1996Teikoku Sen-i Posts First Profit in 7 Terms   Teikoku Sen-i <3302>, a textile maker specializing in linen,has posted nearly 400 million yen in current profits for theterm to December 1995, marking a substantial gain from lastterm's 517 million yen in current losses.  Teikoku saw theeffects from rationalization, and national disaster preventionconsciousness contributed to an increase in demand for relatedproducts.  Sales rose 4% to 16 billion yen, and operatingprofits reached nearly 700 million yen aided by decreased salesand administration costs.Des: ZSA00/ZGH00/ZNJ10Ref: Nihon Keizai Shimbun, 01/06/96Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMLINE JAPAN DAILY: CHEMICALS via NewsNetJANUARY 08, 1996Mitsui Mining Ups Copper Foil Production   Mitsui Mining & Smelting <5706> will expand printed circuitboard-use copper foil operations by 30%, with an investment of10 billion yen over three years.  The capital will be applied tooperations at five overseas production points.  The company willalso reinforce sales to the West by offering a special copperfoil developed in cooperation with U.S. makers of copper-coveredresin boards.  Mitsui Mining already holds a 40% slice of theworld pie in copper foil production, with aggregate monthlyoutput of 3,600 tons.  The heightened operating capacity shouldput the company in the forefront of the industry worldwide.Des: ZSA00/ZGG00/ZNJ40Ref: Nihon Keizai Shimbun, 01/06/96Back to Headline List WT02-B35-3IA095-001021-B004-24http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/ch10.html 205.156.212.5 19970121223503 text/html 39246HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Tuesday, 21-Jan-97 22:33:08 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:41:58 GMTContent-length: 39061Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ch10.html Sample Issue Copyright HAZARDOUS WASTE NEWS via NewsNet JANUARY 2, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES *************** SLANTS &TRENDS *************** (390 words) SUPERFUND REFORM BILLS COULD PLACE BURDEN ON STATE CLEANUP PROGRAMS (744 words) SUPERFUND REFORM BILLS TOP THE LIST OF KEY CONCERNS FOR UPCOMING YEAR (596 words) LAND DISPOSAL RESTRICTIONS H.R. 2036 APPROVED IN COMMITTEE; BILL REQUIRES REPORT ON RELEASES (409 words) DIOXIN ASME REPORT FINDS MINIMAL LINKAGE BETWEEN CHLORINE, DIOXIN EMISSIONS (451 words) SUPERFUND LOVE CANAL AGREEMENT EXEMPLIFIES NEED FOR QUICKER SETTLEMENTS: CMA (382 words) INTERNATIONAL MARKETS BAN ON U.S. IMPORT OF PCBS PROVOKES CANADIAN COMPANIES TO SUE MINISTRY (358 words) CIEC BIOSOLIDS TECHNOLOGY CUTS NOX EMISSIONS IN CALIFORNIA CEMENT KILNS (118 words) MILITARY, FHA AWARD VERSAR CONTRACTS TO CONTROL POLLUTION, STUDY BRIDGES (494 words) CHICAGO BROWNFIELDS FORUM RELEASES MODEL FINANCING GUIDELINES FOR BANKS (705 words) ERM CASE STUDY DEMONSTRATES NEED FOR UNDERSTANDING OF PERMIT PROCESS (504 words) CopyrightHAZARDOUS WASTE NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 2, 1996***************SLANTS &TRENDS***************Spread the word - congressional republicans entering thisElection Year Should Find More Support For Environmentalprotections, and some House leaders may stress this tocolleagues, industry analyst predict. "A number ofRepublicans like [New York Rep. Sherwood] Boehlert alreadyrecognize the depth of support for environmental controls,and they are trying to encourage the party to temper itsstand so it's not anti-environmental," said Doug MacMillan,executive director for the Environmental Technology Council."What they hear in their districts will make them recognizethe depth of public support for it." Superfund Reform '95Executive George Baker agreed that should GOP legislatorsfail to push through environmental reforms, especially toSuperfund, Republicans could "lose the political publicrelations war" and could be deemed anti-environment."They've allowed their opponents to forecast them as rollingback" environmental controls, he said.   EPA, meanwhile, must stand firm with its environmentalpolicies as Congress attempts to reduce agency staffing andbudget, MacMillan added. Since 1994, "EPA has reversedcourse on number of important environmental policies in anapparent attempt to placate some of its adversaries," hesaid. Along with making public statements supporting strictenvironmental standards, the agency must not backpeddle onits regulations. EPA cannot be "talking a good game, whilequietly surrendering to its opposition," he said.JOIN THE CLUB - EPA began preparing to shut down the federalSuperfund program Jan. 2. The agency is unable to pay nearly2,000 of its own employees in the program, and 8,000contractors who perform remediation work. Superfund was notaffected immediately by the federal shutdown because most ofthese employees are paid directly from the fund, rather thanfrom budget appropriations, said Jim Mathews, deputyassistant administrator for EPA's Office of Solid Waste andEmergency Response (HWN, Dec. 18, 1995, p. 399). ThoughCongress has not reauthorized the program nor issued itsallotment for the next fiscal year, Superfund has operatedsince October off a surplus in last year's fund, Mathewssaid. That money will run out Jan. 2, and the agency willbegin shutting down the program. Only emergency personnelwill continue working, reducing the agency's programemployees from more than 3,000 to only 80. Several largeSuperfund sites will continue cleanups during the shutdown,while many will cease operations, he said. Contact: JimMathews, EPA, (202) 260-4610.Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZARDOUS WASTE NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 2, 1996SUPERFUND REFORM BILLS COULD PLACEBURDEN ON STATE CLEANUP PROGRAMS   Superfund reform bills now stalled in Congress may placea larger burden on state cleanups, or halt remediationactivities outright, according to several stateenvironmental officials.   H.R. 2500, proposed by Rep. Michael Oxley (R-Ohio), andS. 1285, proposed by Sen. Robert Smith (R-N.H.), couldcreate an intense burden on state remediation programs, KrisHoellen, assistant deputy director for the Washington-basedAssociation of State and Territorial Solid Waste ManagementOfficials told the National Council of State Legislatures atthe council's annual meeting Dec. 14 in Washington. Underthese bills, litigation could increase from sites thatalready have selected a remedy if they find a more cost-effective method. State officials also fear the bills wouldcap the number of National Priorities List (NPL) sites,leaving states to fund many cleanups themselves.   Oxley's bill would pre-empt states from enacting cleanupstandards more stringent than federal levels, Hoellen said.Smith's bill, however, would allow states to pay thedifference for tougher standards, but it is unlikely stateswould not have the funds to enforce further site remediationbeyond federal standards, she said.   The House version of Superfund reform would cap the NPLat 125 sites over the next seven years, while 90 sites wouldbe allowed over three years on the Senate side. There noware 1,700 NPL-qualified sites EPA has yet to place on thelist, Hoellen said. Shifting these sites to state authoritycould overwhelm state agencies, she added.   Pre-enforcement litigation would greatly hinder sitecleanups, Hoellen told HWN. Both bills would allow partiesto reopen remedy cases if they show they can save at least$1 million using another method. In addition, the Senateversion of the bill would shift more program costs to thestates, compared with cost-sharing provisions in Oxley'sbill, she said.   Many states also do not want to pay for orphan shares,Hoellen said. Particularly, states do not want largepotentially responsible parties cashed out of liability,which could leave state agencies "holding the bag," shesaid.   If either bill passes in its present form, all new workon existing sites will stop, said Ed Putnam, associatedirector of remediation planning and design for the NewJersey Department of Environmental Protection. New Jerseycould only continue ongoing work, he said. Superfund wouldcontinue to fund immediate contamination removal programs,but states could not afford to take additional remedialaction, he added.   "There always has been competition for funds among stateregulatory agencies," Putnam said. "There's simply going tobe more competition" if Congress reforms Superfund.   Remediators would not be able to remove contaminated soilfrom some sites, preferring to close off the area, he said.Furthermore, states would not clean aquifers, preferring tomonitor plumes and treat contaminated wells, Putnam said.   Putnam finds no significant difference for states betweenthe bills. Both make the pursuit of funding competitivebetween states. "It's just a question of how competitive,"he said.Reauthorization Still Up in the Air   A more pressing question for states is the future ofSuperfund, which lacks a reauthorization bill and its taxingauthority, Putnam said. "Superfund is stalled; there is nonew work occurring," he said. Faced with the possibility ofsignificant changes in the law possibly months away and adwindling funding mechanism, it is difficult for states tomake any long-term plans for Superfund remediation, Putnamsaid.   Spending money and manpower to maintain retroactiveliability costs more than it would to repeal it, said acommercial consultant who deals in government affairs.   If the remedy process is not reformed, states could notafford remediation, the consultant told HWN. There are manystate agencies who are competent enough to handle cleanupsmore efficiently than EPA can, he said. "There are a numberof states embarrassed by EPA's performance" in Superfundcleanups, he added.   States do not spend nearly as much money on cleanups asEPA, the consultant said. Particularly, states historicallydo not take as long to select a remedy or to completecleanups.   Though EPA is blaming the Republican Congress forstalling the Superfund program, the consultant criticizedPresident Clinton, who vetoed the recent Veteran'sAdministration/Department of Housing and Urban Developmentbill last month that would have extended Superfund taxes. Inaddition, EPA has been dragging its feet in assisting with acompromise Superfund reauthorization bill, he added. "EPAhas been working overtime to stop the bill," he said.Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZARDOUS WASTE NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 2, 1996SUPERFUND REFORM BILLS TOP THE LISTOF KEY CONCERNS FOR UPCOMING YEAR   Congressional action on Republican Superfund reforms thisyear could significantly alter the course of how hazardouswaste is managed, affecting many aspects ranging fromimpending rulemaking to technology, according to severalindustry analysts.   Superfund reform, a priority on the Republican agenda, isexpected to be the key issue in the industry in 1996. ManyDemocrats have criticized the reform efforts so far, but GOPmembers likely will collaborate more this year with theircolleagues across the aisle to approve a reform package,said George Baker, executive director of Superfund Reform'95. The debate should move rapidly because 1996 is anelection year, and most work will be completed by August togear up for elections in the fall, he said.   Republicans "need Democrats to be comfortable with [thereforms], and get broad support from industry, smallbusinesses and municipalities," Baker said. "These reformsare needed to effectively clean up a number of sitesfaster." Once a reform package is adopted, Superfundreauthorization should proceed smoothly, he added.   Congressional delays on Superfund reform last yearfrustrated members of the Chemical Manufacturers Association(CMA). As the debate drags on, the association is concernedthat legislators will tinker with proposed bills further,allowing more exemptions. "We're getting to the point wheredeals will be made here and there," said CMA spokesman MattWeinstock. "As long as it floats around, there are morechances for industry to make carveouts. Congress needs toget this thing done without creating a new unfair system."   CMA also urges Congress to pass H.R. 2036. The bill wouldstreamline land disposal restrictions under the ResourceConservation and Recovery Act (RCRA) (see story, this page)."The bill will make management of waste fairer and easier tocomply," Weinstock said, praising the bipartisan effort toapprove the bill. "If we could have had that effort onSuperfund, we'd be done."   EPA's Hazardous Waste Identification Rule (HWIR),scheduled for promulgation late this year, also may impacthazardous waste management (HWN, Dec. 4, 1995, p. 384).However, Title 9 of H.R. 2500, Rep. Michael Oxley's (R-Ohio)Superfund reform bill, could render HWIR moot. Officialswith the Environmental Technology Council (ETC) oppose thisportion of the bill because it would allow states to adoptprovisions freeing the management of remediation waste fromRCRA's Subtitle C requirements or the Toxic SubstanceControl Act.   "We believe some modified national standards for hotspots makes sense for Superfund and RCRA waste," said ETCExecutive Director Doug MacMillan. "If the bill passes,there will be no purpose to go forward with the [HWIR]contaminated media rule" to be proposed soon.   Superfund reforms also could severely hamper marketinginnovative technologies for hazardous waste this year. Billsin the House and Senate largely favor closing off ahazardous site rather than seeking permanent remediation,MacMillan said. "That will be a serious disincentive forinnovative site cleanup technology," he said. "Why worryabout detoxifying waste if you can fence a site off orprovide alternatives to water supply?"   EPA anticipates proposing its hazardous waste combustionstrategy this year, which has been a bone of contention inrecent years between hazardous waste incinerators and cementkilns. The agency is slated to propose emission standardsfor cement kilns and to determine proper handling of cementkiln dust. "If EPA could get some realistic, applicablestandards for air emissions and for combustion residues, thelong-running controversies would die down," MacMillan said."That would be positive because the arguments between thevarious groups have eroded the general public's confidenceabout combustion."Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZARDOUS WASTE NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 2, 1996LAND DISPOSAL RESTRICTIONSH.R. 2036 APPROVED IN COMMITTEE;BILL REQUIRES REPORT ON RELEASES   EPA next year may ask particular landfills and treatmentsystems accepting treated hazardous waste to provide datafor a five-year study on the threat of the sites' wastestream to human health and the environment.   The House Commerce Committee Dec. 21 passed H.R. 2036,the Land Disposal Flexibility Act, with relatively minoramendments. The bill, sponsored by Rep. Michael Oxley (R-Ohio), passed the committee's Commerce, Trade and HazardousMaterials Subcommittee in November (HWN, Dec. 11, 1995, p.394).   The measure would allow EPA to set land disposalstandards now prohibited by a federal court decision. Theagency in 1990 exempted from Resource Conservation andRecovery Act (RCRA) standards treated hazardous waste attreatment systems regulated under the Clean Water Act andnonhazardous deep injection wells regulated under the CleanDrinking Water Act. In 1992, however, the Washington, D.C.,District Court directed EPA to apply RCRA standards to thesewastes, which some industry officials said adds up to $800million annually in compliance costs.   Democrats worked extensively with Republican committeemembers to pass the bill to the House floor, with Rep.Blanche Lambert Lincoln (D-Ark.) working with Oxley toaddress many Democratic concerns. The committee passed anamendment offered by Lincoln calling for EPA to completewithin five years a study on these sites to determine ifreleases are threatening the ground water or human health.Ranking Democrat Rep. John Dingell (Mich.) warned thatsetting a deadline on the study could lead to further courtaction, yet did not oppose Lincoln's amendment.   Rep. Frank Pallone (D-N.J.) expressed the strongestopposition to the bill, calling for an EPA study completedwithin three years, whereupon the agency must take action onthe study's findings. Wastewaters from these sites can haveconcentrations of toxins up to 99 times drinking waterstandards, thereby necessitating quick action on these riskreports, he said. "Decharacterized waste containinghazardous constituents may leak from surface impoundments atthe same levels of concerns as listed waste streams,"Pallone said.   Several members opposed the amendment, saying it wouldrequire EPA to depend on old data to meet the three-yeardeadline, and would force the agency to spend more time andresources on waste that does not cause a significant threatto the environment. Committee members sought to push thebill through Congress before Jan. 17, the court-issueddeadline for the EPA rules to take affect. Contact: NandanKenkeremath, majority counsel, (202) 226-2424.Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZARDOUS WASTE NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 2, 1996DIOXINASME REPORT FINDS MINIMAL LINKAGEBETWEEN CHLORINE, DIOXIN EMISSIONS   No significant correlation is shown between the type oramount of chlorine in waste burned in hazardous wastecombustors (HMCs) and the concentrations of dioxin and furanemissions (PCDD/F) measured at the stack, according to arecent study by the American Society of Mechanical Engineers(ASME).   ASME analyzed more than 1,900 test results of hazardous,solid, biomass and medical waste combustors. Limiting thechlorine content of combustor feedstocks has little or noeffect on the composition or quantity of dioxin emitted,states the report, The Relationship Between Chlorine inWaste Streams and Dioxin Emissions from Waste CombustorStacks.   HMCs studied in the report include hazardous wasteincinerators (HWIs), fired boilers and cement kilns. Theconcentration of chlorine in the feed stocks for thegenerators ranges from less than 0.1 percent for manybiomass combustors up to 80 percent for some HWIs, the studysays. The tests were done at 169 facilities - including 74hazardous waste combustors - where chlorine and PCDD/Femissions were measured.   PCDD/F and chlorine were "simultaneously characterized"at 107 units in 90 facilities. The data was checked toidentify errors and statistical problems, standardized toreflect common reference conditions and analyzed todetermine if either the composition of PCDD/F concentrationsor the quantity of those composition changed, ASME states inthe report.   Tests in 72 waste facilities showed no significantrelationship between chlorine input and PCDD/F measured inthe gas streams. In many of the tests, the combustion unitswere "spiked" with larger amounts of chlorinated plastics,or polyvinyl chloride, to determine if a higher chlorinecontent in the waste fuel produced any measure of dioxin,ASME explains. Cement kilns "displayed no apparent stack gasPCDD/F concentration increase with increasing chlorine feedrate," the report states. The result "is not surprising,since chlorine is frequently added to remove natural alkalisand produce Portland cement meeting federal and stateconstruction standards," ASME says.   The study was not intended to evaluate control systemsperformance, generate new data, assess the relationshipbetween PCDD/F and chlorine in liquid effluents or solidresidues, or to evaluate the removal of particulate-boundPCDD/F in emission control devices, ASME says.   "The failure to find simultaneous increases in mostcases, and finding a few inverse relationships, indicatesthat whatever effect feed chlorine has on PCDD/Fconcentrations in flue gases, it is smaller than theinfluence of other causative factors," the society states inthe report. "Any effect chlorine has on PCDD/Fconcentrations in commercial scale systems is a factor ofair pollution control system temperature, ash chemistry,combustion conditions, imprecise measurement and localizedflow stratification." For a copy of the 663-page report,contact John Varrasi, ASME, (212) 705-8158.Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZARDOUS WASTE NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 2, 1996SUPERFUNDLOVE CANAL AGREEMENT EXEMPLIFIESNEED FOR QUICKER SETTLEMENTS: CMA   Some chemical industry analysts hope congressionalreforms to Superfund encourage responsible parties to paycleanup costs more swiftly, saying a settlement last monthfor remediation costs at the infamous Love Canal Superfundsite in New York typifies the need for quicker action.   The Occidental Chemical Corp. Dec. 21 agreed to pay $129million over four years to EPA and the Federal EmergencyManagement Agency (FEMA) to cover cleanup costs at the LoveCanal site. Under the settlement, EPA will receive $102million, and FEMA, which relocated area residents and begansite cleanup, will get $27 million.   Occidental's corporate predecessor, Hooker Chemicals &Plastics Corp., buried more than 20,000 tons of chemicalwaste from 1942 to 1953. Although a housing developmentlater was built on the site, hundreds of families wereforced to leave these homes in the late 1970s to allow crewsto remediate the site. The site's cleanup costs eventuallylead to the creation of Superfund in 1980.   In addition, New York originally sought $630 million indamages from Occidental, but the company in 1994 agreed topay the state $98 million. Occidental's suits with the cityof Niagara Falls and several former residents still arepending.   "This reaffirms the definite need to move on legislativereforms so we don't have these cases hanging around for 11or 12 years," said Chemical Manufacturers Associationspokesman Matt Weinstock, who doubts the settlement willspark other large Superfund payback agreements. "I'd like tothink things will continue on a case-by-case basis."   A key EPA official agreed the Superfund program needsgenuine reform, yet not as stringent as Republican billsproposed in Congress. "We need to speed cleanups and lowercosts so that more property can be returned to communitiesfor productive use," said EPA Region 2 Administrator JeanneFox. "The lessons learned at Love Canal have beensuccessfully applied at hundreds of abandoned waste sitesaround the country, where toxic threats to public healthhave been removed."   Claims in GOP reform bills stating 40 percent of taxpayerfunding for Superfund goes to litigation are untrue, Foxsaid. "That figure refers to the legal costs to privateparties involved in suits and countersuits, often with theirinsurance companies," she added. Contact: Howard Collins,Occidental, (310) 443-6523.Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZARDOUS WASTE NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 2, 1996INTERNATIONAL MARKETSBAN ON U.S. IMPORT OF PCBS PROVOKESCANADIAN COMPANIES TO SUE MINISTRY   An Ohio company's recent exemption from EPA to importpolychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) from Canada for treatmentled the Canadian government to ban PCB exports from Canada.Several Canadian companies, in turn, have filed a lawsuitagainst Canada's Environment Ministry.   EPA Nov. 15 granted S.D. Myers, an Ohio-based hazardouswaste treatment firm, a special exemption to import PCBs fortreatment at the firm's Talmadge, Ohio, plant. The next day,Sheila Copps, Canada's environment minister, issued aninterim ban on the company's exportation of the carcinogenicchemicals, said Dana Myers, president of S.D. Myers.   The Environment Ministry bowed to pressure from theCanadian hazardous waste treatment industry, particularlyChem-Security, a large Edmonton, Alberta-based firm, Myerssaid. Officials from Chem-Security could not be reached forcomment. Prior to the ban, the Canadian government grantedMyers permission to import PCBs with EPA's approval."Environment Canada asked EPA to open the borders" to PCBs,Myers said. "After EPA did, Canada slammed them shut."   After the Environment Ministry issued the interim ban,two Canadian firms, General Waste Transport Inc. and theQuebec Center for the Environment, sued the EnvironmentMinistry Dec. 19 to lift the ban. The Environment Ministryissued the ban under the Canadian Environmental ProtectionAct. Copps implemented an interim ban from one rule andapplied it to a different rule, which invalidates the ban,Myers told HWN.   The companies are bringing Copps and Canadian AttorneyGeneral Allan Rock to court on two separate grounds. First,Copps did not have the authority to enact the ban becausehuman health is not threatened with the transport of PCBsacross national borders, said Douglas Hamilton, a partner inthe Toronto firm of Osler & Hoskin, and the attorneyrepresenting General Waste Transport. The ban also wouldretain Chem-Security's monopoly of the Canadian PCBremediation market, thus invalidating the ban, Myers added.The firms are reviewing Environment Ministry procedures inimplementing the ban to determine if it had the necessarybacking of the Ministry of Health, Hamilton said.Environment Ministry officials could not be reached forcomment. Contact: Dana Myers, S.D. Myers, (216) 633-2666;Art Mathis, Chem-Security, (403) 235-8300.Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZARDOUS WASTE NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 2, 1996CIEC BIOSOLIDS TECHNOLOGY CUTS NOXEMISSIONS IN CALIFORNIA CEMENT KILNS   The Cement Industry Environmental Consortium (CIEC)recently unveiled its biosolids injection technology, whichreduces nitrogen oxide (NOx) emissions and disposeswastewater sludge.   The process uses ammonia in the sludge to convert NOxinto a stable, non-toxic gas, CIEC officials said. Thetechnology mixes sludge with combustion gases from cementkilns.   The consortium now is testing the process at theMitsubishi Cement Corp. plant in Cushenbury, Calif., thestate's largest cement plant. Use of biosolids injection hasreduced NOx emissions by 45 percent, while treating 10percent of Southern California's wastewater sludge, CIECsaid.   Biosolids injection can help cement kilns meet strictClean Air Act standards, CIEC said. Contact: Robert Kahn,CIEC, (206) 236-7200.Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZARDOUS WASTE NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 2, 1996MILITARY, FHA AWARD VERSAR CONTRACTSTO CONTROL POLLUTION, STUDY BRIDGES   Versar recently was awarded a three-year, $7 millioncontract by the Naval Facilities Engineering Services Centerto provide pollution control equipment and services.   Under the contract, Versar will identify, design andinstall equipment for the Navy and Marine Corps thatminimizes emissions. The company also will procure theequipment, write user manuals and provide training.   In addition, Versar received three contracts worth acombined $1.5 million to provide infrastructure managementand services. The contracts include a two-year agreementwith the Federal Highway Administration to assesscontamination from lead-based-paint removal on bridges.Contact: Lawrence White, Versar, (703) 642-6802.   ADA Technologies, Englewood, Colo., recently was awardeda contract for the full-scale demonstration of its new flue-gas conditioning technology. The company will demonstratethe substance on a hot-side electrostatic precipitatorduring three weeks this month to document the effectivenessof the additive. Contact: John Wuster, ADA, (800) 232-0296.   American Bar Association (ABA), Washington, Jan. 10-12will host the Environmental Priorities in Southeast AsianNations conference in Bangkok, Thailand. The conference willfocus on environmental protection approaches in Cambodia,Indonesia, Laos, Malaysia, Singapore, the Philippines,Thailand and Vietnam. Contact: Barbara Blackwell, ABA, (202)662-4093.   GeoSafe Corp., Richland, Wash., last month was granted aToxic Substances Control Act permit to treat polychlorinatedbiphenyls (PCBs) using the company's in-situ vitrificationtechnology. The company has demonstrated the technology canmeet EPA's 99.9999 percent destruction and removalefficiency required for PCB treatment. Contact: JamesHansen, GeoSafe, (509) 375-0710.   Groundwater Technology Inc. (GTI), Norwood, Mass.,recently sold 4.4 million of its shares to Fluor DanielInc., equaling a 54.5 percent interest. Fluor Daniel/GTIwill operate as the environmental services arm of FluorDaniel Inc. The company will continue to be headquartered inNorwood, Mass. The firms expect to complete the transactionin early 1996. Contact: Robert Sliney, GTI, (617) 769-7600.   Huntsman Chemical Corp., Woodbury, N.J., last monthreceived a facility-wide permit for polypropylene productionfrom the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection(DEP). DEP has issued only two other permits of this type,the company said. Contact: Gregory Lloyd, EnvironmentalResources Management Group, (610) 524-3790.   Membrane Technology and Research Inc. (MTR), Menlo Park,Calif., recently unveiled its closed-loop membrane system torecover ethylene and propylene monomer from nitrogen inplant vent streams. Companies may benefit from ethylene andpropylene recovery because monomer costs can account for upto 80 percent of polymer production costs, MTR officialssaid. The system recently was featured at the ChemicalProcess Industries Expo in New York. Contact: Jane Stoner,MTR, (415) 328-2228.   National Technical Information Service (NTIS),Springfield, Va., recently unveiled a new automated wasteclassification software. WasteCat is designed to showgenerators if their waste stream contains hazardoussubstances. Contact: Renee Edwards, NTIS, (703) 487-4778.   Scaltech Inc., Houston, recently contracted with BP OilCo., to manage oily hazardous waste at BP Oil's three majorUnited States refineries. Contact: Douglas Foote, Scaltech,(713) 672-8004.Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZARDOUS WASTE NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 2, 1996CHICAGO BROWNFIELDS FORUM RELEASESMODEL FINANCING GUIDELINES FOR BANKS   The Chicago Brownfields Forum (CBF), seeking ways to makebrownfield redevelopment more feasible, last month releasedmodel lending guidelines that may spur bankers to invest inmore abandoned industrial properties.   The model is designed to allow banks and lendinginstitutions to extend credit to redevelopment projects,while protecting the bank's collateral interest and loanrepayment, CBF officials said. The model identifies policiesand procedures lending institutions can follow in financingredevelopment projects.   The city-organized forum consists of more than 100 publicand private representatives, including real estatedevelopers, industry representatives, environmentalists,government agencies and community groups.   Chapman & Cutler, a Chicago law firm, led the task forcecrafting the guidelines. Banks can adopt the model toexisting policy to initiate financing redevelopmentprojects, CBF officials said. Brownfield financing hassuffered because lending institutions did not know whichquestions to ask developers, so developers did not know whatinformation to submit, officials said. The package includesspecific requirements developers must satisfy, with formsand examples.   CBF developed the policy as an example for other stateswith voluntary cleanup plans. Future models will addressfinancing in states that have no voluntary cleanup program,CBF officials said. Contact: Bill Trumbull, CBF, (312) 744-5711.   COLORADO - The Broomfield City Council last month opposeda plan to bury hazardous waste at the former Rocky Flatsnuclear weapons plant, near Boulder. In November, theDepartment of Energy (DOE) and Kaiser Hill, a DOEcontractor, proposed to expedite cleanup and closure of theplant. According to the plan, workers would remove the mosthazardous radioactive waste, but low-level waste would beburied on-site at the plant. Last month, the council passeda resolution opposing this proposal. The council also sent aletter to the state officials overseeing the cleanup.Contact: Patrick Etchart, DOE, (303) 966-5993.   HAWAII - EPA last month fined the Department of Interior(DOI), National Parks Service for violating the ResourceConservation and Recovery Act (RCRA) by storing hazardouswaste at the Hawaii Volcanoes National Park. The facilitystored hazardous waste without a RCRA permit between Marchand October. The waste contained acetone, chromium, lead,xylene, phenol, arsenic and mercury. EPA also cited DOI forstoring waste in rusted, leaking containers. EPA fined thefacility $243,800 and ordered it to develop a hazardouswaste management plan within two months. Contact: LoisGrunwald, EPA, (415) 744-1588.   OHIO - EPA last month completed cleanup at the CoshoctonCity Landfill Superfund site in Franklin Township. Theremediation activities included construction of a landfillgas collection and venting system, construction of alandfill cap, and ground water monitoring. Potentiallyresponsible parties completed all work, with oversight fromEPA and Ohio state officials. EPA will review the site everyfive years as required by law. From 1968-1979, the site wasused as an 80-acre landfill, which accepted variousindustrial wastes from several local companies. The site wasadded to the National Priorities List in 1983. Contact:Anthony Rutter, EPA, (312)886-8961.   MICHIGAN - EPA last month reached agreement with DowChemical Co. for alleged hazardous waste violations at thecompany's Midland facility. The agency cited the firm inSeptember 1993 for failing to meet Resource Conservation andRecovery Act requirements governing burning hazardous wastein a boiler. The company failed to develop a written plan toanalyze the hazardous waste burned; failed to determine ash,chlorine and chloride concentrations in the waste fed toboilers; and failed to check for leaks in boiler valves, EPAsaid. EPA's consent order called for a $167,000 fine and forDow to correct the violations. Contact: Michael Cunningham,EPA, (312) 886-4464.   WASHINGTON - The Department of Energy (DOE) last monthgave Westinghouse Hanford Co. (WHC) a "good" performancerating for the six months ending Sept. 30. DOE awarded thecompany a grant of more than $1.5 million based on adetailed department evaluation. This rating was asignificant improvement over the company's last rating ofsatisfactory, DOE officials said. DOE cited improvedperformance by WHC in tank remediation and facilitystabilization. DOE, however, noted deficiencies inconducting an operations procedure for radiological controland in establishing an effective field work procedures plan.Contact: Guy Schein, (509) 376-7501.Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZARDOUS WASTE NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 2, 1996ERM CASE STUDY DEMONSTRATES NEEDFOR UNDERSTANDING OF PERMIT PROCESS   Industrial plants can face overly burdensome waterquality-based effluent limits (WQBELs) without a clearunderstanding of how regulating agencies determine theselimits and assess the data on which the limits are based,according to a paper presented by William Hall, a seniorproject manager with Environmental Resources Management(ERM) Group.   The paper, presented recently at the annual WaterEnvironment Federation conference, outlines how theconsulting firm negotiated with the Pennsylvania Departmentof Environmental Resources (DER) to set less-stringentWQBELs for a client. The new limits should be less costlythan a draft National Pollution Discharge Elimination System(NPDES) permit DER originally prepared for an electroniccomponents manufacturer, states Hall's study, NegotiatingLess Conservative Water Based Effluent Limits: A Case Study.   The draft included WQBELs for copper and lead, as well asfluoride limits based on historical performance. Afterstudying the draft limits, ERM concluded these limits weretoo conservative, and the company would struggle to complywith them, the report states.   The manufacturer discharged 330,000 gallons per day ofprocess wastewater into a large fresh water river. Theproposed fluoride limits included average monthly limits,maximum daily limits and instantaneous maximum concentrationlimits. A review of historical data of effluent dischargeshowed the facility could not comply with the state'saverage monthly limit, the study said.   The WQBELs for copper and lead affected four dischargestreams in the facility - three process wastewaterdischarges and a cooling water discharge. Studies showed theplant's wastewater treatment operations, with improvements,could easily handle the limits set for lead. However, thecompany determined the draft copper limits were three timeslower than the best treatment technology could provide, thestudy says.   The low draft limits stemmed partially frommisconceptions about mineral hardness, or concentration, inthe river. ERM recorded the river's hardness data per month.River hardness peaked during the late summer and early fall,which coincided with low effluent flow from the plant, ERMconcluded. DER, therefore, raised the WQBEL for copper inthe permit.   Moreover, ERM determined the slope of the receivingriver, or the difference in elevation between two pointsalong the river, was less steep where effluent enters thanat other sections along the river. A mild slope gives theeffluent less time to travel downstream and a greater chanceto disperse in a smaller area, the report says.   DER has since raised the WQBEL for copper from 0.18milligrams per liter (mg/l) to 0.47 mg/l. DER also raisedthe lead limit from 0.29 mg/l to 0.43 mg/l, thereby removinglead as a water quality-based parameter. DER also raised thecompany's average monthly limit for fluoride 2.5 times thenormal limit, the study says.   "What this case study clearly illustrates is that aregulatory authority is not responsible for establishingoptimum parameters value to maximize effluent limits whiletrying to protect the environment," the report says. "Thatresponsibility lies with the permittee." The paper is freefrom ERM by contacting Dorothy Condon, (610) 524-3657.Back to Headline List WT02-B35-4IA095-001021-B004-49http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/ch14.html 205.156.212.5 19970121223521 text/html 33803HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Tuesday, 21-Jan-97 22:33:24 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:41:58 GMTContent-length: 33618Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ch14.html Sample Issue Copyright HAZMAT TRANSPORT NEWS via NewsNet JANUARY 1, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES *************** SLANTS & TRENDS *************** (1009 words) RSPA IMPROPERLY CEDES AUTHORITY UNDER TICKET PROPOSAL, NPCA SAYS (709 words) PE%A ANNOUNCES DELAY IN NAFTA CROSSINGS (656 words) RSPA PROPOSES EXPEDITED PROCEDURE FOR ISSUING NON-CONTROVERSIAL RULES (321 words) EFFORTS TO ACCELERATE TIMETABLE FOR RADWASTE SHIPMENTS QUICKEN (892 words) NTSB COUNTS HEAD SHIELDS, COUPLERS AS BEING AMONG ITS TOP ACHIEVEMENTS (386 words) CLINTON NOMINATES GEORGIAN FOR TRANSPORT SAFETY BOARD (123 words) U.S. HAZMAT REGS PREEMPT NEW YORK RULES, RSPA SAYS (476 words) CopyrightHAZMAT TRANSPORT NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996***************SLANTS & TRENDS***************THE ASSOCIATION of American Railroads (AAR) last monthcompleted the consolidation of hazmat and other researchfacilities at its Transportation Technology Center (TTC) inPueblo, Colo. As part of the consolidation, AAR closed itsChicago Technical Center (CTC) at the Illinois Institute ofTechnology. Thirty CTC employees were relocated to the TTC.'CONSOLIDATION of our TTC and CTC facilities will result inannual savings of more than $2 million," AAR President EdwinHarper said. "By combining AAR's rail research experts andequipment at one location, we will increase our researcheffectiveness and TTC's capacity to attract future researchand development projects."* * *PRESIDENT CLINTON entered office three years ago this monthpledging to make government more efficient. In keeping withthat promise, the Research and Special ProgramsAdministration (RSPA) has proposed placing administrativeprocedure on its head. On non-controversial rules, RSPA willpromulgate first and ask for comments later (See story, p.5).* * *QUOTE, UNQUOTE: "If a pilot ticketing program isimplemented, shippers should have the opportunity to contestalleged violations by telephone as well as in writing. Therehave been numerous occasions when letters of warning orverbal warnings have been issued inappropriately due toincorrect interpretation of the regulations by inspectors.These enforcement errors can often be resolved over thetelephone. Under the proposed program it appears that therelative ease of issuing tickets could result in morepenalties being proposed and that tickets could only becontested in writing." - American Crop ProtectionAssociation, commenting on a RSPA proposal to issue ticketsfor minor hazmat transport violations.* * *RSPA SURVIVED 1995 INTACT. A Clinton administration proposalto combine the Department of Transportation's 10 agenciesinto three modal offices apparently got lost in thelegislative shuffle last year.RSPA Clarifications     Selective testing: Aldrich Chemical Co., Milwaukee,asked whether alternative closure methods for packages maybe used interchangeably without retesting, so long as thepackages provide an equivalent level of performance.     RSPA responded that under the agency's SelectiveTesting Variation 4 [Section 178.601(g)(ii) of the HazardousMaterials Regulations], testing is not required when thestructural design of the tested-out packaging, includingmethods of closure, "is maintained." The agency added,"Thus, any change to the originally tested closure resultsin a different packaging design type requiring designqualification testing."     Competent authority: The Glidden Co., Cleveland, askedwhether it would need a Competent Authority Permit Numberfrom the U.S. Transportation Department, and display thatnumber on all shipping papers, to export a product in RSPA-approved UN1A2 (open-head) drums. The International MaritimeDangerous Goods (IMDG) Code generally requires shipments tobe made in steel, closed-head drums unless another type ofdrum is permitted under competent authority.     RSPA responded that so long as the U.S. companycomplies with the Hazardous Materials Regulations (HMR) ithas permission from competent authority and does not needother documentation. "The RSPA associate administrator forhazardous materials safety is the United States CompetentAuthority for purposes of the IMDG Code," RSPA said. "Theprovisions contained in the HMR constitute competentauthority approval for the United States for transportationof hazardous materials in instances where the IMDG code ...specifically permit[s] a variation based on the approval ofcompetent authority."     Reportable quantity: The Technical Group Inc.,Washington, asked whether it is better to rely on theintended formulation "batch sheet" information or on theactual laboratory analysis of the end product to determinewhether the lead content of a material meets or exceeds itsassigned reportable quantity of 10 pounds per package.     RSPA said it is the shipper's duty to classify a hazmatproperly, and the agency "does not prescribe a particularmethod a shipper must follow in determining whether amaterial is a hazardous substance." Added RSPA: "If anyconstituent equals or exceeds its listed RQ per package,then the material meets the definition of a hazardoussubstance. Therefore, if the amount of lead content in amaterial equals or exceeds 10 pounds per package, thematerial is a hazardous substance."     Unflanged heads: New Progress Inc., Arthur, Ill., askedwhether Department of Transportation (DOT) regulationspermit cargo tanks with unflanged heads to be used totransport hazmat. New Progress said if DOT rules allow, thecompany would proceed with building chassis-mounted trucktanks with unflanged heads.     RSPA had bad news for the company: DOT regulationsprohibit the use of tanks with unflanged heads. "Unflangedheads have no radius and are unacceptable," RSPA said."Flanged heads having a knuckle radius less than thatpermitted by Section 178.346-1(d)(3) [of the HazardousMaterials Regulations] also are not acceptable."     Made in the USA: Olympic IBC Corp, Kirkland, Wash.,asked whether it may apply the "USA" mark to bulk containersthe company primarily manufactures at its affiliate inMexico. Because it takes full responsibility for themarkings and the final step of manufacture is completed inthe United States, Olympic IBC said it believes thecontainers may be marked USA.     However, the company is wrong, RSPA said. Under theagency's HM-215A rule, RSPA said, "A USA marked packagingshould be manufactured and marked only in the U.S." The ruleis published in the Dec. 29, 1994, Federal Register.     Shipping, fueling: Consolidated Edison Company of NewYork Inc., New York, asked whether the Hazardous MaterialsRegulations, which apply to cylinders used as shippingcontainers, apply to cylinders used as part of a system tofuel a compressed natural gas-powered vehicle.     "Cylinders used as fuel tanks for propulsion and not totransport cargo are not subject to regulation under thefederal hazardous materials transportation law or theHazardous Materials Regulations," RSPA responded.     "In addition, as long as those cylinders are mounted onyour vehicles and used only as fuel tanks, there is no legalrequirement to reinspect or retest them under theexemption," the agency stated. "Therefore, you may make yourown determinations about what reinspections and retests arenecessary for safety purposes."Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZMAT TRANSPORT NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996RSPA IMPROPERLY CEDES AUTHORITYUNDER TICKET PROPOSAL, NPCA SAYS     The Research and Special Programs Administration, in aproposal to ticket hazmat violations that do notsubstantially harm safety, improperly surrenders much of itshazmat oversight responsibility to the U.S. Coast Guard, agroup of paint-makers, suppliers and distributors has toldRSPA.     The National Paint and Coatings Association (NPCA) alsoderided the proposal as ambiguous and a way to discouragecompanies from paying fines, even as the group  praised RSPAfor trying to simplify hazmat enforcement procedures.Nevertheless, the focus of the association's objections isRSPA's proposal to have Coast Guard hearing officers handleshippers' appeals of these tickets.     Under the controversial proposal, RSPA inspectors wouldbe allowed to write tickets for violations that have "nosubstantial impact on safety," including: operating under anexpired exemption, neglecting to register, failing tomaintain training records and not filing incident reports.The tickets would state the facts supporting the allegedviolation and a penalty amount "substantially less than thepenalty that would be proposed under current procedures,"RSPA stated.Coast Guard Would Hear Cases     Other provisions of RSPA's proposal would give allegedviolators the choice of paying the ticket or contesting theproposed penalty within 30 days of receipt. Companiescontesting the ticket would have a hearing before a U.S.Coast Guard hearing officer, a proposal NPCA derided asunfair to industry.     "Final resolution of alleged violations by the CoastGuard, without any recourse back to RSPA, is troublingbecause the industry is not familiar with Coast Guardprocedures and the industry is unsure of the Coast Guard'sfamiliarity with RSPA regulations and the practice of themotor transportation industry," NPCA said.     "Although the Coast Guard may have some expertise withhazardous materials regulations as they relate to maritimeshipping, the Coast Guard has no history of interaction withmotor carriers," the group added. "Therefore, they are notfamiliar with the general practices of the industry and thisfact will be an obstacle to a smooth resolution of thesecases."     NPCA urged RSPA to increase its own role in theproposal by giving alleged violators a right to appeal theCoast Guard's decision to the RSPA administrator. After all,RSPA would be the agency that enforces the Coast Guard'sruling, the association added.     "RSPA's desire to offload some of the burden ofhandling 'insubstantial' violations through a ticketingprogram...to better service cases or violations that doconcern safety issues is laudable," NPCA said. "However,even in cases where there is no substantial impact onsafety, there may come a time during the resolution processthat the enforcing agency's office needs to examine thecase."     In addition to its objection regarding the CoastGuard's role, NPCA said RSPA has failed to define adequatelywhat the agency means by "no substantial impact" on safety."Although it does seem clear that the ticketing option willonly be used for the seemingly innocuous recordkeeping typeof violations, there is no built-in mechanism within theproposal that clearly establishes succinct boundaries forinclusion in the program," NPCA said.Proposal Would Discourage Payment     RSPA's proposal to permit minor violations to countagainst a shipper's safety record, and thereby increase thecompany's penalties for future violations, will discouragethe payment of fines. Companies, instead of paying the finesimmediately, would try their luck at a hearing, therebydelaying payments, the association added.     "If the ticketing proposal is meant to be a streamlinedmethod of dealing with 'insubstantial' violations and willresult in a certain percentage of cases being moved awayfrom RSPA, RSPA will want to encourage companies toparticipate in this new streamlined process," NPCA said.     "If, however, companies learn that the most innocuous'insubstantial' violations will result in escalating finesor other ramifications (like an increase in insurancepremiums because of a number of tickets, being published inthe year-end report of violations with a list of tickets),there will be no incentive to pay the ticket," NPCA added."Faced with escalating fines or other ramifications, mostcompanies will choose to contest the ticket."     RSPA's ticket proposal was published in the Aug. 21Federal Register. Contact: RSPA's Office of Chief Counsel,(202) 366-4400; Office of Hazardous Materials Enforcement,(202) 366-4700.Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZMAT TRANSPORT NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996PE%A ANNOUNCES DELAYIN NAFTA CROSSINGS     Approval for trucking companies wishing to conductcross-border traffic between the United States and Mexicounder the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) is onhold until U.S. and Mexican transportation officials meetand further "improve safety and security measures,"Department of Transportation (DOT) Secretary Federico Pe$asaid Dec. 18.     Under NAFTA, Mexican and U.S. truckers were to beallowed to cross the border and operate throughout thoseU.S. and Mexican states along the border starting Dec. 18.     Mexican drivers wanting to operate past the up-to-15-mile commercial zone must file for approval from theInterstate Commerce Commission's successor agency. Thoughthat agency, the Surface Transportation Board, will takeapplications from Mexican truckers, approval will bewithheld until safety meetings occur, Pe$a said.Mexico: Move Violates NAFTA     Since the announcement, the Mexican government wrote toU.S. Trade Representative Mickey Kantor declaring the U.S.delay a violation of the principles of the agreement andthreatening to file a complaint under NAFTA's enforcementmechanism. U.S. officials expressed surprise about theMexican complaints, saying the Mexican government knew ofthe U.S. intent far in advance.     And, said Kantor in a return letter excerpted in TheWashington Post, despite the Mexicans' concerns, "we mustfirst and foremost ensure the safety and security of ourcitizens."     The trucking industry, cautiously concerned when Pe$afirst announced the delay, became "outraged" as the weekwent on, said Linda Bauer-Darr, vice president ofinternational relations at the American TruckingAssociations (ATA). "Obviously, there is no deadline" to endthe delay, Bauer-Darr said. "Obviously [the delay] wasbrought about because of political pressures.     "This is not a good way to be conducting business ...with our important trading partners," Bauer-Darr said.     As Dec. 18 approached, safety advocates such asCitizens for Reliable and Safe Highways (CRASH) and unionssuch as the International Brotherhood of Teamsters steppedup protests to the pending opening of the border.     The groups contend Mexican trucks do not meet state andfederal standards regarding safety, weight or insurance andthat Mexican drivers are not sufficiently trained in hazmatprocedures. They also contend state and federal officials inthe United States are not sufficiently staffed, funded orprepared to enforce U.S. safety standards on the Mexicantrucks. Officials in the four border states - Arizona,California, New Mexico and Texas - share those worries.     Giving in to pressure from those groups will hurt theU.S. trucking industry in the long run, Bauer-Darr said."This is going to play very dangerously when it comes toother pending trade issues with Mexico," she added.     U.S. and Mexican negotiators are trying to work outdisputes over such issues as small-package delivery, wheat-transportation rules and the use of 53-foot trailers inMexico.     "This delay destroys any political leverage [the UnitedStates] had at all," Bauer-Darr said. "Here we're sayingit's very important for [Mexico] to live up to its NAFTAcommitments, but then we don't live up to ours."     The labor and safety groups were "cautiouslyoptimistic" about the delay. "The delay is good news ...only if it means that Mexico will ultimately raise itstruck-safety standards to meet our own," said CRASHExecutive Director Jack Rendler. "Our government should bedoing more, not less, to address truck safety, and NAFTAshould not result in any loosening of U.S. truck-safetystandards.     Despite the delay on the open-border rule, otheractions took effect Dec. 18 as scheduled, such as the cross-investment rule, which permits U.S. trucking companies toinvest in their Mexican counterparts, and vice versa.Contact: DOT's public-affairs office, (202) 366-5580; ATA,(703) 838-1700; Office of the U.S. Trade Representative,(202) 395-3000.* * *Hazardous Materials Handling Certification for DOT HM-181,HM-215A and HM-126F is a seminar scheduled for Jan. 17 inBaton Rouge, La. Contact: Environmental Resource Center,(800) 537-2372 or (919) 469-1585.Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZMAT TRANSPORT NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996RSPA PROPOSES EXPEDITED PROCEDUREFOR ISSUING NON-CONTROVERSIAL RULES     The Research and Special Programs Administration (RSPA)Dec. 18 - in what would be a break from usual regulatoryprocedure - proposed a new system of issuing rules in non-controversial areas first and then inviting interestedparties to submit their objections.     Under the usual procedure, RSPA - like other federalagencies - proposes rules and invites the public to commenton the proposals. Only after the time for comments hasexpired does the agency issue its regulations.     However, in an effort to make the agency moreefficient, RSPA has proposed bypassing the notice-and-comment period by publishing "non-controversial" rules inthe Federal Register and then seeking input from parties whoobject to the rules. If RSPA does not receive a "significantadverse comment" or notice that a party intends to file anobjection by a certain date, the rule would go into effect.Agency Defines 'Non-Controversial'     In its proposed procedural change, RSPA defined non-controversial rules as those that effect minor, substantivechanges to regulations; incorporate by reference the latestedition of technical or industry standards; or extendcompliance dates.     The agency also defined significant adverse comment asa statement from an interested party that explains why therule is inappropriate, ineffective or unacceptable.     "Comments that are frivolous or insubstantial would notbe considered adverse under this procedure," RSPA said. "Acomment recommending a rule change in addition to the rulewould not be considered a significant adverse comment,unless the commenter states why the rule would beineffective without the additional change."     Parties wishing to comment on RSPA's proposed "direct-final-rule" procedure must do so by Feb. 16. For moreinformation, contact: Nancy Machado of RSPA's chief-counseloffice, (202) 366-4400.     RSPA's proposal is published in the Dec. 18 FederalRegister, p. 65210. The three-page proposal also isavailable via BPI's DocuDial Service% as #75-1102. To order,see page 6.Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZMAT TRANSPORT NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996EFFORTS TO ACCELERATE TIMETABLEFOR RADWASTE SHIPMENTS QUICKEN     Efforts to accelerate the timetable for shipping high-level radioactive waste cross-country seems to be gatheringsteam, despite opposition from the Clinton administration.     Under the 1982 Nuclear Waste Policy Act (NWPA), theDepartment of Energy (DOE) must begin accepting high-levelwaste from U.S. nuclear power plants by 1998. However, DOEis behind schedule in constructing a permanent storagefacility, slated for Yucca Mountain, Nevada.     Next month, the House may vote on legislation (H.R.1020) that would require DOE to open an interim storagefacility at Yucca Mountain. Sen. J. Bennett Johnston (D-La.)introduced similar legislation (S. 167) in the Senate, butthat measure has stalled. Both bills call for the interimfacility to begin accepting waste by 1998, but severalissues must be resolved before the shipments can begin.O'Leary Cites Concerns     Energy Secretary Hazel O'Leary Dec. 14 told the SenateEnergy and Natural Resources Committee the administrationcould not support proposals siting the interim facility atYucca Mountain until it finishes suitability studies on thepermanent repository. However, O'Leary said DOE couldcomplete its suitability determination by the end of 1998,and, if Yucca Mountain appears suitable, the agency mayconsider building an interim facility.     That day, Sen. Rod Grams (R-Minn.) introduced a bill(S. 1478) to privatize interim storage, a proposal backed bynuclear-power interests in his home state. Grams' bill wouldlet a private consortium build and operate an interimstorage facility and allow DOE to contract with theconsortium for waste storage. The facility would be built ongovernment-owned land, probably in Nevada.     "For 16 years, DOE has been charged with theresponsibility of our civilian spent fuel," Grams said. "Inthat time, DOE has spent nearly $5 billion of ratepayers'money, including over $250 million from Minnesota's electriccustomers...Privatizing the interim storage program wouldimprove efficiency and lower costs to the taxpayers."     But most in the nuclear industry are pinning theirhopes on DOE building an interim facility. "It[privatization] would be a last resort," said Scott Petersof the Nuclear Energy Institute.RSPA Appeals ActionRSPA Ref. No. 90-82-SB. In the Matter of MortonInternational Inc., Respondent.Background     On Aug. 16, 1991, the Research and Special ProgramsAdministration (RSPA) fined Morton International $2,000 forhaving knowingly violated several sections of the HazardousMaterials Regulations (HMR). These provisions included 49CFR 171.2(a), 171.2(c), 172.202(a)(1), 172.202(a)(2), and173.102.     RSPA reduced to $2,000 a $3,500 fine the agencyproposed in an Aug. 23, 1990, Notice of Probable Violation.The company appealed the $2,000 fine.Discussion     Morton International conceded RSPA's finding that thecompany had violated HMR by failing to mark "DOT 12B" oneach side of the package. But the company contested RSPA'sother findings.     RSPA said the company was required to meet all mandatesof Exemption DOT E 8214 when offering hazmat for interstatetransportation pursuant to the exemption. Failing that, theshipments had to meet HMR mandates, the agency added.     RSPA charged Morton International with violating theHMR by failing to mark properly its otherwise complyingpackagings with the "12B" specification.     RSPA said Morton International knowingly offered hazmatfor transport in commerce in unauthorized, non-DOTspecification packaging, in violation of Exemption DOT E8214 and 49 CFR 171.2(a) and 173.102. The company said thehazmat was part of a shipment from Utah to California, whereit was awaiting transfer to Japan.     Morton International argued the International AirTransport Association (IATA) Dangerous Goods Regulationsgovern movement of the material to Japan and said theseregulations prohibit "double marking" of packages withUnited Nations (UN) markings and DOT markings. The companysaid this prohibition on dual UN and DOT markings barred itfrom placing the otherwise necessary "DOT 12B" markings onthe packages.     However, RSPA said the company was wrong in believingthat IATA regulations control movement of the packages andthat a prohibition exists on DOT markings on packagesoffered for international transportation. The InternationalCivil Aviation Organization (ICAO) Technical Instructionsgovern international transport of hazmat and permit dualmarkings, RSPA added.     Even if dual markings were prohibited, MortonInternational's violations concern the offering of materialfor transportation from Utah to California; that is withinthe United States, RSPA said. If a prohibition on dualmarkings on international shipments did exist, the companywould still be required to mark the packages with therequisite DOT specification marking for interstate trans-portation within the United States and to make any necessarymodifications before offering the packages for internationaltransportation, RSPA added.     Because Morton International did not comply with theDOT exemption, it was required to comply with the HMR, andits violation lay in its failure to comply with the HMR,RSPA said. While it met the basic requirements of the "DOT12B" specification, the company failed to meet with the HMRbecause it did not mark the packages with the "12B"specification, RSPA said.Findings     "I find that a civil penalty of $1,500 is appropriatein light of the nature and circumstances of theseviolations, their extent and gravity, respondent'sculpability, respondent's lack of prior violations,respondent's ability to pay, the effect of a civil penaltyon respondent's ability to continue in business, and allother relevant factors," RSPA administrator D.K. Sharmasaid.Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZMAT TRANSPORT NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996NTSB COUNTS HEAD SHIELDS, COUPLERSAS BEING AMONG ITS TOP ACHIEVEMENTS     The National Transportation Safety Board counts theNTSB-inspired requirement that railroad tank carstransporting hazmat be equipped with head shields and shelfcouplers as being among its greatest achievements.     In a recent report, NTSB said these safety featureshave dramatically reduced the number of tank-car explosionsand ruptures during the past 10 years. Nevertheless, NTSBwarned the Federal Railroad Administration (FRA), railroadsand shippers to remain vigilant.     "The danger still exists, and accidents still occur,"NTSB wrote in its report We Are All Safer: NTSB Improvementsin Transportation Safety. The report detailed NTSB studieson freight-railroad accidents and resulting boardrecommendations the federal government or private sector hasadopted. These agency and corporate steps have enhancedtransportation safety, NTSB said.NTSB Praises Railroads     For example, NTSB praised the railroad industry forresponding to board suggestions by improving communicationwith communities near railyards and rail routes. Inaddition, FRA, the Association of American Railroads andlocomotive manufacturers have met to establish a program togather data on fuel-tank damage and fuel spills.     The board singled out CSX Transportation (CSXT) forspecial praise for its response to a 1989 derailment andbutane spill in Akron, Ohio. Based on NTSB recommendations,CSXT began training its railroad crews to assist emergencypersonnel responding to hazmat spills and to require crewsto keep up-to-date listings of where the hazmat-containingcars are on trains, the agency added.     NTSB also hailed the Chemical Manufacturers Associationfor requiring its members to have a chemical-risk managementprogram to evaluate risks of spills and implement ways toreduce the chances of hazmat leaks. CMA's actions followed a1981 NTSB study that found 2,121 railroad accidentsinvolving hazmat resulted in the evacuation of 100,000people.     In that study, the board also examined 45 railroadaccidents. "In at least 21 of the 45 cases investigated forthe study, the safety board found that local emergencyresponse incident commanders did not have a hazardous-materials emergency-response plan to follow, and in 19 ofthe cases, incident commanders and railroad personnel hadnot been in contact with each other to develop a plan ofaction in the event of a train accident involving hazardousmaterials," NTSB stated.     For more information, contact: NTSB, Public AffairsOffice, Washington, DC 20594; (202) 382-0660.Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZMAT TRANSPORT NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996CLINTON NOMINATES GEORGIANFOR TRANSPORT SAFETY BOARD     President Clinton last month nominated George Black, aGeorgia county transportation director, for the NationalTransportation Safety Board (NTSB).     Black, director of Gwinnett County's transportationdepartment since 1988, has investigated more than 1,500highway crashes. As director, he has overseen the design,construction, maintenance and operation of the county'sroads and its airport.     "Mr. Black's qualifications and experience as a civilengineer will provide the NTSB with the technical expertisenecessary to evaluate complex highway, bridge-design andmaintenance issues," read a White House statement. Black'snomination awaits Senate confirmation.* * *Transportation Research Board's 75th Annual Meeting isscheduled for Jan. 7-11 in Washington. Contact:Transportation Research Board, 2101 Constitution Ave.,Washington, DC 20418; (202) 334-2934.Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZMAT TRANSPORT NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996U.S. HAZMAT REGS PREEMPTNEW YORK RULES, RSPA SAYS     The U.S. Hazardous Materials Regulations (HMR) preemptNew York state rules that ban the repackaging of hazardouswastes, require a statement on the manifest of wastetransfers between vehicles and mandate secondary containmentin defined containers for the storage or transfer of hazmat,the Research and Special Programs Administration (RSPA)stated last month.     RSPA, which enforces HMR, concluded the federal rulestrump New York's after weighing the Chemical WasteTransportation Institute's (CWTI's) challenge to the stateregulation. In a petition to RSPA, CWTI said the New YorkCodes, Rules and Regulations (NYCRR) are not "substantivelythe same as" the federal regulations and are thereforeinvalid under the federal Hazardous Materials TransportationAct.     In its decision, RSPA agreed with CWTI's argument thatthe NYCRR goes beyond HMR by imposing an absoluteprohibition on repackaging hazardous waste. HMR, unlike theNew York rule, allows for some repackaging, such as theconsolidation of some loads from cargo tanks to tank cars,RSPA said.State Went Too Far     New York also went too far in requiring all hazardouswaste transfers to be listed on manifests, RSPA found.Federal rules require only that the transporter's companyname and Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)identification number appear on the manifest.     Finally, RSPA objected to New York's requirement thathazmat be transferred between vehicles only in containerswith impervious bases and drainage and capacity limits. HMRcontains general requirements that the containers be impact-resistant for the minimum and maximum temperaturesencountered during transportation.     Before RSPA would consider its challenge to New York,CWTI had to survive a challenge from New York. The stateurged RSPA to ignore CWTI's petition, saying the grouplacked standing to oppose the state regulation because noneof its members has been hurt by the controversial rule.     New York, joined by Pennsylvania and Montana, said CWTIis primarily concerned with hazmat transportation, and thestate regulations in question concern toxins that are merelywaiting to be transported. CWTI countered that many of itsmembers have refused to engage in certain hazmat-relatedactivities in New York, lest they be fined heavily forrunning afoul of the state rules.     RSPA, ruling in favor of CWTI, said hazmat awaitingtransportation is still governed by the HMR provisionsgoverning shipments. The New York rules and HMR, therefore,affect CWTI members, allowing the group to challenge thestate regulations, RSPA said.     "Where loading, unloading or storage occurs incidentalto the movement of property in commerce, that activity iswithin the scope of federal law governing the transportationof hazardous material and the HMR," RSPA said. "Requirementsaffecting transportation facilities, and transporters'activities at those facilities, are subject to federalpreemption." For more information, contact Frazer Hilder ofRSPA's chief-counsel office, (202) 366-4400. RSPA's decisionis published in the Dec. 6 Federal Register, p. 62527.Back to Headline List WT02-B35-5IA095-001021-B004-120http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/ch23.html 205.156.212.5 19970121223642 text/html 229954HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Tuesday, 21-Jan-97 22:33:45 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:41:55 GMTContent-length: 229768Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ch23.html Sample Issue Copyright MODERN PLASTICS via NewsNet January 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES FEATURES MACHINERY ADVANCES ABET GAINS IN HDPE BLOWN FILM (1658 words) VIEWS FROM THE PROCESSING INDUSTRIES: OPINION EUROPEAN PROCESSORS NEED SUSTAINABLE ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (709 words) GLOBAL REPORT SPI SAYS IT WILL REVIEW PROPOSED RAIL MERGER (248 words) SABIC ADDS PET AND LDPE (260 words) PC SHORTAGE MAY PROMOTE RESIN ALTERNATIVES (291 words) LOSS OF GM WORK MAY FORCE SALE AT GENCORP (171 words) PVC WINS 2, LOSES 1 IN LATEST GO-AROUND (110 words) TAIWANESE PRESS MAKER IS AWARDED CE MARK (112 words) GLOBAL REPORT: BUSINESS BRIEFS PVC SUPPLIERS CHISSO CORP. (64 words) GE PLASTICS (64 words) HOECHST (61 words) ENGLEHARD CORP./REED-SPECTRUM (119 words) OWENS-CORNING (91 words) PEAR HOLDINGS (70 words) PLASTISCOPE GROWTH PROJECTED FOR BLOW MOLDED BULK CONTAINERS IN U.S. AND EUROPE (887 words) PEEK GETS PUMPED (192 words) BAROMETER: MARKET-PRICE HISTORY, BASIC TP GRADES (287 words) PLASTISCOPE: COINJECTION MANIFOLD MIXING UNIT PUTS A SKIN LAYER ON MOLDINGS (566 words) PLASTISCOPE: MEDICAL MD&M-WEST CONFERENCE TO ADDRESS DESIGN REGULATION (660 words) PLASTISCOPE: ADDITIVES ORGANIC PEROXIDES FACE STIFF TECHNOLOGICAL COMPETITORS (703 words) LIQUID COLORANTS ARE FREE OF OLD DRAWBACKS, GAIN IN POPULARITY (960 words) CLARIFICATION AUG 95 MP, 15 (93 words) PLASTISCOPE: FINISHING PLASMA POLYMERIZATION USED FOR SCRATCH-RESISTANT COATINGS (416 words) PLASTISCOPE: ELECTRONICS CONNECTOR MARKETS FACE DECADE OF HIGH RISKS AND BIG REWARDS (836 words) PLASTISCOPE: DESIGN POLYPROPYLENE SHOWS ITS METTLE IN TEXTILE DYE-TUBE DESIGN (316 words) RESINS REPORT 1996: POLYETHYLENE EXPORTS AND LOW MONOMER COST KEEP SUPPLY AND PRICING STABLE (1261 words) RESINS REPORT 1996 RESINS REPORT 1996 INNOVATIVE TECHNOLOGIES, EXPANDING MARKETS (217 words) RESINS REPORT 1996: PRICING STABILITY SEEMS TO BE AT HAND IN GLOBAL COMMODITY-RESINS MARKETS (1288 words) RESINS REPORT 1996: POLYPROPYLENE STRONG GROWTH WILL CARRY OVER INTO DIVERSE MARKETS AND APPLICATIONS (1290 words) RESINS REPORT 1996: METALLOCENES VOLUME IS BEGINNING TO BUILD AS END-USERS ASSESS RESINS' BENEFITS (1396 words) RESINS REPORT 1996: ABS DEMAND MATCHES GDP GROWTH IN DEVELOPED NATIONS, SURGES IN ASIA (657 words) RESINS REPORT 1996: NYLON SPECIALTY GRADES PROMISE GROWTH DESPITE SHORTAGES OF GLASS FIBERS (648 words) RESINS REPORT 1996: POLYVINYL CHLORIDE SURGING DEMAND IN HIGH-GROWTH REGIONS BUOYS END-USE OUTLOOK (726 words) RESINS REPORT 1996: PET REGIONAL GROWTH, OVERCAPACITY MAY CHANGE PATTERNS OF SUPPLY (599 words) RESINS REPORT 1996: POLYCARBONATE RESIN SHORTAGE SHOULD EASE THIS YEAR AS CAPACITY COMES ON STREAM (649 words) EDITORIAL WELCOME TO A `WORLDWIDE WEB' (319 words) RESINS REPORT 1996: UNITED STATES LINEAR LOW-DENSITY POLYETHYLENE (LLDPE)* (127 words) CONVENTIONAL LOW-DENSITY POLYETHYLENE* (LDPE, COPOLYMER) (138 words) POLYSTYRENE (PS) MAJOR MARKETS (342 words) ABS MAJOR MARKETS (154 words) PVC (133 words) POLYPROPYLENE (PP) MAJOR MARKETS (159 words) HIGH-DENSITY POLYETHYLENE (HDPE) MAJOR MARKETS (186 words) ETHYLENE-VINYL ACETATE (EVA) (64 words) ACRYLIC PATTERN OF CONSUMPTION (60 words) POST-CONSUMER RECYCLATE PATTERN OF CONSUMPTION (156 words) POST-CONSUMER FEEDSTOCK PATTERNS OF SOURCING (166 words) ACETALS (54 words) POLYCARBONATE (63 words) NYLONS (97 words) POLYESTER, UNSATURATED (72 words) POLYETHYLENE TEREPHTHALATE PATTERN OF CONSUMPTION (65 words) RESINS REPORT 1996: MEXICO SELECTED MEXICAN RESIN MARKETS, 1994-95 (127 words) RESINS REPORT 1996: CANADA SELECTED CANADIAN RESIN MARKETS, 1994-95 (100 words) RESINS REPORT 1996: LATIN AMERICA SELECT BRAZILIAN RESIN MARKETS (83 words) SELECT LATIN AMERICAN CAPACITIES BY COUNTRY (51 words) RESINS REPORT 1996: ASIA-PACIFIC SELECT CAPACITIES BY COUNTRY (86 words) RESINS REPORT 1996: WESTERN EUROPE LOW-DENSITY, LINEAR LOW-DENSITY POLYETHYLENE (87 words) EXPANDABLE POLYSTYRENE (27 words) NYLONS (69 words) ABS (73 words) HIGH-DENSITY POLYETHYLENE (49 words) POLYCARBONATE (55 words) POLYETHYLENE TEREPHTHALATE PATTERN OF CONSUMPTION (50 words) POLYSTYRENE (92 words) UNSATURATED POLYESTER (68 words) RESINS REPORT: WESTERN EUROPE POLYPROPYLENE (38 words) VINYLS (89 words) ACRYLIC (34 words) ACETALS (41 words) RESINS REPORT: JAPAN LOW-DENSITY POLYETHYLENE (51 words) HIGH-DENSITY POLYETHYLENE (48 words) POLYETHYLENE TEREPHTHALATE (26 words) NYLON (89 words) POLYPROPYLENE (46 words) ACRYLIC (30 words) POLYSTYRENE (38 words) ABS (45 words) POLYACETAL (35 words) POLYBUTYLENE TEREPHTHALATE (38 words) POLYVINYL CHLORIDE (34 words) POLYCARBONATE (39 words) EQUIPMENT MODULAR INJECTION MACHINES SUIT A WIDE RANGE OF REQUIREMENTS (464 words) DIE DESIGN CUTS FLOW HANGUPS (152 words) PRECISION CLAMPING (70 words) EQUIPMENT: THERMOFORMING TWIN-SHEET UNIT MAKES AUTO PARTS (175 words) EQUIPMENT: AUXILIARIES GRAVIMETRIC BLENDER (116 words) EQUIPMENT: TESTING COLOR MATCHING IS FAST (110 words) EQUIPMENT: INJECTION MOLDING TWO-MATERIAL MACHINE (214 words) FOCUS VERSATILE STAMPING SYSTEMS ENHANCE USER CAPABILITIES (935 words) TECHNICAL PAPER HYDROGEN FLUORIDE IS CUT FROM COMPOUNDING PROCESS ACID SCAVENGER ADDITIVES NUKE (NEUTRALIZE) NOXIOUS FUMES (1518 words) RESINS REPORT 1996: POLYSTYRENE RELATIVE STABILITY IN SUPPLY AND PRICING IS PROJECTED FOR MARKET (630 words) MATERIALS BIODEGRADABLE POLYMERS OFFER TAILORED RATES OF DEGRADATION (359 words) PBT MAKES A CLEAN SWEEP (86 words) PRICING FORECAST (35 words) MATERIALS: RESINS & COMPOUNDS FILM-GRADE HDPE (84 words) POLYETHERIMIDE RESINS (124 words) COPOLYMER (76 words) WEATHERABLE PC (67 words) MATERIALS: ADDITIVES FLEXIBLE PVC (128 words) PEARLESCENT PIGMENTS (70 words) CopyrightMODERN PLASTICS via NewsNetJanuary 1996   MACHINERY ADVANCES ABET GAINS IN HDPE BLOWN FILMBy:MICHAEL C. GABRIELESpurred by ongoing technical innovations, favorable cost comparisons withpaper and other resin systems, and growing end-use markets, high-densitypolyethylene blown film production will register strong annual growth ratesduring the next five years.   North America, Asia, and Latin America are identified as prime growthmarkets for HDPE film, while the more mature Western European market issteady but less robust. Many equipment suppliers say Eastern Europe isdeveloping as an especially fertile sector for HDPE film growth.Suppliers project strong growth for HDPE film   Equipment suppliers are unanimous in their bullish forecast for thegrowth of HDPE film. They say many processors, especially those in theU.S., are set to embark on significant expansion in their productioncapabilities over the next 24 months.   Processors are looking to upgrade the quality of their operations andfilm products by utilizing a host of incremental technical innovations.Many of these capital investments will involve processing lines for``high-stalk,'' coextrusion high-molecular weight HDPE.   HDPE film sales in North America are projected to grow at a healthyaverage annual rate in excess of 20% during the next five years, sourcessay. Much of this increase in business will come at the expense of LDPE andpaper, in various packaging applications.   An industry source at a major polyolefin resin producer estimates thetotal U.S. market for HDPE film in 1995 was upwards of 1.5 billion lb.,with a value in excess of $1 billion. About 150 billion HDPE film bags wereproduced last year for four major market categories: grocery ``T-shirt''sacks; thin-film industrial can liners; consumer garbage bags; and generalconsumer product merchandise bags.   Eastern Europe is cited by several equipment suppliers as a vibrantgrowth sector for the production of HDPE film. Many processors in theemerging market economies of Eastern Europe are moving aggressively toinvest in high-stalk, coextruded HMW-HDPE film lines, which typically carrya price tag in excess of $2 million.   Machinery builders point out that HDPE film's ability to be downgagedyet maintain physical properties is one factor that will continue to fuelits growth in both consumer and industrial packaging and insulatingapplications.   ``You can't downgage LDPE or LLDPE like HDPE and still maintain desiredlevels of tensile strength,'' David Nunes, president of Alpine American,Natick, MA, says. ``Also, paper prices are skyrocketing, while the demandfor T-shirt bags is growing at an extraordinary rate.''   Sources say U.S. paper prices are five times higher than HDPE film inapplications such as T-shirt bags. Recent reports quote the price of 70-lb.unbleached kraft grocery sack paper at $590 a ton, with supplies tight andprices expected to continue rising in the near term.Demand for grooved-feed extruders is picking up   Joseph Altimari, executive vice president, Black Clawson-Sano Inc.,Amelia, OH, says his firm's recent marketing alliance with Spanishmachinery builder Covex R.S. Extrusion S.A., of Barcelona, will seek tocapitalize on the growing market demand for grooved-feed extruders for HDPEblown film. Black Clawson-Sano last spring acquired the exclusive rights tomarket Covex HDPE film systems in North America.   The grooved-feed extruders provide stronger, more consistent, andpredictable extrusion rates compared with smooth-bore types. However,Altimari points out grooved-feed results in higher wear rates on machines.To remedy this, Covex has come up with a novel, proprietary groove designthat reduces back pressure and wear in the feed zone.   Covex film lines utilize an extruder design that reduces screw r.p.m. byas much as 25 to 50%, compared with existing standard machines, yetmaintains equivalent film output levels, according to Altimari. Inaddition, Covex has introduced a bi-layer die design with a singleextruder, which is said to orient HDPE film to help prevent the ``zippertear'' effect.   Paul Kiefel Extrusionstechnik GmbH, Wrentham, MA, and Reifenhauser Inc.,Peabody, MA, each offer 100-mm. grooved-feed extruders aimed at the T-shirtbag market. The machines are capable of output rates over 1000 lb./hr.Alpine is testing a 120-mm. extruder for HDPE, which has been adapted froman LDPE film system. The design will allow processors to run both HDPE andLDPE.   Reifenhauser has unveiled an internal bubble cooling (IBC) technology,which induces more ``neck-in'' for the stalk or neck of a film bubble.Matthew Bangert, vice president of sales, explains the IBC system decreasesthe neck diameter of the film bubble, just below the frost line. Thisenables processors to use larger dies to boost output rates withoutsacrificing the desired physical properties of the film.   Bangert says the technology achieves up to 30% neck-in for the bubblestalk; the typical neck-in range for most film lines is 5 to 15%.   Battenfeld Gloucester, Gloucester, MA, recently delivered an enhancedblown film ``swing'' line to an unnamed U.S. customer, which provides thecapability to change die diameters for the processing of eitherhigh-molecular-weight HDPE or LLDPE.   Bill Hellmuth, senior product manager, says the new line can switchbetween a 17-in. die diameter, for HMW-HDPE, and a 24- in. die diameter forLLDPE. The unit is equipped with a three-layer die and two extruders: 80-and 90-mm. The line has a 124-in. nip roll face and an output range of 1000to 15,000 lb./hr., depending on film thickness.   Brampton Engineering Inc., Brampton, ON, Canada, has launched its``Dial-A-Gap'' die gap adjusting system. Bill Wybenga, president, explainsthe system isn't an automatic gaging control; it adjusts the total gaparound the die's circumference.   Wybenga says the system, which can be electronically or manuallyoperated, allows processors to increase or decrease the nominal film diegap to suit the needs of the material and the output rate. The gap can beadjusted in a range of 0.5 to 3 mm. He says that operating with a morenarrow die gap increases the tear resistance and dart impact properties ofthe film.   Alpha Marathon Mfg. Inc., Mississauga, ON, Canada, has introduced aspiral die with a ``flow-mixing channel'' to provide a consistenttemperature gradient at the spiral. This provides more exact film gaging,with improved optical properties and better machine-direction filmorientation.   An Alpha spokesman explains that each spiral is fed from two ports, andeach port feeds two spirals, which homogenizes the melt entering thespirals with a thermal layering effect. The screw also incorporates aspecial mixing tip.High-end applications include insulation   Most sources were guarded when asked to discuss new market areas forHDPE film. However, indications are that emerging higher-end applicationswill involve using the material as a conductive insulator or shield.   These applications include conductive bags and over-wraps, in areas suchas printed circuit boards, video and electrical cables, and otherelectronic products.   Hellmuth of Battenfeld says his firm is involved in new marketapplications, which call for the development of HDPE film lamination. HDPEfilm is laminated to a light-gage PE foam, providing conductive insulationand a protective covering for consumer products.   Gunther Neumann, a sales representative with Kiefel Inc., Wrentham, MA,says a well-established trend for new-equipment sales for HDPE film hasbeen the inclusion of coextrusion capability. He says feedback fromprocessors indicates they require the flexibility to pair the strength anddowngaging properties of HDPE with the clarity and puncture resistance ofLLDPE.   Reifenhauser has done proprietary development work with HDPE/LDPEcoextrusions, to produce higher-clarity film. The opacity typicallyassociated with HDPE is a surface phenomenon. LDPE, as an outer layer toHDPE, becomes a clarity enhancer.   Many processors and end users are evaluating the coextrusioncombination of HDPE and metallocenes, sources say. Application trends pointto using a metallocene as a skin layer over HDPE film. This combinationtakes advantage of HDPE's superior tensile strength, along with the tearresistance and enhanced surface appearance of metallocenes.New oscillating systems are among advances   Macro Engineering & Technology Inc., Mississauga, ON, Canada, in Marchwill begin testing a horizontal oscillating nip on a lab-scale line. Abenefit of the design is a lower head-room requirement in processingplants, compared with a typical vertical oscillating nip system. It alsoeliminates the need to stand film on its edge, which reduces sagging.   Brendan Dorney, sales engineer, says this design is well suited for theproduction of HDPE film. He explains that the horizontal skew bars directthe film in a scissor-like manner through the 180 or 360 deg. of rotation.The fixed horizontal bars, like those in a vertical process, use an aircushion for lubrication.   Recent innovations from Egan Davis-Standard, Somerville, NJ, are a94-in. oscillating nip, and European-style surface winder. Rick L. Keller,industry director of film systems, says the new oscillating nip, introducedlast year, helps reduce gage variations in process, allowing for a moreuniform gage distribution, which results in a flatter, more consistent filmroll geometry. The nip is electrically driven and oscillates 720 deg.(+/-360).   The Egan surface winder has been rolled out to meet the demands of U.S.film processors, many of whom are showing a preference to automatic surfacewinders rather than center or turret winders.   Surface winders long have been considered the system of choice amongEuropean blown film processors. Keller says the Egan winder can handlerolls up to 50 in. in diameter, and enables processors to achieve a higherdegree of control in the film roll hardness.   Kiefel's ``light'' mono extrusion line (Compex 60 SA.L), is described asa lower-cost system for HDPE packaging films. The system includes astationary extruder with a standard 23 L/D screw length, an internal bubblestabilizer with a new high-slip, wear-resistant plastic cone, and dualirises for external bubble stabilization.Photograph(s):Photograph: Paper prices are said to outweigh HDPE film costs by afive-fold margin in most high- volume applications. [Photo, Battenfeld]Photograph: Technological innovations for HDPE film lines include thissix-layer coextrusion system from Alpine American.Photograph: Black Clawson-Sano will market Covex systems in North America,addressing the demand for grooved-feed extruders.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightMODERN PLASTICS via NewsNetJanuary 1996   EUROPEAN PROCESSORS NEED SUSTAINABLE ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENTBy:JOACHIM ECKSTEIN   In the processing industry, our philosophy is one where basic standardsand strategies influence our everyday business practices. I believe that inthe past, we concentrated too heavily on the operational side. Only whenconfronted with change did we consider new strategies. The changesconfronting our industry were often politically motivated, such as takingback used products, quota regulations, or collection systems, and were notrelated to sensible economic practices. We plastics processors too oftenonly reacted rather than developed our own independent strategies. Thus,for example, we were not able to promote politically and publicly supportedwaste-to-energy recovery through incineration. Today, only a few Europeancountries favor this economic and ecologically sound method of wastemanagement.   We are confronted in all European countries with varied environmentalregulations at varied costs. The highest fees are found in Germany, tosupport the Dual System's (DSD) collection and processing activities.Recycling a kilogram of plastic costs about $2, three times the value ofthe collected material.   Last year members of the EuPC (European Plastics Converters Association)reoriented their philosophy and strategy toward the same goals proposed byEuropean politicians. The EuPC has taken the principles of ``sustainabledevelopment,'' as put forth at the 1992 Rio Conference, as tenets. We seethe fulfillment of Sustainable Development as insuring sustainableexistence for the entire plastics industry. Therefore, when the principlesof European plastics processors coincide with those of Europeanpoliticians, future conflicts between political and business goals can beavoided.PROFIT NEEDED TO WITHSTAND HARDSHIPS   European processors are mainly small to medium-sized businesses whichunderstand that entrepreneurial activities, including ecological aspects,have be economically viable. All new or additional ecological burdensplaced on our industry have to be both bearable and profitable to insurethe processor's economic survival. So far, this has not been the case. Ifwe are required to use recycled materials, then these materials should besold at rates that correspond to their actual costs.   There are a number of internal actions we as processors can take toalign ecological measures with our business principles. Resource and energyreduction, investing in modern technology to ensure better productivity andlow exhaust emissions, as well as sensible use of recyclate are just a fewof the measures we can contribute.   The products we produce have different life cycles of usefulness. Thehigher the quality and better the designs we manufacture, the longer theycan be used - therefore increasing the attractiveness for the customer whoshould be willing to pay a higher price.   By reducing raw material use and building in the collection andrecycling costs at the production stage, we can make our contribution toimproving both the environment and the cost situation.   Collection, sorting, and recycling of used plastics are today notcovered in the processor's cost calculation. They are usually paid bymunicipalities. The goal of the Rio Conference was to transfer these coststo the producer and seller. This is only possible when a realistic coststructure allows for a pragmatic cost/sales price ratio to cover therecycling process.   The EuPC is not propagating any single form of recycling. Of course,mechanical recycling, the sole technology which the processor can put intopractice, is only attractive if the costs of collection, separation, andutilization are under or at the same level as virgin raw material. If thecosts of sorting and cleaning plastics waste make mechanical reprocessinguneconomical, then other methods such as waste-to-energy recycling shouldbe considered.   By orienting our philosophy on the principles of sustainabledevelopment, we European plastic processors want to contribute our part inkeeping plastics, with its outstanding properties, a preferred material.This should stimulate growth in our industry and create jobs.   A growth rate of only 1%/yr. in the European plastics processingindustry equates to income of $214 million, which finances 6000 extra jobs.We thus see sustainable development making a meaningful contribution to allour social security.About the Author(s):Joachim Eckstein is president of the European Plastics Converters, aBrussels-based umbrella organization representing approximately 25,000predominantly medium-sized processing operations throughout Europe. Membershave a combined processing capacity of more than 30 million tons of resineach year.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightMODERN PLASTICS via NewsNetJanuary 1996   SPI SAYS IT WILL REVIEW PROPOSED RAIL MERGER   Plans by rail line Union Pacific Corp. to acquire rival Southern PacificTransportation Co. are under study by the Society of the Plastics Industry,to determine how such a consolidation of rail service would affect U.S.resin shipments.   The merger would create the largest Class 1 railroad in U.S. history.SPI says that if the deal goes through, 75 to 80% of all resin producedbetween Houston, TX, and New Orleans, LA, would be shipped by one company.This amounts to 39 billion lb. - or 72% - of U.S. resin production.   SPI is concerned about shipping rates. Transportation is 20% of resincost - the second-most expensive cost after raw materials. The group hasuntil March 29 to file an objection with regulators.   Union Pacific, which filed notice of the merger Nov. 30 and seeksapproval by August, doesn't believe it will lead to higher prices. ``Lowertransport prices will result over the long run,'' says regional marketingdirector Edward Trandahl. He notes 40 plastics shippers in support of themerger.   One supplier in favor is Andrew Smith, CEO of polyolefins producerRexene Corp. ``We believe the merger will provide more efficienttransportation service.''   One statistic to emerge from SPI's review is the impact of plastics onTexas and Louisiana. The industry employs 88,000 in those states, and pumps$21 billion into their economies annually.Photograph(s):Photograph: If Union Pacific acquires rival, it will ship 72% of U.S.resin.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightMODERN PLASTICS via NewsNetJanuary 1996   SABIC ADDS PET AND LDPE   Addition of these resins by Saudi Basic Industries Corp. will make thecompany, known by its acronym Sabic, one of the world's most broadly basedresin suppliers by 1996-97. Sabic already produces high-densitypolyethylene, linear low-density PE, polypropylene, polystyrene, andsuspension grades of polyvinyl chloride.   A 310-million-lb./yr. polyethylene terephthalate facility, includingcapacity for bottle grades, was due on line late last year. A770-million-lb./yr. plant for purified terephthalic acid monomer, a PETprecursor, is scheduled for startup in 1997, which would make Sabicself-sufficient in PET feedstocks (it already makes ethylene glycol).   The addition of conventional (high-pressure) low-density polyethylenecapacity is due on line in 1997. A 440-million-lb./yr. facility will makeheavy-duty bag, shrink wrap, and other film- and molding-grade resins.Abdullah Nojaidi, Sabic's president, says that local users in the MiddleEast now want their suppliers to provide them with LDPE to complement LLDPEin blending and other roles.   While LDPE has been losing share to LLDPE and HDPE for such applicationsas films in various regions, it continues to find use in many markets forthe process efficiencies it provides as a blending resin with LLDPE. Thereare also many process machines that are configured to run low-density PE,which are not likely to be replaced or upgraded soon to take LLDPE.   Sabic is also entering PVC emulsion (paste) supply, with a50-million-lb./yr. unit just brought onstream. Support facilities to makedi-octyl phthalate plasticizers (using a technology to be licensed fromJapan's Mitsubishi), as well as DOP feedstocks, are also underconstruction.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightMODERN PLASTICS via NewsNetJanuary 1996   PC SHORTAGE MAY PROMOTE RESIN ALTERNATIVES   Supply shortfalls, long lead times, and rising price continue to plaguepolycarbonate. Several suppliers of PC (and competing clear/tough resins)say lead times for delivering PC in North America, Europe, and Asia stoodat 8 to 16 weeks in late December. In October, a fourth price hike in sixmonths went into effect, bringing prices for blow molding grades to US$1.80to $1.90/lb. for volume buys, a rise of at least $0.30/lb. sincefirst-quarter 1995. Many accounts are on allocation. (See related article,p. 67.)   Users are scrambling to cope. In some markets, where compromise onclarity is feasible, a shift to lower-cost clear/tough styrenics isoccurring. Blending of PC and other polymers in opaque markets isincreasing, too. Bayer, for example, reports a shift in some markets toalternative materials in its slate like ABS/PET alloys. The result is thatclear styrenics, like Phillips 66's butadiene-modified grades and Novacor'sacrylic-modified resins, are sold out, with inquiries in medical and otherroles flooding in.   Indeed, some say a permanent change may be underway in select markets,as end-users learn to adapt to alternatives that sell for under $1/lb. ``PCshortfalls create a new mind-set - and a window for replacement,'' statesSteve Shelby, K-Resin commercial manager at Phillips 66, Houston, TX.Another approach is to send out metallized PC scrap (e.g., from compactdisks), which is usually landfilled, for cleanup by recyclers andsubsequent reuse.   ``PC today is simply precious,'' a supplier explains. Consultants pegcurrent PC capacity utilization rates at near 100%. And demand is viewed ascontinuing to outrun announced capacity increases through 1996-97,according to Bill Kuhlke, Kuhlke Assoc., Houston, TX. PC shortfalls andhigh costs could persist until 1998-99, observers say.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightMODERN PLASTICS via NewsNetJanuary 1996   LOSS OF GM WORK MAY FORCE SALE AT GENCORP   GM's switch from sheet molding compound to steel for body panels on theU-van platform has prompted GenCorp, the supplier of body panels, toconsider selling its Reinforced Plastics Div. Preliminary sale talks arebeing held with Cambridge Industries Inc., Madison Heights, MI.   GenCorp produced lift gates, doors, side panels, and other componentsfor the all-plastics-exterior U-van in Shelbyville, IN, since 1989.Production of U-van components will end at mid-year. Parts are also madethere for GM's Camaro, Firebird, and Corvette, Chrysler's Jeep, and Ford'sRanger.   Cambridge is a diverse automotive supplier that maintains 11 plants inthe U.S. It produces interior trim, exterior panels, and structuralcomponents.   Observers say GM switched to steel for economy. The automaker isredesigning the van for 1997 and anticipates volumes of 300,000 to 400,000,a production level that is more cost-effective for steel. In 1995, volumesreached 120,000 for the U-van, which consists of the Lumina APV,Silhouette, and TranSport models. Only 100,000 units are planned for 1996.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightMODERN PLASTICS via NewsNetJanuary 1996   PVC WINS 2, LOSES 1 IN LATEST GO-AROUND   Proponents of polyvinyl chloride gained ground in two high-profileregulatory showdowns.   In Berlin, the city legislature voted down restrictions on vinyl use inmunicipal construction, reversing a position that it took five yearsearlier. Thus, in Germany's future capital, PVC resumes a familiar role asa building material in windows, shutters, roof beams, and pipe.   In Canada, Toronto officials urged legislators to reject anactivist-proposed ban on PVC pipe. Testimony by the industry is creditedwith thwarting a citywide ban.   A setback was encountered in Sweden, where Greenpeace claims victory ina campaign to have Parliament approve the ``speedy'' phaseout of most PVCproducts.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightMODERN PLASTICS via NewsNetJanuary 1996   TAIWANESE PRESS MAKER IS AWARDED CE MARK   Fu Chun Shin Machinery Manufacture Co., in Tainan, says that its 60- to420-ton injection molding machines now carry the CE mark, a Europeanquality standard (Dec 95 MP, 23). U.K.-based body Amtri Veritas presentedthe company with the certificate.   According to Pao-Hiun Wang, president of FCS, the company is the firstTaiwanese injection machinery supplier to gain the CE mark. FCS spent ayear upgrading machinery with the assistance of its agent, Excel UK, forcertification.   The CE mark is a prerequisite for machinery suppliers selling in Europe.FCS says clients worldwide are requesting machines with the mark, which isbecoming an international safety standard.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightMODERN PLASTICS via NewsNetJanuary 1996   PVC SUPPLIERS CHISSO CORP.   PVC suppliers Chisso Corp., Kureha Chemical Industry Co., and AsahiGlass Co., all in Tokyo, are reportedly in discussions aimed at combiningtheir operations into a joint venture. Such a venture would have capacityfor 683 million lb./yr., ranking it third behind Shin Dai-Ichi and aventure between Tosoh Corp. and others due to start up this month.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightMODERN PLASTICS via NewsNetJanuary 1996   GE PLASTICS   GE Plastics, Pittsfield, MA, has purchased the remaining 50% of Polimar,its ABS joint venture in Mexico with ICA Plasticos. The purchase gives GEfull ownership of the manufacturing facility at Tampico, Tamaulipas. GEalso purchased the remaining 55% of Coplen SA, its engineeringthermoplastics joint venture in Brazil with Nitriflex. The purchase leavesCoplen owned by GE.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightMODERN PLASTICS via NewsNetJanuary 1996   HOECHST   Hoechst, Frankfurt, Germany, and 3M, St. Paul, MN, plan a joint venturefor fluoropolymers that is slated to begin in mid-year. The deal willimprove the global presence of both companies by combining regionaloperations. The venture will develop and sell fluoropolymers. Brands willcontinue: 3M makes Fluorel and Dynamar elastomers, Hoechst makes Hostaflongrades.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightMODERN PLASTICS via NewsNetJanuary 1996   ENGLEHARD CORP./REED-SPECTRUM   Expansions are underway in additives and fillers capacity. In organicpigments, Englehard Corp., Iselin, NJ, has increased by 35% capacity atLouisville, KY. Reed-Spectrum, Holden, MA, is to bring on line addedcolorant capacity in Phoenix, AZ. In biocides, a manufacturing andmarketing partnership has been forged by Lonza Inc., Fair Lawn, NJ, andSunkyong Industries Ltd, Seoul, South Korea. Laurel Industries, Cleveland,OH, is adding a line in La Porte, TX, for antimony oxide. ECC Intl.,Atlanta, GA, is buying the fine-ground calcium-carbonate operations ofGenstar Stone Products, giving it a foothold in the northeast U.S. SCMChemicals, Baltimore, MD, is expanding its titanium dioxide unit inStallingborough, U.K., 35 to 40%.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightMODERN PLASTICS via NewsNetJanuary 1996   OWENS-CORNING   Activity is afoot in glass-fiber supply. In December, Owens-Corning,Toledo, OH, purchased Fiber-Lite, a manufacturer-molder of glass-fibermolding media for automotive, office furniture insulation, andsound-deadening. A joint venture, meanwhile, was formed by Smith FiberglassProducts, Little Rock, AR, and a local partner to build China's firstreinforced pipe facility. The U.S. firm, in partnership with HarbinComposites, Harbin, China, plans to assist the oil industry in solvingcorrosion and leakage problems. Fugitive oil is a major contributor toproduct and environmental losses in China.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightMODERN PLASTICS via NewsNetJanuary 1996   PEAR HOLDINGS   Pear Holdings, Oakville, ON, Canada, has licensed composite resintechnology from Ashland Chemical, Columbus, OH, involving polyether amideresins. These thermosets offer 400 degrees F. stability, low smoke andflame generation, and an ability to make parts up to 8 in. thick. Materialsreportedly have 500% more toughness and better adhesion than epoxies. gainsrights to make and market materials worldwide for 10 yr.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightMODERN PLASTICS via NewsNetJanuary 1996   GROWTH PROJECTED FOR BLOW MOLDED BULK CONTAINERS IN U.S. AND EUROPEBy:Michael C. Gabriele   The U.S. and Europe are emerging as high-growth markets for theproduction and sale of blow molded intermediate bulk containers. Demand forthe specialized industrial containers is steaming along at an annual growthrate of at least 15%, a trend expected to continue over the next fiveyears. However, the wider use of blow molded IBCs is coming at the expenseof rotationally molded containers.   IBCs represent a class of large-volume (275 or 330 gal., and 1000 or1250 liter) industrial containers, with a blow molded tank enclosed andsupported by a tubular steel or welded wire mesh structure.   A critical boost to the growth of blow molded IBCs occurred in late1994, when the United Nations passed an international commerce regulation(HM-181E), which stated blow molded IBCs containing hazardous materialscould be reused. Prior to this ruling, only rotationally molded tanks couldbe recycled for the shipment of hazardous materials. The chemical industryand food processors represent the two major end-use markets for IBCs.Four major processors are located in U.S.   Tom Barrett, president of Scheutz Container Systems Inc., North Branch,NJ - one of four major U.S. producers of blow molded IBCs - notes thegrowth of blow molded IBCs is being pulled by solid demand from end users.``End users see the advantages in more efficient, cost-effective materialhandling, and safer overall storage of materials using IBCs, compared with55-gal. drums,'' Barrett states.   Hoover Material Handling Group Inc., with three production facilities(Mount Vernon, OH; Anniston, AL; and Beatrice, NE) is the largest U.S.producer of blow molded IBCs. John R. Redmond, president, estimates thathis company currently produces nearly half of all blow molded IBCs in theU.S.   Other U.S. processors include Sonoco Product Co., Lavonia, GA, andScheutz (production installations in North Branch; Atlanta; andPerrysburg, OH). Sonoco produces blow molded IBCs under a licensetechnology agreement with Sotralentz, a machinery builder and systemintegrator based in Drulingen, France.   A fourth company, Van Leer Containers Inc., based in Alsip, IL, isslated to begin production at a plant in Lawrenceville, GA, during thefirst half of this year. The firm is a unit of Van Leer Nederland BV,Amstelveen, the Netherlands.   Blow molding equipment suppliers for the production of IBCs includeKrupp Kautex Maschinenbau GmbH, Bonn, Germany; the Plastics Machinery Div.of Cincinnati Milacron, Batavia, OH; Battenfeld Blowmolding Machines Inc.,Boonton, NJ; Bekum America Corp., Williamston, MI; Ube Industries Ltd.,Tokyo, Japan; and Uniloy Srl, Calenzano, Italy.Two German equipment builders - Rikutec GmbH, based in Altenkirchen, andMauser-Werke GmbH, located in Bruhl - produce their own line of blowmolding machines for commercial sale, as well as process IBCs.   Hoover operates two Krupp Kautex machines - one in Mt. Vernon and one inAnniston. Last April, Hoover went on line with a new Bekum unit in Mt.Vernon.   Michael D. Hodges, Sonoco market manager, plastics, says his companyutilizes two Krupp Kautex machines at its Lavonia site.   Sources say there are as many as 15 processors in Europe producing blowmolded IBCs, with the companies concentrated mainly in Germany, France, andthe Netherlands. Scheutz Werke GmbH, Selters, Germany, (the parent firm toScheutz Container), and Van Leer are identified as the largest Europeanproducers of blow molded IBCs.   It's estimated that between 900,000 and 1.1 million blow molded IBCswere produced and sold in Europe in 1995, according to industry sources. Bycontrast, the U.S. market reached just over 400,000 units last year. Bothtotals represent a growth rate of 15% compared with the previous year, alevel of average annual increase anticipated to continue for this businesssegment through the year 2000, sources say.   Bob Zendel, Sonoco general manager, says IBCs are developing as apreferred mode of material transportation, replacing the venerable 55-gal.drum. Compared with the drums, IBCs are described as being more efficientcontainers, in terms of shipping space utilization, handling and storage,enclosure cleaning and reuse, and material dispensing, he says.Technical innovations for blow molded IBCs   The leading-edge technological trend for blow molded IBCs involves theuse of coextrusion techniques. Multilayer tanks can incorporate acombination of resin systems, or can make use of regrind material,depending on the application.   Sonoco and Van Leer this year will initiate production of coextrudedIBCs in the U.S. Sonoco will employ its existing Krupp equipment, while VanLeer will use a Rikutec machine. Hoover, with its Bekum unit, also willhave coextrusion capability.   In another development, Hoover recently unveiled its ``Tufftote'' lineof IBCs, which combines an inner HDPE blow molded vessel with a two-partouter RIM shell. The RIM material is a thermoset olefin (dicyclopentadieneor DCPD) known as Telene, supplied by BFGoodrich Co., Cleveland, OH. Theresult is a freestanding plastics IBC with no metal support frame, whichcan be stacked up to three units high.   Hoover officials say Tufftote IBCs have a 60% lower tare weightcompared with standard metal-caged containers, and eliminate the corrosionproblems commonly associated with metal frames when transporting varioushazardous liquid chemicals.Photograph(s):Photograph: Top: Hoover Materials Handling Group's Tufftote IBC combinesblow molded HDPE inner layer with 2-part outer RIM shell.Photograph: Bottom: Bekum America's BA 440 is used for blow molding IBCs.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightMODERN PLASTICS via NewsNetJanuary 1996   PEEK GETS PUMPEDBy:Joseph A. Grande   Metal is slowly taking a back seat when it comes to low-wear andlow-friction applications in the oil refinery and petrochemical industries.Polyether-etherketone (PEEK) is increasingly being used in stationary androtating wear components in centrifugal pumps which are used in oilrefineries, petrochemical plants, and pipeline installations.   A good example is a new large-scale refinery in Thailand. The builder,Caltex Corp., Dallas, TX, specified PEEK for the case rings in all therefinery's process pumps. It may be the first time that a new pumpconstruction has been specified with non-metallic wear rings, according toPEEK compounder and processor EGC Corp., Houston, TX.   In contrast to 410 stainless steel, bronze, or cast iron, PEEK isnon-galling and non-seizing when in contact with other metal-matingsurfaces. The formulation, called Xytrex 451, is a 30% chopped carbon fiberresin with tensile strength of 17,000 p.s.i. and continuous use temperatureof 350 to 400F. The material has a coefficient of friction that is sixtimes better than stainless steel, according to the supplier. Thecompression-molded rings are 6-in. x 5.5 in. x 1-in.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightMODERN PLASTICS via NewsNetJanuary 1996   BAROMETER: MARKET-PRICE HISTORY, BASIC TP GRADES      BAROMETER: Market-price history, basic TP grades         Market price, cents/lb., bulk basis, in given quarter                                        1994Polymer or feedstock          1       2       3       4LDPE, liner                 31.0    34.0    38.0    44.0LLDPE, hexene film          33.0    35.0    39.0    47.0HDPE, blow molding*         30.0    33.0    36.0    44.0HMW-HDPE, film              32.0    34.0    38.0    47.0Ethylene                    21.0    22.0    24.0    26.0PP, homopolymer molding     30.0    32.0    35.0    40.0Propylene, polymer grade    13.0    14.5    18.0    20.0PS, crystal, molding        41.0    44.0    45.0    53.0PS, impact, extrusion       46.0    46.0    47.0    56.0EPS, bead, construction     60.0    60.0    62.0    70.0Styrene                     25.0    27.0    32.0    39.0Benzene                     13.0    15.0    20.0    18.0PVC, pipe grade             31.0    33.0    37.0    39.0Vinyl chloride              20.0    21.0    23.0    24.5ABS, molding, high impact   90     100     100     105.0Acrylonitrile               27.0    28.0    30.0    40.0Butadiene                   20.0    21.0    20.0    22.0PET, bottle-grade           63.0    63.0    65.0    70.0Crude oil                    5.8     5.8     6.0     6.2              Market price,  cents/lb., bulk basis, in given quarter                                        1995Polymer or feedstock          1       2       3       4LDPE, liner                 47.0    48.0    44.0    40.0LLDPE, hexene film          49.0    49.0    47.0    39.0HDPE, blow molding*         47.0    48.0    42.0    37.0HMW-HDPE, film              50.0    50.0    45.0    43.0Ethylene                    31.0    30.0    28.0    21.0PP, homopolymer molding     44.0    47.0    45.0    41.0Propylene, polymer grade    21.0    25.0    24.0    20.0PS, crystal, molding        53.0    55.0    53.0    52.0PS, impact, extrusion       56.0    58.0    58.0    54.0EPS, bead, construction     70.0    75.0    77.0    75.0Styrene                     47.0    51.0    44.0    39.0Benzene                     15.0    14.0    14.0    13.0PVC, pipe grade             40.0    41.0    37.0    32.0Vinyl chloride              26.5    26.5    25.0    22.0ABS, molding, high impact  110.0   104.0   102.0    96.0Acrylonitrile               44.0    46.0    42.0    40.0Butadiene                   21.0    21.0    20.0    19.0PET, bottle-grade           73.0    75.0    75.0    75.0Crude oil                    6.4     6.0     6.2     6.4* HomopolymerCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightMODERN PLASTICS via NewsNetJanuary 1996   MANIFOLD MIXING UNIT PUTS A SKIN LAYER ON MOLDINGSBy:Peter Mapleston   A small mixing unit that fits between nozzle and mold in injection andblow molding machines can be used to produce sandwich moldings in whichcolorants and other surface-active additives are present only in the skinlayer of the molding. The system was introduced at K'95, and according toits developers has aroused considerable interest, not only among potentialcustomers, but also suppliers of additives as well as thermoplastics.   The Addmix system works with any type of additive in liquid form. Oneprimary application is colors, but Addmix says the unit is equallyappropriate for such additives as release agents, and even laser-sensitiveadditives used in moldings that are subsequently printed by lasers (Aug 95MP, 28).   As of January, the London-based company will supply off-the-shelfmanifolds that attach to the back of each mold. The additive is mixed intothe polymer melt between the end of the injection barrel and the mold. Byselective addition of the additive into the first part of the shot - thepart which becomes the skin layer of the molding - processors can cut downon their additives consumption by as much as 80%, depending on the geometryof the part. Users can adjust the volume of melt into which the additive ismixed, over a limited range.   Use of the manifold does not affect production cycle times. Although nodetails are available on the design and the means of mixing the additiveinto the melt, company director Simcha Kilim describes the manifold as a``form of hot-runner manifold.'' He says it does contain a non-rotatingmoving part connected to the injection head. ``It does not affect theregular behavior of the machine,'' he says. Additive is metered to themanifold using a simple peristaltic pump that delivers constant pressure.System helps molders save money, material   Kilim says that although it might appear at first that additivesuppliers would hesitate to embrace a technology that will reduce theirsales, companies supplying additives with low degradation temperatures areinterested because the Addmix manifold submits the additives to littlethermal and shear stress.   The Addmix system can be used in various ways. The company's maininterest is in skin molding, and around the middle of next year it willintroduce a version for multiple-cavity molds that enables selectivecoloring (diagram). In this system, melt is split into two streams, andeach stream can be mixed with a different color.   A manifold suitable for linking to a mold with a cavity around 200 cu.cm. costs around $8500 (5000). Addmix says that money can be recouped in afew months. It cites savings possible with a typical polymer with a basecost of $0.865/lb.   A yellow compound containing 1.5% additive priced at $10.468/lb. costs$1.009/lb. In production of a part with a 3-mm. wall thickness, the Addmixsystem can be used to give a skin layer of 0.5 mm. (1 mm. total). If thecolor in the skin layer is added at 2% for security, the total cost formaterial in a part weighing 1 lb. is $0.927, giving a saving of $0.08/lb.of processed material. The savings are even more stark when more exoticcolors, some of which cost over $70/lb., are used.Illustration(s):Illustration: Addmix manifold enables surface-active additives to beintroduced into skin layers on moldings.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightMODERN PLASTICS via NewsNetJanuary 1996   MD&M-WEST CONFERENCE TO ADDRESS DESIGN REGULATIONBy:Merle R. Snyder   Regulatory issues, technology advances, and global businessopportunities will be the focus of attention as participants from the U.S.and about 30 other countries gather for the 12th annual Medical Design &Manufacturing (MD&M) West conference and exhibition, Feb. 6 to 8, at theConvention Center in Anaheim, CA. About 800 exhibitors are expected tooccupy 112,000 sq. ft. of space.   An early session, Feb. 5, conducted by representatives of the U.S. Foodand Drug Administration (FDA), is billed: ``GMP (good manufacturingpractices) Design Controls and the New 510(k) Environment - a RegulatoryUpdate.'' Visitors may also sign up for 15 minutes of free consultationwith industry and regulatory agency experts in the ``Meet the Experts''forum.   The new GMP rule has been designed for compatibility with thequality-systems philosophy of the International Standards Organization(ISO) 9000 series of international standards. Manufacturers that properlyimplement design controls can also reduce their product liability exposureand minimize product development costs. The session will include discussionof the new 510(k) guidelines' impact on device marketing.   Specific topics to be addressed include implementation timing forspecific design controls; component, labeling, and packaging designcontrols; design input, verification, and output; biocompatibilityconsiderations; and proper preparation of a 510(k).   Also on Feb. 5, is a tour of the R&D and clean-room assembly operationsof Gish Biomedical, Irvine, CA. Gish manufactures medical devices used incardiovascular and orthopedic surgery, orthopedic and thoracic autologousblood recovery and reuse systems, and vascular access products for extendedhome-care infusion therapies. Tour participants will have the opportunityto meet with researchers, product designers, manufacturing engineers, andcorporate management in the course of the tour of the 150,000-sq.-ft.production facility.   Speakers in a Feb. 6 session on clinical trials will discuss the useof human subjects to determine a product's efficacy and marketability,while focusing on such issues as investigational device exemptions (IDEs),FDA regulations, effective clinical trial design, difficulties inconducting trials, and alternative techniques for overcoming problems.   In a partnership that is now entering its third year, the MedicalPlastics Div. of the Society of Plastics Engineers (SPE) is presenting aRegional Technical Conference (Retec) in an all-day session Feb. 7,concurrent with the MD&M West event. Hosted by Exxon Chemical's RobertPortnoy, and chaired by Udayan Patel of Advanced Cardiovascular Systems,the session is billed ``Application of Plastics to Medical Devices:Problems and Solutions.''Molders, designers seek global opportunities   International considerations loom ever larger in the medical devicebusiness. International standards-setting groups are creating a wide rangeof global standards regarding clean-room and aseptic processing andpackaging. A session on Feb. 8, instructed by Anne Marie Dixon, managingpartner of a clean room consulting firm, will discuss the work of ISO'sTechnical Committee 198.   Also on Feb. 8, speakers will address opportunities in Japan, greaterAsia, Taiwan, Europe, and Latin America in a session entitled ``GlobalExpansion: International Opportunities for Medical Device ManufacturingCompanies.''The market for medical devices and supplies in China is expected to surpass$1 billion this year. The country is therefore the focus of a session toinclude presentations by officials of the Ministry of Health, People'sRepublic of China, including: an ``Overview of the Chinese Health-CareSystem''; ``Hospital and Clinical Needs for Medical Devices''; and``Reimbursement Policies and Cost Containment.''   U.S.-China government initiatives will be discussed by Paul E. Barry,international trade specialist, Office of Microelectronics, MedicalEquipment, and Instrumentation, International Trade Administration, at theU.S. Dept. of Commerce.   MD&M West is sponsored by Medical Device & Diagnostic Industry magazine,published by Canon Communications Inc. For information, call (310)392-5509, fax (310) 392-1557, or go online via the World Wide Web or theInternet: http:/ /www.cancom.com/.com/.Photograph(s):Photograph: Oxygenator and cardiotomy/venous reservoir from AvecorCardiovascular are produced in PC. [Photo, Bayer]Photograph: Technologies and equipment for high productivity will be ondisplay at MD&M West.[Photo, U.S. Medical]Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightMODERN PLASTICS via NewsNetJanuary 1996   ORGANIC PEROXIDES FACE STIFF TECHNOLOGICAL COMPETITORSBy:Gordon Graff   New technologies for producing and modifying polymers are posing aformidable challenge to organic peroxides as the additives of choice in anumber of traditional high-volume areas.   According to industry observers, peroxides are still secure in suchcurrent applications as initiators for vinyl polymerization, curing agentsfor thermoset resins, and crosslinking agents for elastomers and PE. Butthey say that fast-rising competitors like metallocene catalyst technologyand electron beam processing could eventually edge out peroxides in theirpresent roles as rheology modifiers for PP and as initiators for productionof LDPE.   In the modification of PP, ``metallocenes definitely have an advantageover peroxides,'' says consultant John Murphy of The Catalyst Group, SpringHouse, PA. Right now, peroxides are often used to degrade PP in acontrolled fashion, after it emerges from the reactor. This``vis-breaking'' produces a polymer with a relatively narrow molecularweight (MW) distribution, a feature that improves its melt flow propertiesduring processing. But metallocene catalysts have the ability to produce PPright out of the reactor with the requisite narrow MW distribution. Suchpolymers in principle should need no post-reactor peroxide treatment.   There is little uncertainty in the minds of metallocene polymerproducers. Malcolm Kaus, Exxpol venture manager at Exxon Chemical, Houston,TX, declares flatly that Exxon's recently commercialized metallocene PPtechnology ``will greatly diminish, if not eliminate, peroxide use'' in thetreatment of PP. ``Of course this is only a projection,'' he adds, ``andI'm not sure in what time frame this will be realized.''   Besides Exxon, other developers of metallocene-based PP include HoechstAG, Frankfurt, Germany; BASF, Ludwigshafen, Germany; and Japan's MitsuiToatsu, Tokyo.Metallocene claims concern peroxide makers   Peroxide producers are taking the metallocene competition seriously.``We're definitely concerned about claims'' that metallocenes will displaceperoxides, says R. Gerald Gimbarski, business manager for organic peroxidesat Elf Atochem, Philadelphia, PA. ``I agree that metallocenes could be athreat,'' adds Ronald Pastorino, market manager for organic peroxides atWitco Corp., Greenwich, CT, although he says that any challenge is notlikely to materialize for ``several years.''   Electron beam (E-beam) processing is also presenting a frontal challengeto peroxides. E-beam processors claim that their systems have advantagesover peroxides in such applications as crosslinking rotationally molded PEstorage tanks and curing the resin in PE water tubing. For example, KarenButler, marketing director at E-Beam Services, Cranbury, NJ, points outthat peroxides, which are temperature-sensitive, are not compatible withhigh shear rates or the process temperatures required for high line speedsand thin-walled or intricately shaped products, whereas E-beam curing canbe used in these applications. She adds that E-beam allows more precisecontrol of crosslinking density than peroxides or other chemical curingagents.   One drawback of E-beam systems is that fabricators, who seldom wish toinvest in an E-beam facility on their premises, typically have to shiptheir uncured objects to a distant processor. On the other hand, the extratransportation costs are reduced by the savings from eliminating peroxidesin the formulation.   Despite stiff competition from other technologies, peroxide makers arecontinuing to innovate. At Elf Atochem, Gimbarski points to two recentintroductions under its Lupersol line of organic peroxides. These products,grades 610-M50 and 688-M50, are hexylene glycol peroxyesters that serve aslow-temperature, fast front-end initiators in the production of polyvinylchloride. They are intended to speed up polymerization cycle times.   The 610-M50 grade is also the first new peroxide additive approved inthe U.S. in 12 years not required by the Environmental Protection Agency tocarry a warning label of carcinogenic hazards. Elf avoided the label bysubmitting voluminous safety testing data to EPA.                  How the economics of              peroxide and electron-beam                 crosslinking compare*               Peroxide resin   Electron-beam                cross-linking   cross-linkingPart weight, lb.     100            100Resin cost, $/lb.    100             60Labor/capital,$/part                40             3010% scrapproduction,$/part    14              9Scrap disposal,$/part                 1              0Additional transport,$/part                 0             11E-beam processing,$/part                 0             50Total,$/part        155            160* Processing of rotomolded polyethylene agricultural chemical tanks.Comparison assumes a 500-mile round-trip to E-beam processing plant and a15-Mrad radiation dose.Source: E-Beam Services Inc.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightMODERN PLASTICS via NewsNetJanuary 1996   LIQUID COLORANTS ARE FREE OF OLD DRAWBACKS, GAIN IN POPULARITYBy:Gordon Graff   Liquid colorants, which were once confined to a small niche in theinjection molding business, are now competing head-on with traditionalcolor concentrates and other solid systems in high-volume extrusion andextrusion blow molding markets. Behind this trend are technical advancesover the past five years that have made liquid colorants more reliable andeconomical for many applications than pellet concentrates and other solidcolorants.   In particular, improved carrier vehicles have made liquid systemscompatible with just about all thermoplastic resins, and a new generationof highly accurate liquid dispensing pumps now offers consistent colorquality in fabricated products. The high concentrations of pigment in thelatest liquid systems also enhances their economic appeal for processors.   The liquid colorants industry received a big boost earlier this yearwhen Rubbermaid Inc., Wooster, OH, one of the country's largest plasticsprocessors, decided to switch from solid colorants to liquid systems inmany of its plastics fabricating operations. Details of the switch aresketchy, and Rubbermaid declines to comment on it. But according to oneindustry observer, the move will be ``very influential'' in convincingsmaller processors to adopt liquid systems.Business is booming for colorant pump suppliers   While there are few estimates of the size of the liquid colorantsmarket, suppliers of both the colorants and the dispensing pumps often soldwith them report that business is booming. ``Sales of liquid colorant pumpshave more than doubled for us this year,'' says B. Patrick Smith, vicepresident for marketing and sales at Maguire Products Inc., Media, PA, oneof the leading suppliers of dispensing equipment for liquid systems. AndMichael R. Shaughnessy, president of ColorMatrix Corp., Cleveland, OH, asupplier of liquid colorants, estimates that such products are growing``significantly faster'' in the U.S. than the plastics colorants businessas a whole.   Despite their inroads into extrusion applications, liquid systems arestill concentrated heavily in injection molded products. According to oneindustry observer, liquid colorants now account for 20 to 25% of thecolorants used for injection molded products in North America.   By most accounts, use of liquid colorants is far more widespread inNorth America than Europe. In explaining this disparity, industry sourcescite the fact that many European pigment manufacturers also make colorconcentrates, which have well-entrenched markets. Elsewhere, pigment makersare more independent and thus freer to experiment with new formulations.Nonetheless, liquid systems are catching on in Europe. In fact, newbusiness there has been so brisk that ColorMatrix recently opened amanufacturing plant near Liverpool, England, to address the market.Meanwhile, interest in liquid colorants is said to be particularly strongin Latin America.   Liquid colorants have come a long way from their first appearance in thelate 1970s, when incompatibility between their liquid carrier vehicles andmany thermoplastics caused slippage of extruder screws. Many formulationswere also slow to disperse in melted resins, and liquid dispensingequipment was often inaccurate or costly.   Today's liquid carriers - their compositions are well-guarded tradesecrets - are compatible with most polyolefin, styrenic, and engineeringresins; screw slippage is largely a thing of the past. Better millingprocedures are producing very fine pigment particles that make liquidcolorants easier to disperse than competing dry powdered colorants and eventhe liquid colorants of just a few years ago.Dispensing units are more accurate, less expensive   Perhaps the most significant factor responsible for the growingpopularity of liquid colorants is the accurate and inexpensive dispensingpumps that have recently come to the fore. These pumps are portable andgenerally cost between $1000 and $2500. Liquid colorants are oftenformulated for particular dispensing machines. In fact, such liquidcolorant suppliers as Ferro Corp., Edison, NJ, and Morton International,Chicago Heights, IL, also offer their customers dispensing machinery.   Although they differ in details, most current liquid color dispensingunits feature a peristaltic pump, in which liquid is released by periodiccompression and release of a flexible pumping tube by a series of rollers.The rollers are driven by a variable-speed, microprocessor-controlledmotor. Precise metering is achieved by automatic counting of each rotationof the motor, which is set to deliver a known amount of liquid perrotation. The liquid colorant always remains inside the feed tube and nevercomes into contact with the rollers or any other part of the pumpingmechanism. As a result, color changeovers can be rapid.   The colorant feed tube usually enters injection or extrusion machines inone of two locations: immediately below the hopper at the feed throat, orinto a groove machined into the base of the barrel. Both configurationspromote rapid mixing of colorant and resin in the barrel and an evendistribution of color in extruded or molded articles.   While liquid colorants usually cost more on a unit basis than powders orpellet concentrates, they are so concentrated (typically 75% pigmentloadings) that they are often more economical to use than competingproducts.   Despite the favorable economics, liquid colorants have been slow topenetrate some applications. Blown film is one such area, because liquidsystems are less efficient than the concentrates in achieving requiredlevels of opacity in very thin films.   Meanwhile, suppliers of liquid colorants are unveiling grades forspecial applications. For example, Riverdale Color Manufacturing, Brooklyn,NY, is developing liquid colorants for use with ABS resins.   Overall, growth of liquid colorants during the next year is expected toremain strong. Among the reasons, notes Riverdale Color president CharlesIrish, are recent price hikes for polyethylene, polypropylene, and othercarrier resins used in pellet concentrates. Because of the resulting run-upin concentrate prices, he says, ``more processors may entertain switchingto liquids.''Photograph(s):Photograph: Liquid colorant dispensing unit by Maguire Products.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightMODERN PLASTICS via NewsNetJanuary 1996   AUG 95 MP, 15   An article about machinery supplier Starlinger & Co. indicated thatthree years ago it bought, then sold, fellow Austrian company MaplanInternational (Aug 95 MP, 15). In fact, although Starlinger bought theentire Maplan International business, encompassing twin- and single-screwextruders and rubber processing equipment, it only subsequently sold thetwin-screw business (to Theysohn Extrusionstechnik, also of Austria). Itretains the remaining businesses. Starlinger has never had any holding inAmerican Maplan, which was separate from Maplan Int. and which was recentlyacquired by the Battenfeld Group.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightMODERN PLASTICS via NewsNetJanuary 1996   PLASMA POLYMERIZATION USED FOR SCRATCH-RESISTANT COATINGSBy:Robert Colvin   Researchers at Germany's Institute for Plastics Processing (IKV),Aachen, have come up with an innovative process to coat injection moldedpolycarbonate and polymethyl methacrylate optical parts to obtain highscratch resistance. This high-density process - a vacuum-coating methodwhich produces a glass-like surface - is performed at relatively lowtemperatures in a microwave bath. IKV scientists are predicting thetechnique can eventually be used to economically coat any size surface.   Its specific advantage is that properties of the polymer layersdeposited on the plastic can be modified through selective process controland aligned to a range of requirements such as crosslinking and the abilityto withstand chemical and mechanical stresses. This coating is free ofmicropores, has an amorphous layer structure, and offers good adhesion,even to nonpolar surfaces.   Previously used methods for applying coatings include painting them onthe lens surface, which carries the drawback of dust contamination and ionplating, and allows only low scratch resistance over small areas andentails long process times. Plasma-aided evaporation is another option.Here, clean-room conditions are needed, as well as resources to deal withsolvent-laden air.   Plasma polymerization's adhesive qualities are obtained through a formof process control which involves the formation of coupling agent layersduring coating. These layers are aligned to the substrate being used. Byvarying the process parameters, it is possible for the hardness of theinterface layer to be further tailored.   To obtain adequate scratch resistance as determined by the sand droptest (DIN 52348-1) on PC, a coating of 6 micron is needed. The coating rateis up to 2 micron/min., 50 times higher than plasma-aided evaporationsystems, says IVK's Harald Zell.   IKV engineers have developed a plant concept for the production oflarge-area coatings. So far they have been able to apply plasmahomogeneously over a width of 500 mm. at a deposition rate of 0.2micron/min.   Apart from transparent, scratch-resistant coatings, plasmapolymerization may find other applications. Since the surface tension ofthe coatings can be selectively varied, hydrophobic layers can be employedas anti-stick coatings. With hydrophilic coatings, good anti-mistingproperties can be obtained, since droplets of water on the substratespontaneously form a transparent film which doesn't scatter light. IKVresearchers say anti-permeation coatings for PE fuel tanks are also on thehorizon.Photograph(s):Photograph: Plasma polymerization permits glass-like, scratch-resistantcoatings (lower half) of injection molded optical parts produced with highdeposition rates. [Photo, IKV]Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightMODERN PLASTICS via NewsNetJanuary 1996   CONNECTOR MARKETS FACE DECADE OF HIGH RISKS AND BIG REWARDSBy:Robert D. Leaversuch   At first glance, today's fast-emerging information age looks like abonanza for some 500 companies worldwide that mold electronic connectors,and for their materials and equipment suppliers. Indeed, overall resin useshould continue to grow at about 10%/yr. Yet the breakneck speed oftechnological change in the varied end-markets that use connectors isdisconcerting.   In fact, the connector industry faces a tough, risky decade ahead as itcopes with expanding yet swift-changing demands by multinational giants whomanufacture computer, business machine, wireless, cellular phone,automotive, and other electronic systems, and which in turn depend onconnectors.   Ongoing evolution in electronics makes it difficult to understand orpredict market needs, according to a study to be issued in early 1996 byFleck Research, Santa Ana, CA. The consultant is estimating global unit andpolymer use rates for some 700 distinct connector segments through 2005.   A central dilemma is that the exploding demand for the number ofconnector units worldwide coincides with miniaturization and integration ofthe devices. Fewer, smaller connectors eventually can mean less resin usefor each application. Also, miniaturization intensifies the performancerequirements for both the connectors and resins selected to make them.   Miniaturization of connectors is driving designers to morelightweighting and precision, higher flame-retardancy ratings, and higheroperating temperatures as compared to the past, says Ken Fleck, coordinatorof the study. This opens new opportunities for resins like liquid crystalpolymer.Connectors claim 600 million lb. of resin   World connector markets attract captive and custom producers thatinclude major global technology powerhouses (table). In 1995, worldthermoplastics use in connectors hit 600 million lb., according to theFleck report. This includes about a 10 to 15% fraction of thermosets(mainly phenolic).   Thermoplastics in connectors tend to be high-performance, high-valuematerials. Most cost about $1.60 to $2.27/lb.; a fifth cost $2.27 to$9.10/lb.   Polyamides and thermoplastic polyesters are the most widely usedpolymers, followed by polyphenylene sulfide, PC, and liquid crystalpolymers.   The U.S. is the largest regional market, with a global share of 35%, or210 million lb. Its largest end-use markets are data communication, phone,wireless, computer, and automotive systems.   Western Europe and Japan each have roughly 25% of the world market forconnectors, with a dozen Pacific Rim nations supplying another 10%. Shiftsin automobile production (e.g., to the Far East, Eastern Europe, and LatinAmerica) in recent years have made automotive connectors more widely usedthere. They come in tiers used in the engine (e.g., anti-lock brakes) andpassenger compartment (seat belts), having quite different requirements.   Global demand for connector units is exploding. The report estimates 50%more connector units will be sold in the U.S. in the next five years, from20 billion to 30 billion units. But profiting from this expansion may beless than easy for molders and materials suppliers.Challenges come with changing electronics   The composition of connector markets is changing in lockstep withchanges in electronic products. For instance, 65% of the computers sold in1995 in North America were desktop models, and 9% were workstation models.But this 74% segment of computers consumed 90% of connector units and 96%of resin.   A decade from now, the market is expected to shift to notebook andhandheld computers, which tend to use fewer, smaller connector units. In1995, these categories made up 25% of computers, but used only 4% ofresin.   Another escalating design requirement is increases in the density ofpins (i.e., number per sq. in.), and increases in the pitch of pins andconnectors. Additionally, smaller connector designs generally involve lowershrinkage rates, thinner walls, and more precise processing.   The types of polymers used in connectors is in flux as a result of thesepressures. For example, Woo Young, Pyungtaek, South Korea, recentlyswitched a 300-pin connector for telephone exchanges to a nylon 46 from DSMEngineering Plastics, Sittard, The Netherlands. The Stanyl materialreplaces cross-linked PPS, and is said to offer problem-free insertion,high pin-retention, and soldering resistance to 260C.   At the same time, new versions of PPS, including linear grades made byHoechst AG, Frankfurt, Germany, are replacing polyesters in some roles.A strong shift from thermosets to thermoplastics is also underway, Fleckreports.                Global leaders in thermoplastic                   connectors face a major                   technological challenge*Connectorsupplier,                 Regional market share, 1995location                 Japan      W. Europe       N. AmericaAMP Intl.                12.0          22.5          19.4Slough, U.K.Molex                     5.2           3.4           4.5Lisie, ILITT Canon                 --            3.4           3.5Santa Ana, CAFranatome                 --            9.4           --Paris, FranceAmphenol                  --            3.0           4.2Wallingford, CTBerg Electronics          --            2.5           3.7St Louis, MOSiemens                   --            1.9           --Speyer, Germany3M                        --            --            2.9St. Paul, MN* Excludes captive automotive connectors.Source: Freck Research, 501 North Golden Circle, Suite 200, Santa Ana, CA92705.Photograph(s):Photograph: Nylon connectors reflect design pressures, including increasedpin densities and high temperature performance. [Photo, DSM]Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightMODERN PLASTICS via NewsNetJanuary 1996   POLYPROPYLENE SHOWS ITS METTLE IN TEXTILE DYE-TUBE DESIGNBy:Robert D. Leaversuch   Compressible dye-tube moldings illustrate how designers can use plasticsto enhance manufacturability, consolidate parts, and reduce material waste.The cylindrical, lattice-walled, spring-like devices, injection molded inPP by Technimark Inc., Randleman, NC, compress 40% when under high-speedload, yet resist crushing.   The necessary balance of flexibility and strength, along with desiredthermal and chemical resistance, are provided by PP resins supplied byEpsilon Products, Marcus Hook, PA.   PP dye tubes are rapidly replacing stainless steel versions in the U.S.for high-speed winding of polyester and PP yarns through 270 degress F. dyebaths. The devices incorporate molded-in fins that allow the yarn to be feddirectly from the item to the subsequent weaving or knitting steps intextile-making. Moreover, a three-fold transfer of yarn to separate metaland paper tubing pickup devices (a process called ``backwinding'') isbypassed. These previously needed steps had added to labor costs, generatedconsiderable tubing waste, and degraded fiber quality.   The spring-like behavior of the PP devices in effect increases theeffective capacity of costly dye baths by 40%, and reduces chemicals andwater use. In 1995, Technimark expected to mold 30 million of thelightweight (0.25 lb.) parts for the U.S. market, where a rapid transitionto PP is underway.   Mike Pembroke, Epsilon's sales director, asserts that the application``extends the envelope of PP design capabilities.'' Technology and know-howfor processing the complex, high-tolerance part is licensed by JosephZimmerman, Aachen, Germany.   Technimark has adapted the tube design for the U.S. Two- and four-cavitymolds are used; cycle times are 10 to 14 sec. The processor has designed instop buttons to prevent overcompression of tubes. Machines used are 400-tonVan Dorn HT units. The disposable dye tubes can be reused in PPfurniture.Photograph(s):Photograph: Compressible PP dye tube design is transforming yarn dyeing.[Photo, Technimark]Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightMODERN PLASTICS via NewsNetJanuary 1996   EXPORTS AND LOW MONOMER COST KEEP SUPPLY AND PRICING STABLEBy:Robert Colvin   Subdued buying by processors and a quarter-by-quarter drop in the costof ethylene monomer helped to keep polyethylene prices last year fromrising to what many producers would have termed an acceptable rate. Badnews for the producers, no doubt, but good news for processors, especiallyafter 1994, which saw some of the steepest price run-ups for PE in recentyears.   Though manufacturers are banking on low customer inventories helping tostimulate buying in the first quarter of this year, chances are that priceswill remain pretty much where they were at the end of 1995.   In North America, for example, fourth-quarter polyethylene prices rangedfrom 37 cents/lb. for blow molding grades of high-density PE, to 40cents/lb. for low-density PE liner grades. These levels were downsubstantially from second-quarter 1995, when the average price for blowmolding grades of HDPE topped out at 50 cents/lb. and liner-grade LDPE hit48 cents/lb.   Moreover, in North America, ethylene monomer prices began the year at 31cents/lb. and finished 1995 at 21 cents/lb.North American pricing affects global resin costs   Not surprisingly then, North American LDPE prices are considered to bevery competitive vis-a-vis those of other exporting regions on the globalmarket. According to McGraw-Hill's Platt's Polymerscan, a pricing servicein London, offshore resin sources continue to exert an influence on globalpricing. In Western Europe, imports, though slowing, remain a factor in theprice structure of resin. Asian prices have weakened as a result of highavailability from a variety of sources, according to Platt's Hazel Marlow.   Among the various PE types, consultants note that HDPE inventoriesremain high and export sales show no signs of taking off. They attributethis to direct competition in film applications with linear low-density PE,which itself is hit by overcapacity.   Change might be in the offing in 1996, however. Advances in HDPE filmprocess technologies and blown film extrusion lines, coupled withprice-driven gains in large-volume markets like T-shirt bags, bode well forthe resin's use in many areas, notably, Western Europe and North America(see story, p. 44).   Compounding the situation for PE producers is market agitation inEurope. Investigators acting on European Commission orders swooped downlate last year on corporate offices of manufacturers Borealis, BASF, BP,DSM, Dow, Shell, Petrofina, Hoechst, Solvay, and Polimeri Europa, overallegations of possible illegal cartel operations in pricing. Theinvestigation, which is still underway, appears to have been prompted bycomplaints from processors and buyers stemming from limited supplies earlylast year, allegations of price fixing, and possible restrictivecompetitive practices.Formulation advances upgrade properties   Prices and politics aside, polymer technology is sparking optimism withregard to properties enhancements. DSM, Sittard, the Netherlands, has comeup with an injection molding grade of LLDPE, Stamylex, which offers highpurity and a narrow molecular weight distribution.   London-based BP Chemicals and Germany's Hoechst, Frankfurt, have comeout with a range of grades (rated as PE 100) for high-pressure water, gas,steam, and industrial pipes.   Not to be outdone, both HDPE market leader Solvay, Brussels, Belgium,and Borealis, Lyngby, Denmark, introduced at K'95 third-generation gradesfor similar applications (rated PE 80 and PE 100).   The high-pressure pipe grades are, for the most part, bimodal.   Hoechst is also eyeing future applications that will take market sharefrom other materials with its HDPE. Key among them is the hoped forswitch-over by Germany's mineral water producers from glass to polyethyleneterephthalate bottles, and the resulting demand for new bottle crates aswell as substitution of aluminum caps by HDPE caps.   Even machine manufacturers are getting into the act by upgradingextrusion lines for HDPE. Increases in competitive materials' prices andwaste-management costs have allowed HDPE film to make important inroadsinto the film market through its down-gaging properties. Reifenhauser,Troisdorf, Germany, for example, is designing better certain of its linesto fit the polymer's characteristics.   New capacity coming on stream includes production for specialty grades.One example is the new Borstar technology for manufacturingenhanced-property bimodal PE, which went into commercial operation at theend of last year in a 264-million-lb./yr. plant run by Borealis in Porvoo,Finland.   Quantum Chemical, Cincinnati, OH, has a new Unipol PE gas-phaseLLDPE/HDPE unit, with a capacity of 480 million lb./yr., set to start up atthe end of 1996 in La Porte, TX. At the same site, the company willmaintain its 85-million-lb./yr. LLDPE unit dedicated to making rotationalmolding resins. By the end of June, it will also have restarted a250-million-lb./yr. Unipol reactor at Morris, IL. Another Unipol LLDPEreactor at the site will be debottlenecked to raise capacity by 100 millionlb./yr. to a total of 400 million lb./yr.   In a final move, Quantum has plans to convert its dedicated LLDPEreactor at Port Arthur, TX, to a dedicated HDPE unit using BP technologyoffering a capacity of 300 million lb./yr. Work is slated for completion byOctober.   Other suppliers are also increasing capacity. Montell, Wilmington, DE,has started up a 440-million-lb./yr. PE plant at Lake Charles, LA, usingits Spherilene process technology.   Dow Plastics, Midland, MI, plans to debottleneck an LDPE plant inSarnia, ON, Canada, and an LLDPE train located in Fort Saskatchewan,Canada.   Polimeri Europa, the Enichem/Union Carbide joint venture, in Milan,Italy, will build a 400-million-lb./yr. Unipol swing reactor for HDPE andLLDPE in Brindisi, Italy.   Meanwhile, several companies say plants are scheduled for constructionin Brazil, India, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, and parts of Southeast Asia andChina.   While few plans exist for deactivating plants, Dow Plastics recentlyannounced it is shuttering a slurry HDPE facility in Sarnia, ON, Canada,with a nameplate capacity of 160 million lb./yr.   Konrad Scheidl, former PE manager at Dow and now market analyst withMaack Business Services, in Au, Switzerland, sees one affect of all thisnew capacity on the market, especially that using swing technology toproduce either LLDPE or HDPE: loss of share by LDPE. These swing-capacityresins are making rapid penetration in the film market because of HDPE'sdowngaging qualities and alpha-olefin-comonomer LLDPE's improved tensile,heat seal, and impact strength, and high miscibility. LLDPE is calculatedby Maack to overtake HDPE this year in capacity growth, and to surpass LDPEin 1998.   Peter Toohy, manager of plastics sales for Chevron Chemical, Houston,TX, says he doesn't see LDPE rolling over and yielding market share soeasily. The resin is in big demand in countries where LLDPE is readilyavailable, but where processing equipment and expertise have not reachedthe levels of North America or Europe, he says.   Rob van Ooijen, PE manager at DSM, agrees. He adds that to compensatefor difficulties in processing LLDPE, an addition of 10 to 40% of LDPE canact as a blending agent. Thus, some plants that run LLDPE may still needlow-density grades for processability. DSM is one of the few companies tomake recent investments in LDPE facilities. Van Ooijen says production hasbeen sold out.   This year Union Carbide, Danbury, CT, is launching Ultra Tuflin, ahexane-based LLDPE aimed at replacing LDPE. It reportedly offers up to 110%more machine-direction tear strength (at 89 micron) than existinghigher-alpha-olefin LLDPE's.         POLYETHYLENE   Select nameplate capacities                           Million lb.                           (1995)Dow                          5742Quantum                      3935Exxon                        3832Union Carbide                3640Borealis                     3131Polymeri Europa(Union Carbide/Enichem)      3065Chevron                      2348BP Chemicals                 2348DSM                          2007Phillips                     1800BASF                         1764Photograph(s):Photograph: More than 30 million fuel tanks have been produced from theLupolen HDPE grade from BASFCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightMODERN PLASTICS via NewsNetJanuary 1996   RESINS REPORT 1996INNOVATIVE TECHNOLOGIES, EXPANDING MARKETS   This is a dynamic time in resins supply. On one hand, technology isexpanding the properties and applications potential of materials. On theother, burgeoning demand in developing countries is creating a huge marketfor plastics, while influencing supply and pricing around the world.   For processors, these trends signal opportunity and challenge. As thefollowing articles indicate, the capabilities of plastics design have neverbeen greater. New technologies, grades, and application concepts increasemarket penetration.   But growth can be difficult. The runup in demand for resins last year,much of it influenced by inventory buying to offset shortages, stretchedproduction to the limit. Some resins remain in tight supply. New capacityis coming on line, though, and 1996 is seen as a year of more balancedsupply and demand. Prices, moreover, should be relatively stable for mostresins.   Modest economic growth is forecast for most of the industrialized world.This should assure steady if unspectacular gains in resin consumption. Indeveloping countries, GDP growth and resin consumption will stay atdouble-digit rates.   This year will be one in which innovative technologies and expandingmarkets define plastics use. With no major economic problems on thehorizon, and supply and pricing relatively stable, processors have thefoundation in place for a successful 1996.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightMODERN PLASTICS via NewsNetJanuary 1996   STABILITY SEEMS TO BE AT HAND IN GLOBAL COMMODITY-RESINS MARKETSBy:Robert D. Leaversuch   Processors of large-volume resins have experienced an unusual degree ofchaos in buying raw materials over the past year. But industry seerspredict that 1996 holds the potential for greater stability (and sopredictability) in the cost and availability of polyolefin, styrenic, andvinyl resins.   ``Expect a reasonable equilibrium between demand and supply in 1996,''says Jim Fisher, president of consultant IBMA, Princeton, NJ. He and otherconsultants generally expect the prices of most volume resins to stabilizeat or near fourth-quarter 1995 levels early in the new year. But somesuppliers expect that a ``bounce,'' or slight upswing in prices, mightoccur. One possible harbinger of this: Dow Chemical, Midland, MI, saying PEis undervalued, announced a 5 cents/lb. across-the-board increase for Jan.1.   What disturbs processors most about an uneven pricing course is theuncertainty it entails in strategic planning. Volatility, no matter howslight, thwarts efforts to schedule production, control inventory, orfollow a business plan. An underlying concern about pricing is globaldemand. Polyethylene, polypropylene, and polystyrene are maintaining growthrates, on average, at 50 to 100% higher than the typical increases in grossdomestic product for many countries, particularly developing nations.Memories of recent cost carousel linger   In 1994-95, volume-resin pricing took an erratic course worldwide(graphs). Global interconnections in resin supply are apparent in parallelpricing patterns for the U.S., Europe, and Asia.   Overcapacity and low pricing levels for the various grades of PE, PP,PS, and PVC had been widely projected for the period 1994-95. In fact,mid-1994 prices stood close to historic lows. Crystal PS in the U.S. was at45 cents/lb.; spot tags for PP homopolymer in Germany and PVC in Asia wereat $1000/metric ton.Unforeseen scenarios thwart business plans   But the unexpected intervened. A spate of natural and operationaldifficulties struck resin and monomer plants worldwide at the turn of 1995,pushing monomer costs up and disrupting resin supplies. A hoarding frenzyand six-month-long inventory buildup followed. Moreover, resin exports toChina, a burgeoning market, kept soaring. At the May-June peak, PS hadrisen by 26% in the U.S., PP by 35% in Germany, and PVC by 13% in Japan ascompared to mid-1994.   Around mid-1995, a reversal was underway. IBMA's Fisher attributes thisto effects of the continuing recession in Japan, to slowdowns in France andthe U.K., China's sudden retreat from aggressive resin buying (whichdepressed export prices), and a resultant inventory rundown. Major monomersfell in cost, but less so than resin; supplier margins were squeezed.   At presstime, all the large-volume resin prices had dropped from their1995 peaks, typically by approximately 25% in the U.S. and about 40% inEurope and Asia. Nevertheless, prices generally remain above the lows theyreached in 1994.   Ron Yocum, CEO at Quantum Chemical Co., Cincinnati, OH, a majorpolyolefins producer, says that the demand side for PE and PP remainsfavorable. He pegs underlying PE growth at about 1.5 to 1.7 times that ofGDP. National economies obviously vary by region, but in the developedcountries, this could yield growth in the low single digits - generally onthe order of 3 to 5%/yr. In countries like China, where GDP is increasingat double-digit rates, PE growth would be much greater.   But why did official PE demand in one major market, the U.S., rise by12% in 1994 and remain relatively flat in 1995? (Figures released atpresstime by the Society of the Plastics Industry, Washington, DC, show a0.9% decline in production and a 3% drop in sales and captive use for PE inthe U.S.) Inventory shifts, brought about by turmoil in 1994-95, obscured areal growth rate for 1995 of around 4 to 5%. Yocum sees continued growthbeing aided by technology (e.g., super-condensing modes that doubleLLD/HDPE capacity at 40 to 70% of cost), and improving polyolefinscost-performance.   In PP, suppliers expect underlying growth to be twice that of global GDPthrough 2000.Substantial growth seen in developing nations   Long-term, demand prospects favor other resins, too. Developingeconomies (e.g., China, India, parts of Latin America) represent a dramaticsource of growth for styrenics and PVC. For instance, PS use is booming inBrazil. Alberto Carvalheiro, commercial director of EDN, the top PSsupplier there, puts domestic growth at 25% for 1994 (a boom period) and10% for 1995. Underlying growth is 1.3 times GDP, and expanding PS use inpackaging and export products (appliances, toys, TV cabinets) is credited.   A striking example of demand strength is Mexico. Despite the collapse ofthe peso and a 10% decline in GDP, demand by packagers and export-orientedprocessors for some resins in Mexico actually grew in 1995. Monica Conde,an analyst with consultant IMPI, Mexico City, estimates that demand inMexico for polyethylene terephthalate, PP, and PS rose, respectively, by38%, 8%, and 4% last year.   By late 1995, some industry sources argue, the decline of prices forlarge-volume resins had bottomed out in the U.S., with inventories becomingmore in balance. IBMA's Fisher, however, says softness in many Europeaneconomies makes it less likely that prices there will firm up as quickly.He says that many countries in Europe have yet to fully address the highsocial cost of their social welfare policies. The seers pepper theirforecasts with caveats, most notably discounting the impact of a possiblerecession, or a new, unexpected round of plant shutdowns.   Stable monomer costs are one reason cited for expecting more resinstability in 1996. Fred Petersen of Probe Economics, Armonk, NY, who tracksmonomers, notes that ethylene, which gyrated from 16 to 28 cents/lb. in1994-95, is now at 21 cents/lb. Currently announced ethylene expansions, ifcarried out, should assure adequate ethylene supply for two years, Petersenadds. Propylene and styrene are considered likely to tighten slowly, notmoving upward before 1997-98.Planned capacity will meet demand   As for resin capacity, experts foresee two major waves of expansion overthe next several years. In PE, for instance, North American-based supplierswill add some 2.8 billion lb. (e.g., Novacor in Canada) in 1997-98, orenough to almost balance new demand. A much larger spurt in capacity is setto occur offshore, notably in the Far East. Most forecasts see world PEcapacity rising by 16% through 1998.   Bill Kuhlke of consultant Kuhlke Assoc., Houston, TX, puts today'sglobal PE operating rate at 86%. He sees growth absorbing added capacity by1998. Utilization rates by then would rise to 91%, which would put newpressure on pricing.   Super-condensing-type modes for LLD/HDPE plants developed by BPChemicals, Exxon Chemical, and Union Carbide make a second PE expansionfeasible. But the impact won't be felt before 1999.   In styrenics, consultants foresee crystal grades averaging 48 cents/lb.in 1996, a figure that is close to current levels. Added capacity in thestyrene-importing regions (Western Europe and the Far East) is seen causinga 50% drop in U.S. exports. Ed Glatzer of Chem Systems anticipates styreneaveraging 36 cents/lb. in 1996 and 33 cents/lb. in 1997, which would helpkeep PS and ABS prices low.   In vinyl, Richard Roman, Roman Assoc., Cleveland, OH, sees asupply-demand balance lasting several years. New capacity will about matchanticipated growth. The U.S. and Eastern European producers, moreover, arelikely to be export bases for meeting the PVC needs of developing nations.Illustration(s):Illustration: Graph: Commodity resin costs were erratic in 1995, butforecasts project less volatility: United StatesIllustration: Graph: Commodity resin costs were erratic in 1995, butforecasts project less volatility: GermanyIllustration: Graph: Commodity resin costs were erratic in 1995, butforecasts project less volatility: AsiaCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightMODERN PLASTICS via NewsNetJanuary 1996   STRONG GROWTH WILL CARRY OVER INTO DIVERSE MARKETS AND APPLICATIONSBy:Robert Colvin, with Stephen Moore in Tokyo   Polypropylene is the only olefin resin in North America, Western Europe,and Japan to have registered substantive growth last year. The materialshowed most gains in blow molded containers (North America), sheet,profile, and film extrusion, and injection molded packaging.   These results stem from end-use growth and polypropylene's continuingversatility as a resin, which is expanding its use in areas likepackaging.   The results in North America, at least, also reflect a shift that tookplace in inventory and production last year. In 1994, U.S. sales of mostcommodity resins were at double-digit levels - at times beyond theabilities of production capacity, according to Kevin Boyle of OccidentalChemical Corp., Dallas, TX, chairman of the Society of the PlasticsIndustry's Committee on Resin Statistics. This in turn led to a run onpurchasing, which shifted inventories of volume resins from producers toconverters. As buying slowed in 1995, inventories shifted back toproducers, with the result being that in the U.S., while production of allplastics rose 3.4% in 1995 over 1994, total sales and captive use increasedby only 0.3%, according to figures released by the SPI at a press briefingin its Washington, DC, headquarters on Dec. 6, 1995.Resin's strength lifted U.S. production figures   Though SPI began including Canadian sales with those of the U.S. in PPlast year, thus making year-to-year comparisons with 1994 difficult, Boylenoted during the press briefing that had PP production been deleted from1995 U.S. resin figures, thermoplastics production would have declined byhalf, to 1.7% over 1994.   In many global markets polypropylene producers are, however,anticipating a first-quarter turnaround from fourth-quarter 1995. If thishappens, processors will find plenty of material - inventories at manysuppliers are reportedly hovering at around 6 to 7 weeks' supply. Prices,moreover, should remain at or around current levels in most areas. No wildfluctuations are predicted. Nor do many experts foresee PP supplytightening before 1999.   Consultant Phillip Townsend Assoc. Inc. (PTAI), Houston, TX, projects anaverage annual growth in worldwide PP consumption of 7.2% between 1994 and1999.   Continuing advances in PP performance are strengthening itsprice/properties ratio. A number of manufacturers have come up with ways toimprove properties and thus bridge the performance gap between the resinand select engineering polymers. Examples include the Hivalloypolymerization process from Montell, Wilmington, DE; injection moldinggrades of impact copolymer from Fina Oil & Chemical Co., Dallas, and newControlled Crystallinity PP (CCPP) resins manufactured by Borealis, Lyngby,Denmark.   Some observers estimate that as much as two-thirds of PP's consumptionincrease is at the expense of other thermoplastics. Robert Woods, businessmanager for PP at Quantum Chemical, Cincinnati, OH, says that due to gainsin clarity, renewed interest has surfaced in PP as a substitute for PET insome dairy and food containers such as peanut butter jars.   Rexene Products Co., meanwhile, has a developmental PP-based flexiblepolymer, Rexflex FPO, which the Dallas-based supplier claims will pullautomotive market share from PUR and foamed PVC, by virtue of its improvedmelt strength and a 35% lower density than PVC.   Joseph T. Bonk, specialty polymers manager, says automotive applicationsare expected to include skin-covered foamed instrument panels whosestrength will be that they are made from a single resin - PP - thus facilitating recycling. Since the material contains no plasticizers, windowfogging is not a problem. To meet expected FPO demand, Rexene is building a50-million-lb./yr. facility in Odessa, TX, that is to come on stream in thethird quarter.Asia remains large growth market   Outside North America, Western Europe, and Japan, the demand equationfor PP changes radically. Consultant Andrew Stevens at PTAI, for example,sees average annual growth for Asia (excluding Japan) of 11.5% through1999.   Demand for PP in China remains high and is growing by as much as 11%annually. Present local production stands at 2.64 billion lb./yr. comparedwith demand of 4.4 billion lb./yr. By 2010, some 8.65 billion lb./yr. willbe needed. Because local producers won't be able to meet demand, observerspredict that imports will not only meet consumption needs in China, buthave a ripple effect on global supply. Assuming demand remains constant andprice is attractive, excess capacity could flow to China and create tightsupplies elsewhere.   Tianjin United Chemical, Tianjin, China, has just started up an882-million-lb./yr. PP plant based on Montell technology. Two other882-million-lb./yr. plants have also come on stream: one in Guangdong,financed by Hong Kong and Taiwanese investors, and one at the ZhongyuanPetrochemical Union, which uses Montell technology.   Other important PP markets include India with about 16% yearly growthpotential. India, despite a population of about 950 million, has one of thelowest per-capita plastics consumption rates in the world, about 1 kg. (2.2lb.) The average global consumption rate is around 16 kg. (35 lb.) TheU.S., by contrast, consumes about 60 kg. (132 lb.) of plastics/person. Thepotential for PP (as well as other resins) is thus tremendous.   Major players like Reliance Industries, Bombay, and IndianPetrochemicals, Baroda, are expanding capacities. Domestic PP capacityshould rise to 1.19 billion lb./yr. by 1996 and to 2.64 billion lb./yr. by2000. Reliance is setting up a 771-million-lb./yr. plant at Jamnagar inaddition to a 771-million-lb./yr. facility at Hazira. This capacity willmake it the sub-continent's largest PP producer.   Elsewhere in the region, Pakistan's Ravi Chemicals Group, in a jointventure with British-based Alyph Ltd., is to build a 154-million-lb./yr.plant in Karachi - the country's first. Pakistan uses 110 million lb./yr.The balance is for export.Production expansions, consolidations proceed   Capacity expansions and realignments are, of course, ongoing everywhere.In Japan last year there was the merger of Tokyo-based Showa Denko andNippon Petrochemicals, which created a polyolefins giant offering 762million lb./yr. of capacity. This was followed by further consolidation inthe Japanese market with a union between Mitsui Petrochemical Industriesand Ube Industries, in Tokyo, to offer 992 million lb./yr. of nameplatecapacity.New capacity is coming on stream   Europe has 14 PP suppliers. Among them is Dow Europe, Horgen,Switzerland, which has plans to build a 440-million-lb./yr. plant at Bunain the former East Germany.   In Africa, meanwhile, Hoechst AG, Frankfurt, Germany, has increasedcapacity from 132 million lb./yr. to 330 million lb. at its 50:50 jointventure in Sasolburg, South Africa.   In the U.S., Solvay Polymers, Houston, TX, is building a gas-phasereactor and also debottlenecking lines to increase capacity from 440million lb./yr. to 770 million lb. at Deer Park, TX, this year.   Exxon Chemical Co., which is also based in Houston, has plans to build a527-million-lb./yr. plant in Baytown, TX.Many plants are built, few are being closed   Will all this capacity be needed? Particularly in Europe where manyobservers have complained for several years that there is already too muchcapacity in place from too many producers?   Observers point out that although a number of plants are going up, fewolder ones are being decommissioned. Among the reasons that are cited forthis, according to Quantum's Woods, is that it may be easier to keep olderplants operating than to pay the cost of shuttering them and cleaning upthe property. Regulation not only influences plastics use, but affects theeconomics of production as well.        POLYPROPYLENE  Select nameplate capacities                             Million lb.                               (1995)Montell                         4885Fina                            1790Amoco                           1662Borealis                        1520BASF                            1410Hoechst                         1210Exxon                           1025Aristech                         925Huntsman                         882PCD                              810Photograph(s):Photograph: Polypropylene grades offer toughness and strength for outdoorproducts such as lawn mowers and other garden equipment. [Photos, DSM]Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightMODERN PLASTICS via NewsNetJanuary 1996   VOLUME IS BEGINNING TO BUILD AS END-USERS ASSESS RESINS' BENEFITSBy:Robert D. Leaversuch   Metallocene-catalyzed polyolefins have generated much notice. But 1996may be a watershed in determining their impact.   Until now, metallocene polyethylene (mPE) and polypropylene (mPP) resinshave been circumscribed by narrow (though widening) grade slates,confidential R&D, and patent disputes. Small, dedicated resin unitsoperate, but their capacity is less than 0.5% of market potential.   Now, the catalysts are being retrofit to full-scale units for everymajor polymerization process, which puts them into the productionmainstream. The trio of current mPE suppliers (Exxon, Dow, and Mitsui)becomes a pack in 1996. Five suppliers are set to launch mPP grades.Processors can also expect mPE and perhaps mPP technology to be licensed byother producers before 1996 is over (table).   The materials could help to sustain plastics growth rates at historiclevels (i.e., double the GDP). ``Metallocenes potentially allow polyolefinsto replace [some] higher-cost performance materials,'' states Ron Yocum,CEO at Quantum Corp.   There's little doubt among processors and suppliers that mPE and mPP canoffer cost-performance gains across a swath of specialty markets.Metallocene PE is commercial, in the U.S., in niches likecontrolled-permeation films (e.g., produce bags) and low-residuals wire andcable, and, in Europe, flexible hosing.   In dispute is how fast and how far grades can go in ``pseudo-commodity''markets. Pseudo-commodity applications use volume resins like PE and PP,but require property enhancements, like clarity and toughness, whichjustify a premium and are attainable via metallocene catalysis.   Examples are some clarity films (now served by LDPE), stretch film(typically higher-alpha-olefin LLDPE), and flexibles (plasticized vinyl andrubber).   Consultants foresee 1996-98 as a time when mPE and mPP extend theirreach (most rapidly in the U.S.) to larger markets: e.g., stretch film(superior toughness and cling), molded medical parts, and polymermodifiers.Battling constraints in metallocenes' use   ``There's no doubt about mPE's specialties role; what's less clear isend-user commitment in volume markets,'' says John Murphy of CatalystConsultants Inc., Spring Hills, PA. One reason for end-user ambiguity isthe desire to keep a low profile to retain a competitive advantage. Moresubstantive reasons for questioning the growth of metallocene materials usehave been resin capacity limits, cost, and processability.   ``Capacity limits are no longer a realistic long-term constraint,''declares Bob Bauman, of consultant Chem Systems, Tarrytown, NY. He saysthat in the past year, a number of suppliers have run mPE in gas-phase,slurry, loop, and high-pressure process units (table). Retrofits involveupgrading a unit's catalyst delivery system and changing reactorconditions, both done at modest cost.   Exxon has run 30 million lb. of mPE on a 1-billion-lb./yr. gas-phaseplant in the U.S. Thus, it seems feasible to capitalize on mPE benefitswithout building specialized or dedicated capacity - a view also taken byBP, Union Carbide, and Mobil. In theory, at least, it is feasible to use anew type of swing capacity - units that shift between metallocene andconventional catalysts.   Other sources point out the practical limits to retrofitting metallocenecatalysts to units. In fact (as with current LLDPE/HDPE swing units), thiscapability is likely to be used rarely, since units are large andinflexible. Except in large volumes, shifting between grades and catalystsadds downtime, increases off-spec transition material, cuts throughput, andraises cost.   A common strategy is to convert small, often aging, reactors to mPE, anapproach taken by Union Carbide, Hoechst, BASF, and BP. David James,Carbide's R&D director, suggests that dedicated plants best optimizecomonomer use at present (metallocenes being 10-fold more efficient thanregular catalysts).   Dow favors dedicated capacity. It has announced a 300% increase inworldwide mPE (tradename Insite) capacity for 1996. This includes a second125-million-lb./yr. unit in the U.S., and a 150-million-lb. unit in Spain.Len Azzaro, PE commercial director, says LLDPEs using Insite technologywill be made at a 400-million-lb./yr. unit by late 1996.Cost is an issue: will premium stay or be cut?   Metallocene PE catalyst costs 1 to 1.5 cents/lb. more than HAO-LLDPEcatalyst. This helps make mPE 10 to 15% costlier than LLDPE. And it createsa dilemma: dedicated units cost more to run, volumes do not yet justifydedicating full-scale units, and economies of scale are adverse. BalajiSingh of consultant Phillip Townsend Assoc., Houston, TX, says suppliersmust pare mPE costs to gain share. He sees catalyst costs falling to under1 to 1.5 cents/lb. in excess of LLDPE in five years.   In theory, this should lower resin prices. But Bill Kuhlke of consultantKuhlke Assoc., Houston, TX, expects suppliers (with an estimated $3.3billion in metallocenes investment) to keep premiums up, perhaps for aslong as 15 years, to pay back costs of development and in capacity. Otherssay the market will determine price, payback notwithstanding.   Exxon and BP plan to run mPE on large-scale gas reactors. This couldentail high operating costs, but they see it as the best way to seedmarkets as demand grows. Eventually, mPE volumes would rise, and afull-scale plant could be dedicated. Estimates of when this crossover mightoccur range from five to 10 years.   Suppliers cite gains in making mPE more processable. Singh notes that ashift to metallocenes in markets like stretch film and medical moldings canbe a ``minor headache'' for processors versus shifting from LDPE to LLDPE.   Horst Maack, president of consultant Maack Business Services, Au,Switzerland, questions whether mPE can be run in Europe's (mostly LDPE)process equipment by just tweaking machinery. Maack says mPE involveshigher conversion costs for those adopting mPE in film in Europe. Changesin screws, die gaps, feed sections, and winding equipment add 5% to 30% toinvestment. And mPE also runs hotter than conventional PE, so throughputscould fall and costly controls may be needed.   ``A landslide in volume markets in Europe is likely when mPE matchesLDPE's processability,'' says Maack. He sees 200,000 tons (400 million lb.)of mPE use in Europe by 2000.   Hartz Mann, BASF's PE applications director, sees blending as one way tointroduce mPE in Europe. BASF's tubular LDPE capacity is said to be optimalfor plastomer versions (grades of 0.886 to 0.910 g./cc. density). Slurryprocess units may prove most suitable for high-density mPEs.   Penetration by mPE and mPP technologies also depends on licensing.Exxon, with a broad stake in patents, and alliances with Hoechst(catalyst), Mitsui (gas-phase process), and DSM (plastomers), may have anedge. But licensing also requires a servicing and know-how infrastructure,which may give Union Carbide and BP an inside track.   Roland Hingmann, BASF's R&D director for polypropylene, says thatrunning mPP in PP plants is feasible, if not as simple as for mPE. Theability has, in fact, been demonstrated by Hoechst, Exxon, BASF, and othersin gas and slurry reactors. BASF is promoting with its technology improvedhomopolymer, controlled-rheology grades, high-stiffness and -toughnesscopolymers, and reactor TPOs.These are the top contenders in the drive to commercialize technology forproduction of metallocene-based polymers*                                                Location of                                                dedicated       RetrofitSupplier        Material+       Process  **       capacity++     status***BP Chemicals,   mPE, `96           1             U.K.             CRLondon, U.K.BASF,            mPE              1,2,4         Germany           CRLudwigshafen,    mPPGermanyDow Chemical     mPE               3          U.S., Spain (`96)   CRMidland, MI      sPS+++DSM****          mPE,`96           3          Holland (`96)       CRSittard,NetherlandsExxon Chemical  mPE              1,2,3,4      U.S., France (`96)   CRHouston, TX     mPPFina            SPP,'96            2             ##                CRDallas, TXHoechst AG      mPP                1          Germany              CRFrankfurt       COGermanyMobil Chemical  mPE,`96            1             ##                CRNorwalk, CTMitsuiTokyo,          mPE                1          Japan                CRJapan           CONovacor         mPE,`96            3             ##                 -Calgary,CanadaPhillips 66Bartlesville, OK mPE               2             ##                 -Ube              mPE ,`96          1#            ##                 -Yamaguchi, JapanUnion Carbide    mPE, `96          1             h                  CRDanbury, CT* MODERN PLASTICS' estimates based on published sources and company data.+ Materials are polyethylene (mPE), polypropylene (mPP), syndiotacticpolystyrene (SPS), syndiotactic PP (SPP), and cyclic olefins (CO).** Process unit types used to run metallocenes: 1) gas-phase; 2) loopslurry; 3) solution; 4) high-pressure LDPE.++ Existing dedicated or semi-works commercial plants.*** CR indicates commercial runs in a full-scale, though not necessarily adedicated, plant.+++Joint venture with Japan's Idemitsu.****Joint venture with Exxon for 0.880 to 0.910-g./cc.-density-rangematerials.## No dedicated facility is running.#  50,000-ton unit using Exxon/Mitsui license.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightMODERN PLASTICS via NewsNetJanuary 1996   DEMAND MATCHES GDP GROWTH IN DEVELOPED NATIONS, SURGES IN ASIABy:Joseph A. Grande   Last year ABS demand stabilized in many areas and approached moretraditional growth rates.   Use of ABS showed a decline of about 8% in the U.S., the first drop infour years, while Europe managed a slight gain. Consumption was strong inJapan, which posted an 8% gain, the first significant increase in fiveyears. Meanwhile, the rest of the Far East had double-digit growth. Theoverall performance was a distinct contrast to 1994, which sawabove-average consumption.   ``Performance in 1994 was not real growth because we were coming out ofdeep recession,'' says Harald Laesche, ABS product manager at Bayer AG,Leverkusen, Germany. As a result, observers say 1995's weaker numbersshould be viewed within the market's overall performance of the last fiveyears. During that period, ABS has grown about 3% annually, in line withGDP growth of developed countries, says Ulf Buergel, business manager ofstyrene copolymers for Dow Europe, Horgen, Switzerland.Bayer acquisition changes global scene   The lineup of global players changed last year, as Bayer revealed plansto purchase Monsanto's ABS business. The move will more than double Bayer'scapacity and propel it into the top tier of ABS producers, alongside ChiMei and GE Plastics.   A global study of the styrenics business by consultant Chem Systems,Tarrytown, NY, predicts 5 to 6% annual growth through 2000. Mature U.S. andEuropean markets will see marginal gains.   Demand in Japan will grow at an average of 1.6% over the next threeyears, led by toys, leisure goods, and construction, according to the JapanABS Resin Industry Assn., Tokyo. Use in vehicles will decrease due to lowerproduction volumes and increased substitution of PP. Meanwhile, exports areforecast to grow at an average annual rate of 9.2%. Hot destinations areChina, Thailand, the Philippines, and Indonesia.   The rest of the Far East will enjoy double-digit growth, says EdwardGlatzer of Chem Systems.   In inter-polymer substitution, competition with PS and PP is atequilibrium, suppliers claim. High-impact PS and PP continue to nip at ABS,however, particularly in appliances that were over-engineered in ABS. InEuropean autos, governmental requirements for impact at low temperature maybring back interiors that had been switched to PP.   One bright spot last year was continued demand for ABS and ABS/PC blendsin computers and telecommunications. Growth is spurred by miniaturizationand the ability of materials to provide thin walls, strength, and highprocessability. These blends are growing at a 15 to 20% rate inapplications such as cellular phones and notebook computers. On the otherhand, ABS has seen significant erosion in computer monitors and keyboards.PS has gained a strong foothold based on cost and lower physicalrequirements.   A key target for GE Plastics is building and construction. The firm ispushing Cycolac ABS, coextruded with a capstock ofacrylic/styrene/acrylonitrile, for window profiles, cladding, and othercomponents.   Most of the world's capacity buildup is in Asia. Chi Mei, Tainan,Taiwan, has plans to construct a 441-million to 882-million-lb./yr. plantin Singapore or Malaysia. The company also plans to boost capacity inTaiwan to 2.6 billion lb./yr. by 1998.   Toray Industries, Tokyo, will double capacity in Malaysia to 353 millionlb./yr. by summer, making it the largest ABS facility in Southeast Asia.   Improved processability remains crucial. At Dow, new Magnum ABS gradesprovide lower plateout and double the melt flow rate.  ACRYLONITRILE-BUTADIENE-STYRENE    Select nameplate capacities                    Million lb.                      (1995)Chi Mei               1874GE*                   1509Bayer+                1223Dow                    639LG Chemical            408* Includes joint venture of Ube Industries Ltd., Ube, and GE Japan HoldingInc.+ Includes 914 million lb. of capacity from Monsanto. At presstime, Bayerwas planning to purchase Monsanto's global ABS business.Source: Chem Systems Inc., Tarrytown, NYPhotograph(s):Photograph: ABS is coextruded with an ASA weatherable polymer for windowframes, cladding and other components. [Photo, GE Plastics]Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightMODERN PLASTICS via NewsNetJanuary 1996   SPECIALTY GRADES PROMISE GROWTH DESPITE SHORTAGES OF GLASS FIBERSBy:Peter Mapleston   Supply problems for nylon compounds have much to do with theavailability of glass-fiber reinforcements. A shortage in fibers occurredafter a fast pick-up in demand that started in 1994 and carried throughfirst-half 1995.   Glass-fiber prices also moved up over 15% in 1995, though they are stillat sub-1980's levels. This year could see them rise again, from 5% intodouble digits, depending on market conditions, which are softening inareas.   Another issue is the decision by Owens Corning to phase out 10-micronfibers favored by many compounders (mostly European) and focus on 11- and14-micron fibers that are less costly to produce. That's reflected in theprice: OCF 14-micron fibers sell for around 15% less than 10-microngrades.   At Hoechst-Celanese in Dallas, TX, nylon 66 product manager ChuckCalhoun says the company has ``outstanding'' glass fiber-reinforcedproducts that rely on very fine fibers for much of their performance -performance that could be hard to reproduce with thicker types.   Jim Morelli, sales and marketing director at AlliedSignal, Morristown,NJ, is sanguine. Allied's Capron nylon 6 grades ``are very forgiving. Wecan use a significant number of types of fibers.''   Resin-wise, if demand stays around 7%/yr., there should be no problemsin nylon 66 supply. Nylon 6 supply is less critical, due largely to aslackening in the fibers market that enables polymer makers to divertmaterial to compounds. In Europe especially, millions of pounds of polymerfrom ex-East Bloc countries are available. Nylon 66 prices are thus firm,while nylon 6 price is under downward pressure.   While the auto market in North America is flat overall, growth in nylonswill come through increased penetration into manifolds. Japanese car makersare also switching to nylon manifolds.   Prospects, in fact, look good for nylon 6 in air-intake manifolds.Glass-reinforced compounds perform as well or better than 66 in partsassembled by vibration welding, which is replacing lost-core injectionmolding for manifolds fitted to some European cars. Allied says Capron HPN(high-productivity nylon) 6 grades, initially for packaging, may bepreferable to 66 in lost-core molding, since their high flow improves cycletimes and reduces core shift. The company claims the grades allowproductivity gains of 20 to 30% over standard nylon 6.   Bayer has programs with auto-makers for making large parts using hybridtechnology in which plastics, often nylons, are molded around large metalinserts. Parts include cross-car beams, door panels, and seat frames.   At Hoechst-Celanese, Calhoun cites good growth in niche automotiveelectronics, as well as in components for suspension systems calledspring-seat spacers. The components, each around 4 oz., replace fabricatedmetal, saving weight and cost.   Several companies are introducing nylons with improved high-temperatureproperties (Dec MP, 74). DuPont has added Zytel HTN semi-aromatic grades inEurope. Main target is automotive - fog-lamp housings, ignition parts,sensors, components for ABS brakes - but several electronics applicationsare turning up for dimensional stability and heat resistance. Grades have aglass-transition temperature 135 degrees F. higher than nylon 66;properties are marginally affected by water uptake. Creep is low.   Most activity for nylons in packaging is in films with improved barrier.EMS-Chemie, Domat/Ems, Switzerland, has introduced what it terms``multi-polyamides'' that contain over three types of nylon, and in somecases as many as five. The copolymers are for niches such as cheesepackaging, to prevent the ballooning that occurs when cheese gases can'tescape through skin packaging.   The materials replace PVdC in multilayer structures. According to EMS,they are as good as PVdC at keeping oxygen out of the pack, and better atletting carbon dioxide out. The materials are also said to be easier toprocess than PVdC. Their low melt point and crystallinity suit them forbiaxial orientation.Photograph(s):Photograph: Air intake manifolds can be molded in nylon 6 or 66.[Photo, DuPont]Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightMODERN PLASTICS via NewsNetJanuary 1996   SURGING DEMAND IN HIGH-GROWTH REGIONS BUOYS END-USE OUTLOOKBy:Martin O'Neill   Polyvinyl chloride sales were generally even in North America andWestern Europe last year, and off substantially (approximately 9.5%) inJapan. Reasons for the material's performance in these regions, apart fromthe continuing recession in Japan, include a second-half decline ineconomically sensitive end-use markets like housing starts and generalconstruction, conversion to competitive materials like PET and PP inpackaging, and, to a degree, issues of recyclability.   Exports, however, were up in many areas, notably from the U.S. (about1.4 billion lb. - a 20% jump from 1994); also, Japan, Mexico, Brazil, andEastern Europe. Factors influencing this range from the weakness of theU.S. dollar to European currencies like the German mark (though the pricedifferential is not as pronounced as it was in 1994), to overcapacity inJapan chasing developing market opportunities in Asia.   The outlook for PVC use this year varies by region. Since PVC demandtends to follow GDP growth in the developed nations, average growth isforecast for North America and Western Europe. Some economists predicteconomic growth in the 2 to 2.6% range for the Group of Seven nations - theU.S., Canada, United Kingdom, France, Germany, Italy, and Japan - primarilyas a result of efforts to reduce budget deficits. Others predict that somenational economies will experience less growth - as little as 1.3% in theU.S., for example. The winner would appear to be Japan, for which growth of2.1% is forecast by some experts for 1996 - low compared to many countries,but a substantial jump from the 0.1% growth predictions for 1995 that weremade late last year.   In other areas, PVC could see sizeable growth. Infrastructure repair,for example, will continue in Eastern Europe, creating demand for windowprofiles. The growing economies of some Latin American countries and thecontinuing strength of Asia bode well for PVC use in these areas.   And while PET continues to take share away from PVC in packaging, someapplications are holding firm while others are reverting to the material.In France, Evian has switched from PVC to PET bottles for its mineralwater, and Vittel will follow suit this year. Yet due to its price, PVCcontinues to play a major role in bottled water. In film, one Europeangrocery chain is changing back to PVC from polyethylene for meat wrap, toget a shelf life of 2 to 4 days versus 24 hr. with PE.   The bright spot in the PVC market, as with other resins, is Asia, wherecapacity and demand are increasing, albeit from a relatively low startingpoint. Joint ventures among Japanese, South Korean, and Western companiesare prominent, but domestic development is also strong.   Thailand was a net exporter of PVC for the first time in 1994. It hasembarked on an ambitious expansion program that could see it become theworld's largest supplier in the next decade.   India's PVC market is expected to grow from 1.03 billion lb. to 1.76billion lb. by 2000, according to industry estimates.   Demand for PVC in Vietnam is 110 million lb./yr., but growing by 20%annually. Occidental Chemical Corp, Dallas, TX, and trading house MarubeniCorp., Osaka, Japan, are establishing a 220-million-lb./yr. suspensionplant in southern Vietnam, which is due on stream by 1998. The venture,Oxy-Vina Plastics and Chemical Co., is the first involving a U.S.corporation in that country since resumption of diplomatic relationsbetween America and Vietnam last year.   In China, PVC capacity is about 3.3 billion lb./yr. Imports amounted to1.07 billion lb. in 1994, including copolymers. The country plans tocomplete three plants before 1998, increasing capacity by 352 millionlb./yr., according to the Ministry of Chemical Industry.      POLYVINYL CHLORIDE Select nameplate capacities*                    Million lb.                      (1995)Formosa               3800Shintechb             3300Solvay                2750Geon                  2600EVC                   2500Occidental            1580Borden                1400HanWha                1160Georgia-Gulf          1150* Merger of Mitsui, Tosoh and Denki, effective Jan. 1, 1996, would create asupplier with 1300 million lb.  b: Industry sources indicate that Shintechhas received permit approval for a major expansion. These sources expectShintech to add 200 million to 300 million lb. in debottlenecking, andprobably a 500-million-lb. unit in the period 1996-98.Photograph(s):Photograph: PVC continues to advance in the window profile market. [Photo,Veka AG]Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightMODERN PLASTICS via NewsNetJanuary 1996   REGIONAL GROWTH, OVERCAPACITY MAY CHANGE PATTERNS OF SUPPLYBy:Martin O'Neill   The phenomenal growth of PET in packaging over the last 20 years may beslowing in mature markets, like North America, but its potential in largelyuntapped markets assures solid growth for the foreseeable future.   G. Keith Mitchell, director of consultant PCI Ltd., in London, noted thepotential for PET in several regions at a conference late last yearsponsored by The Packaging Group Inc., Milltown, NJ. Per-capita consumptionin North America and Europe is, respectively, 3362 and 1150 g. But it'sonly 520 g./person in South America, 270 g. in the Middle East and Africa,and 220 g./person in Asia-Pacific.   Overall, observers say the outlook for 1996 is ``snug,'' with Europeprojected to import up to 363 million lb. of resin this year, a 7.8%increase over 1995. The North American supply-demand ratio should berelatively balanced in 1996, with quantities available for export to Europeand South America. Much surplus capacity exists in Asia and Asia-Pacific,where output is 20% for domestic use and 80% for export.   Meanwhile, the capacity buildup continues worldwide, and will have animpact as soon as next year. In 1997, Europe's PET imports are projected byMitchell to decline to 15 million lb. In 1998, he forecasts that Europewill be a net exporter, capable of shipping 321 million lb.   By 1997-98, if all the capacity that's under construction or plannedcomes on line, says Guido Ghisolfi, CEO of Sinco Engineering, an Italianbuilder of PET plants, there could be global overcapacity of 6.6 billionlb.   Among changes that experts like Ghisolfi see from this is a demand bythe major end-users of PET to stabilize the resin's price structureworldwide. Ghisolfi says that about 10 multinationals (e.g., Nestle,Unilever, Coca-Cola) consume 60% of PET. If such overcapacity occurs, itwould be a buyer's market, and the volumes these end-users consume willgive them much leverage in pressing for price stability - even to insistingthat prices not be tied entirely to raw materials' costs.   Such observations are speculative. Yet expansions continue.   Eastman Chemical is building in Spain and Latin America, and targets 3.4billion lb. in place globally in late 1998.   Hoechst will triple capacity to over 3 billion lb. by 2000, and maybuild in Asia.   Shell Chemicals will bring North American capacity to 1.1 billionlb./yr. In Italy, capacity will be doubled to 352 million lb./yr. by early1997, in Patrica.   ICI has a U.S. plant in precommission, which will boost North Americancapacity to 363 million lb./yr. A 264-million-lb./yr. European plant willcome on stream this year, raising the regional total to 484 millionlb./yr.   Meanwhile, Dow Europe has entered the PET business via an agreement withEnichem, whereby Dow acquires 80% of its Inca Intl. subsidiary in Italy.   In Japan, Kaneko is adding a 33-million-lb./yr. unit in Sabae tocomplement its 55-million-lb./yr. plant in Hofu.   Mitsui Petrochemical has absorbed Mitsui PET Resin Co., its bottle-grademarketing arm, to combine its PET and purified terephthalic acidactivities.   And China's Shantou Oceanic Group recently obtained approval to buildPET film and bottle-grade resin plants. Japanese sources believe China'stotal PET resin capacity will grow from 3.8 billion lb./yr. in 1994 to 5.3billion lb./yr. in 1997. Nonetheless, the country is expected to remain anet importer of the resin through the 1990s.  POLYETHYLENE TEREPHTHALATE Select nameplate capacities                        Million lb.                         (1995)Eastman                   1690Hoechst                   1001Shell Chemicals            992ICI                        363Dow                        264Photograph(s):Photograph: Mineral water bottles are the fastest growing application forPET worldwide.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightMODERN PLASTICS via NewsNetJanuary 1996   RESIN SHORTAGE SHOULD EASE THIS YEAR AS CAPACITY COMES ON STREAMBy:Peter Mapleston   The market for PC has been tight, due to high demand (10 to 12% growthin late 1995) and supply problems experienced by several producers lastyear.   But relief is coming. This year there will be 135 million lb./yr. morein GE's Burkville, AL, plant, and a further expansion of undisclosed sizeat Bergen op Zoom, in The Netherlands. Bayer is debottlenecking threeplants, in Belgium, Germany, and the U.S.; and it is considering adding athird line in Antwerp, Belgium. Dow is also debottlenecking. Bayer,meanwhile, awaits approval - possibly in the first quarter - for a25-million-lb./yr. plant in China.   The net result of these expansions, says Bayer vp. Mark Witman, is thatsupply will be back in balance in 1997.   ``Demand will be strong in 1996, but not as strong as in 1995,'' saysDow Chemical's PC business director Mike Murry, in Midland, MI. GE's Lexanmanager in Europe, Robert Williams, expects a slowdown in growth to aslittle as 5%/yr.   Meanwhile, prices rose over 10% last year, with the highest jump in theFar East, where they are near twice those of mid-1994, compared to some 40%higher in Europe. Suppliers expect prices to stick in 1996.   Growth in the Far East remains strong. Production of PC in Japan waslikely to exceed 450 million lb. last year. Demand is fueled by electronicsand exports. With Southeast Asia, Taiwan, and South Korea active importersof Japanese PC, exports are again expected to account for over half ofJapanese shipments. Coupled with increases in domestic use, Japaneseshipments may rise 10% in 1995, versus 35% in 1994.   Korean demand for PC is seen surpassing 50 million lb. in 1995, owing togrowth in electronics and automotive. The market is expected to continueits dependence on imports until the only polymer maker, Samyung Kasei,completes an expansion to 66 million lb./yr. at the end of 1997.   Demand for PC in China, mainly from processors in Guangdong, will likelydouble by 2000. China imports almost all its PC. Local producers havecapacity of 5.5 million lb./yr., but production problems have seen outputdwindle to under 2.2 million lb./yr.   Production of CDs for music, computer data, and (soon) movies willprovide double-digit growth through the decade, with some putting thefigure at around 25%/yr. Bayer, GE, and Japan's Teijin are leaders in thissector; Dow has a grade in development.   Bayer is working on film insert molding for automotive and otherapplications. First commercial use of the technology has been small partson which the film provides functional markings on switches and dials. Filmswill be used for esthetics on larger parts. Films coming out of Bayer'splant in Berlin, CT, coextrusions of PC and thermoplastic polyurethane,have a soft touch.   Prospects for PC blends in bumpers don't look good. GE, however, isgetting Xenoy used in body panels (mostly fenders) on limited-edition carsas well as trucks. And it will supply material for the plastics-bodiedSmart car to be built by the Mercedes-Swatch venture in 1997 or 1998.   Packaging activity revolves around multitrip containers for milk andwater. Dairies in Austria, Germany, and Switzerland have switched to PCbottles, which can make 50 trips or more. Consumers like them because theyopen more easily than cartons and are lighter than glass. Retailers likethem because, being square, they fit better onto pallets and require 30%less space.   Three- and 5-gal. containers for mineral water are finding more use.Bayer cites double-digit growth in Europe, the Far East, and South America,and says the potential market is 10 times higher than today.Photograph(s):Photograph: Decoration and protection of automotive interior and exteriorparts are achieved by using PC film inserts. (Photo, Bayer)Photograph: PC strands are extruded in the form of rods at a Bayer plant.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightMODERN PLASTICS via NewsNetJanuary 1996   WELCOME TO A `WORLDWIDE WEB'By:Patrick A. Toensmeier   In 1996, MODERN PLASTICS will offer its own version of a ``worldwideweb.'' The ``web sites'' will be international plastics shows. Our ``webservers'' will be tabloids developed for each show and distributedon-site.   There will be at least seven shows so covered. They are, as highlightedon the map: Aseanplast, in Jakarta (Mar. 12-15); Argenplas, in Buenos Aires(Apr. 18-24); Plastexpo, Lyon, France (May 21-24); Mercoplast, Rio deJaneiro (Aug. 20-21); International Plastics Fair, Tokyo (Oct. 11-15);Ausplas, Melbourne, Australia (Oct. 22-26); and Interplas, Birmingham,England (Nov. 10-14). We may also produce a tabloid for Chinaplas, inBeijing (Mar. 26-30), and for Equiplast, in Barcelona, Spain (Oct. 20-25).   The tabloids will feature information about new products on display ateach show. They will also include overviews of local markets, businesstrends, and other issues of interest to processors.   Importantly, the news that MODERN PLASTICS acquires in developing thesetabloids, and in covering the shows, will be reported in the magazine aswell. And the contacts that our editors make in this process will help usto provide, on a continuing basis, the information and perspective onprocess technology, market issues, and business trends our readers need fortheir decision-making.   We will, of course, have a presence at more expositions this year.MODERN PLASTICS' global editorial staff will cover over 20 shows around theworld in 1996. Show coverage may seem routine. But it's an opportunity forreaders to review the latest developments in materials and machinery thatcan contribute to the capability and profitability of their operations.   In today's global economy, trade shows are not local events. Theproducts and technologies they feature have an impact on companiesworldwide. Show coverage is part of the continuing effort by MODERNPLASTICS to keep readers in step with developments that affect theirbusinesses, no matter where they do business.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightMODERN PLASTICS via NewsNetJanuary 1996   LINEAR LOW-DENSITY POLYETHYLENE (LLDPE)*LINEAR LOW-DENSITY POLYETHYLENE (LLDPE)*     Pattern of consumption**Market                    Million lb.                        1994      1995ExtrusionPackaging film        Food             331     417        Non-food         738     580        Stretch          851     802Non-packaging film        Carryout bags    228     232        Trash & can         liners         1183     903        Other            422     426Total film              3753    3360Coating                   20      18Sheet                     53      42Wire & cable             205     196Other extrusion          105     102Total extrusion         4136    3718Injection molding        603     562Blow molding              21      18Rotomolding              345     348Resellers & compounders  575     620Export                   519     562All other                113     120Grand total             6312    5948* Excludes conventional LDPE and PE copolymers; see adjacent table.** Figure includes imports of 1.107 billion lb. in 1994, and estimated at1.17 billion lb. for 1995.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightMODERN PLASTICS via NewsNetJanuary 1996   CONVENTIONAL LOW-DENSITY POLYETHYLENE* (LDPE, COPOLYMER)CONVENTIONAL LOW-DENSITY POLYETHYLENEa (LDPE, COPOLYMER)          Pattern of consumption**                         Million lb.Market                1994       1995ExtrusionPackaging film        Food          1207    1068        Non-food      1154     896        Shrink         166     192        Stretch         80      80Non-packaging film        Carryout bags  108     198        Trash & can         liners        292     175        Other          566     576Total film            3573    3185Coating                869     902Sheet                  106     102Wire & cable           253     188Pipe                   150     142Other extrusion        147     140Total extrusion       5098    4659Injection molding      366     360Blow molding            77      68Rotomolding            104     106Resellers & compounders           622     620Export                1352    1390All other              220     224Grand total           7839    7427* Excludes linear low-density PE; see adjacent LLDPE table.** Under industry reporting procedures, figure includes imports of 180million lb. in 1994, and estimated at 175 million lb. in 1995.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightMODERN PLASTICS via NewsNetJanuary 1996   POLYSTYRENE (PS) MAJOR MARKETS            POLYSTYRENE (PS)             Major markets*                                Million lb.Market                        1994**      1995Molding (solid PS only)Appliances/consumerelectronics        Air conditioners        33      33        Refrigerators &                freezers        84      83Small appliances                45      45Cassettes, reels, etc.         305     301Radio/TV/stereo        cabinets               198     195Other                           14      14Furniture & furnishings        Furniture               37      37        Toilet seats             9       9        Other                   13      13Toys & recreational        Toys                   139     137        Novelties               55      55        Photographic            64      64        Other                    9       9Housewares        Personal care           87      87        Other                  100      97Building & construction         62      62Misc. consumer & industrial        Footwear (heels)         7       7        Medical                101      99        Other                   22      22Packaging & disposables        Closures               115     113        Rigid packaging        105     105        Produce baskets         31      31        Tumblers & glasses     100      97        Flatware, cutlery       97      94        Dishes, cups, bowls     65      63Blow molded items               10      10Other injection                117     115Total molding                 2024    1997Extrusion (solid PS only)Appliances/consumerelectronics        Refrigerators &        freezers               124     124        Other                   47      47Furniture & furnishings         32      32Toys & recreational             44      44Housewares                      72      72Building & construction         80      80Misc. consumer &        industrial              70      70Packaging & disposablesOriented film & sheet          321     322Dairy containers               181     179Vending & portion cups         316     310Lids                           156     152Plates & bowls                  60      59        Other extrusion,          solid PS             260     255Extrusion (foam PS)Board                          196     193Sheet        Food-stock trays       229     225        Egg cartons             61      61        Single service                Plates         184     181                Hinged                containers     120     118                Cups             (nonthermoformed)  59      57        Other foam sheet+       45      45Total extrusion               2657    2626Expandable bead (EPS)Billets        Building & construction243     239        Other                   45      45Shapes        Packaging              125     120        Other                   59      57Cups & containers              185     179Loose fill                      90      90Total expandable bead          747     730Export                         354     344Other++                        206     195Grand total                   5988    5892* Includes imports of 198 million lb. in 1994 and estimated at 96 millionlb. in 1995.** Some 1994 figures revised in light of new information.+ Auto headliners, miscellaneous single-service and         nonthermoformed items.++ Chiefly resold and blending material.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightMODERN PLASTICS via NewsNetJanuary 1996   ABS MAJOR MARKETS          ABS Major marketsMarket                           Million lb.                                1994*      1995Extrusion        Appliances               185        168        Construction: pipe       149        127        Leisure products          25         23        Luggage                   11         11        Packaging                  9          9        Recreational vehicles+    34         32        Other**                   85         78Total extrusion                  498        448Injection Molding        Appliances                96         92        Business machines++       90         86        Construction                Pipe fittings     27         22                Other             11         10        Consumer electronics      27         22        Furniture                 10         10        Luggage                    3          3        Recreation                24         24        Telecommunications         Telephone handsets       27         25         Other                    10         10        Transportation***        330        293        Other injection molding  135        123Total injection molding          790        720Modifiers+++                      54         50Other uses                        30         29Export                           208        207Grand total                     1580       1454* 1994 figures revised in light of new information.+ Includes mobile homes, etc.** Much of this is custom sheet.++ Including calculators.*** Includes mobile homes.+++ For use with other resins in extrusion and injection molding.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightMODERN PLASTICS via NewsNetJanuary 1996   PVC       PVC Major markets                            Million lb.Market                    1994*    1995Calendering        Flooring           231     214        Textiles            88      49        Other calendering  847     859Total calendering         1166    1122Coating        Flooring           210     211        Textile/paper      119     109        Protective          56      51        Other               27      27Total coating              412     398Extrusion        Pipe & conduit    4595    4560        Wire & cable       428     392        Siding            1471    1408        Windows & doors    293     297        Packaging          330     348        Non-packaging       57      55        Other              487     471Total extrusion           7661    7531Molding        Bottles            190     173        Fittings           280     257        Other injection    103     103Total molding              573     533Compounders & resellers    457     501Export                    1145    1366Paste processes            228     220All other                  120     128Grand Total             11,762  11,799* Data includes sales in Canada as well as the U.S.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightMODERN PLASTICS via NewsNetJanuary 1996   POLYPROPYLENE (PP) MAJOR MARKETS       POLYPROPYLENE (PP)         Major markets*Market+                  Million lb.                         1994**  1995Blow molding        Containers         159     168        Other                5      15Total blow molding         164     183Extrusion        Coating             16      18        Fibers & filaments2688    3108        Film (up to 10 mil)                Oriented   740     830                Unoriented 166     252        Pipe & conduit      26      35        Sheet (over 10 mil)153     218        Wire & cable        28      22        Other extrusion    107     102Total extrusion           3924    4585Injection molding        Appliances         248     250        Consumer products 1088    1063        Rigid packaging   1027    1069        Transportation     355     368Other molding              232     244Total injection molding   2950    2994Export                     629     550All other++               2274    2332Grand total               9941  10,644*Data not directly comparable due to a reporting change. In 1995, for thefirst time, data includes sales in Canada as well as the U.S.+ Includes imports of 252 million lb. in 1994.**  Some 1994 revisions.++  Chiefly resold and compounding material.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightMODERN PLASTICS via NewsNetJanuary 1996   HIGH-DENSITY POLYETHYLENE (HDPE) MAJOR MARKETS         HIGH-DENSITY POLYETHYLENE (HDPE)                Major markets*                             Million lb.Market                       1994    1995Extrusion        Packaging film                Food             171     146                Non-food         160     156        Non-packaging film                Grocery sacks    583     530                Other retail bags108     140                Trash bags, liner375     382                Other            144     168        Coating                   62      64        Pipe and conduit                Corrugated       122     176                Gas distribution 197     196                Industrial/sewer 325     340                Other             44      44        Sheet                    636     680        Wire & cable             128     133        Other extrusion          116     116Total extrusion                 3171    3271Injection molding        Pails                   631     670        Tubs and containers+    251     220        Crates and totes        292     253        Caps and closures       179     162        All other               584     627Total injection molding        1937    1932Blow molding  Bottles    Liquid food bottles        1183    1202    HIC bottles**               949     902    Motor oil bottles           245     198        Industrial drums        286     224        All other               986     962Total blow molding             3649    3488Rotomolding                     118     110Resellers and        compounders            1223    1140Export                         1389    1330All other                       380     374Grand total                  11,867  11,645* Includes imports of 750 million lb. in 1994 and 890 million lb. in 1995.+ Includes drink cups.** Household and industrial chemicals.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightMODERN PLASTICS via NewsNetJanuary 1996   ETHYLENE-VINYL ACETATE (EVA)      ETHYLENE-VINYL ACETATE (EVA)*         Pattern of consumption                          Million lb.Market                    1994    1995Extrusion        Coating             85      86        Film               718     725        Wire & cable        66      65        Other               12      14Total extrusion            881     890Injection molding           55      57Adhesives                  125     130Other                       25      26Export                     108     116Total                     1194    1219* Poundage broken out from conventional LDPE table.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightMODERN PLASTICS via NewsNetJanuary 1996   ACRYLIC PATTERN OF CONSUMPTION          ACRYLIC*    Pattern of consumption                       Million lb.Market                 1991    1992Cast sheet        Sanitaryware     32      34        Fabrication+    100     100Extruded sheet        Glazing         105     100        Fabrication      90      95Molding        Automotive       48      50        Other           114     117Dispersions for kitchen-,        bathroom-wares   40      50Total                   529     546* 1994 and 1995 figures include Canada.+ Signs, glazing, etc.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightMODERN PLASTICS via NewsNetJanuary 1996   POST-CONSUMER RECYCLATE PATTERN OF CONSUMPTION             POST-CONSUMER RECYCLATE*              Pattern of consumption                                Million lb.Market                          1994    1995Polyethylene terephthalate        Bottle-grade                Fibers           250     275                Food bottles+     25      45                Non-food bottles  55      60                Strapping         40      42                Sheet             40      43                Alloys, compounds 20      20                Export           115     155        All other**               20       5Total PET                        565     645High-density polyethylene        Bottles                  151     180        Drainage pipe             96      90        Film                      45      90        Pallets                   40      55        Plastic lumber            36      45All other                        175     120Total HDPE                       543     580Low-density polyethylenes        Film                     112     125        Other                     33      35Total LDPE                       145     160Polystyrene        Foam packaging            16      24        Loosefill                 14      18        Solid moldings             8      12        Other                      7       6Total PS                          45      60Polypropylene                     30      35Polyvinyl chloride                 7      10All other resins                  35      35Grand total                     1370    1525* Excludes typical 10-20% loss of collected volume that occurs duringcleaning and reclaim steps.+ Primarily PET bottles reconverted to monomer chemically.** Includes bottles and non-packaging film.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightMODERN PLASTICS via NewsNetJanuary 1996   POST-CONSUMER FEEDSTOCK PATTERNS OF SOURCING            POST-CONSUMER FEEDSTOCK*               Patterns of sourcing                                   Million lb.Resin/product                     1994    1995Polyethylene terephthalate+        Soft drink bottles         520     585        Custom bottles              45      60Total PET                          565     645High-density polyethylene        Natural-color bottles**    304     325        Pigmented bottles          183     200        Base cups                   35      30        All other++                 21      25Total HDPE                         543     580Low-density polyethylenes          145     160Polystyrene                         45      60Polyvinyl chloride                   7      10Polypropylene***                    30      35Other                               35      35Grand total                       1370    1525* Excludes typical 10-20% losses of collected volume incurred in reclaim.+ Excludes 50 million lb. of X-ray film.**  Typically, natural bottles are homopolymer for milk and water use;pigmented are copolymer for chemical and detergent use.++ Includes packaging (primarily HDPE film) and non-packaging.*** Excludes about 200 million lb. reclaimed from vehicle battery cases.MODERN PLASTICS estimates based on work by Walden Research Inc., Concord,MA, and R.W. Beck & Associates, Orlando, FL (on behalf of the AmericanPlastics Council, Washington, DC).Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightMODERN PLASTICS via NewsNetJanuary 1996   ACETALS              ACETALS*        Pattern of consumptionMarket                        Million lb.                              1994      1995Appliances/power tools           20      21Consumer products                41      44Electrical/electronics           19      20Industrial                       51      54Plumbing, hardware               48      49Transportation                   28      31Other                             6       7Export                           99     104Total                           312     330* 1994 and 1995 figures include Canada.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightMODERN PLASTICS via NewsNetJanuary 1996   POLYCARBONATE    Million lb.Market 1994 1995POLYCARBONATE*Pattern of consumptionAppliances 63 73Lighting 15 17Business equipment 38 41Electrical/electronics 49 53Glazing 118 125Information storage 29 34Packaging 32 35Recreation 55 61Transportation 85 96Medical 50 53Export 152 156Other 10 13Total 696 757* 1994 and 1995 figures include Canada.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightMODERN PLASTICS via NewsNetJanuary 1996   NYLONS               NYLONS*      Pattern of consumption                      Million lb.Market                1994+   1995Filaments              29      30Film                   93     101Sheet, rod, tube       37      36Wire & cable           50      51Appliances/power tools 23      23Consumer products      40      38Electrical/electronics 99      110Industrial             60      60Transportation        294     320Export                163     192Other**                64      79Total                 952    1040* All types; 1994 and 1995 figures include Canada.+ 1994 figures revised in light of new information.** Includes material sold by independent compounders and traders, powdercoatings, hot melts, grades for blow molding, monomer casting, etc.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightMODERN PLASTICS via NewsNetJanuary 1996   POLYESTER, UNSATURATED           POLYESTER, UNSATURATED*           Pattern of consumption                          Million lb.Market                    1994+   1995Reinforced polyester   Molded, filament-wound           pultruded, hand layup,           etc.             825     910   Sheet, flat and        corrugated          208     234Total reinforced        polyester          1033    1144Non-reinforced polyester        Surface coating      22      24        Other               372     381Total non-reinforced        polyester           394     405Export                       60      75Grand total                1487    1624* Resin only.+ 1994 figures revised in light of new information.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightMODERN PLASTICS via NewsNetJanuary 1996   POLYETHYLENE TEREPHTHALATE PATTERN OF CONSUMPTION         POLYETHYLENE TEREPHTHALATE          Pattern of consumption                                Million lb.Market                          1994    1995Blow molding        Soft-drink bottles      1168    1540        Custom bottles           678     880Extrusion        Film                     675     680        Magnetic recording film   99      102        Ovenable trays            62      65Coating for ovenable board        16      17Sheeting (for blisters, cups,        food trays, etc.)        134     154Strapping                         42      43Exports                          317     440Total                           3191    3921Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightMODERN PLASTICS via NewsNetJanuary 1996   SELECTED MEXICAN RESIN MARKETS, 1994-95             SELECTED MEXICAN RESIN MARKETS, 1994-95          Million lb.                                                           Sales of           Domestic                                        domestic            demand         Imports         Exports         resin*Resin   1994    1995    1994    1995    1994    1995    1994    1995LDPE+   924     910     297     280     33      40      660     670HDPE    675     620     363     350     128     130     440     400PP      520     560     246     200     100     120     374     480PS**    398     415     143     160     20      45      275     300PVC     561     530     44      10      363     370     880     890PET     148     205     40      30      13      90      121     265* Domestic demand minus import plus export.+ LDPE, LLDPE and EVA.** Includes EPS.Source: Instituto Mexicano del Plastico Industrial, S.C. (IMPI). Attn.Monica Conde. Insurgents Sur #945, Col. Del Valie C.P., 03100 Mexico D.F.,Mexico Ph. 525 6693325.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightMODERN PLASTICS via NewsNetJanuary 1996   SELECTED CANADIAN RESIN MARKETS, 1994-95        SELECTED CANADIAN RESIN MARKETS, 1994-95*          Million lb.                                                         Sales of           Domestic                                      domestic           demand+        Imports          Exports       resin**Resin   1994    1995    1994    1995    1994    1995    1994    1995LDPE++  1248    1367    362     375     1790    1896    2677    2889HDPE    723     655     190     225     997     1169    1530    1599PP      646     529     476     353     399     569     569     573PVC     1173    1025    406     386     337     346     1105    986* Does not reflect inventory built in 1994 and drawdown in 1995.+ Number equals sales of domestic resin, plus imports, less exports.** Domestic demand minus import and plus export.++ Includes EPS.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightMODERN PLASTICS via NewsNetJanuary 1996   SELECT BRAZILIAN RESIN MARKETS              SELECT BRAZILIAN RESIN MARKETS*          Million lb.            Export        Domestic          Total            demand         demand        productionResin   1994    1995    1994    1995    1994    1995LDPE    415     445     944     1025    1358    1471LLDPE   95      93      229     247     324     340HDPE    300     309     732     783     1032    1091PP      355     379     825     891     1180    1270PS+     22      26      320     353     342     379PVC     18      24      203     223     221     247* Excludes imports of foreign-made resin.+ Includes expandable PS.Source: MODERN PLASTICS estimatesCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightMODERN PLASTICS via NewsNetJanuary 1996   SELECT LATIN AMERICAN CAPACITIES BY COUNTRY      SELECT LATIN AMERICAN CAPACITIES BY COUNTRY*                Million lb.                1995Country          LDPE    LLDPE   HDPE    PPArgentina         277     265     137     375Brazil           1495     815     842    1755Chile              95      -       -       -Colombia          123     132     -       395Venezuela         264     330     221     154Source:  Maack Business ServicesCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightMODERN PLASTICS via NewsNetJanuary 1996   SELECT CAPACITIES BY COUNTRY             SELECT CAPACITIES BY COUNTRY                 Million lb.                 1995Country          LDPE    LLDPE   HDPE    PPAustralia         298     198     353     551China            2170    1279    1158    1854India             419     882     474     354Indonesia          -      662     110     774Japan            3431    1885    2513    5411Malaysia           -      308     -       441North Korea        55      -       -       -Pakistan           -       66      -       -Singapore         320     -       353     397South Korea      1400    1455    2051    3760Taiwan            529     265     441    1014Thailand          551     132     882     684Source:  Maack Business ServicesCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightMODERN PLASTICS via NewsNetJanuary 1996   LOW-DENSITY, LINEAR LOW-DENSITY POLYETHYLENE           LOW-DENSITY, LINEAR LOW-DENSITY POLYETHYLENE                 Million lb.                 1994                          1995                                  Total                         TotalMarket           LDPE    LLDPE   LL/LDPE       LDPE    LLDPE   LL/LDPEBlow molding       165     13      178           154     13      167Extrusion  Coating          926       4     930           922      4      926  Film, sheet     7288    2284    9572          7012    2441    9453  Pipe, conduit    243      53     296           243      77     320  Wire, cable      406      49     455           404      51     455Injection molding  485     223     708           478     225     703All other          549     190     739           540     192     732Total           10,062    2816  12,878          9753    3003  12,756Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightMODERN PLASTICS via NewsNetJanuary 1996   EXPANDABLE POLYSTYRENE        EXPANDABLE POLYSTYRENE                            Million lb.Market                       1994    1995Building and construction     860     895Packaging                     423     441Other                          40      40Total                        1323    1376Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightMODERN PLASTICS via NewsNetJanuary 1996   NYLONS              NYLONS*                               Million lb.Market                       1994    1995Monofilaments, bristle        37      40Film                         108     119Sheet, rod, tube              51      52Misc. extrusion               20      21Appliances                    51      55Consumer goods                75      79Electrical/electronics       189     205Machinery parts               61      68Transportation               253     279Misc. injection               44      44Other+                        39      40Total                        928     1002* All types.+ Includes powder coatings, hot melts, blow molding, monomer casting.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightMODERN PLASTICS via NewsNetJanuary 1996   ABS                   ABS                                      Million lb.Market                                1994*   1995Appliances                              287     295Automotive                              278     284Electrical/electronics        (including business machines,        radio and TV, telephones,        as well as other        electrical uses. Does        not include conduit        or appliances.)                 289     300Furniture                                20      22Pipe and fitting        (including telephone and        electrical conduit)              26      29Recreation        (including boats)                77      79Other                                   258     262Total                                  1235    1271* Some figures revised in light of new information.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightMODERN PLASTICS via NewsNetJanuary 1996   HIGH-DENSITY POLYETHYLENE         HIGH-DENSITY POLYETHYLENE                               Million lb.Market                         1994*   1995Blow molding                   2734    2721Extrusion        Film, sheet            1568    1557        Monofilaments and          slit/spin film        265     265        Pipe and conduit       1069    1052        Wire and cable          106     106Injection molding              1887    1907All other                       271     256Total                          7900    7864Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightMODERN PLASTICS via NewsNetJanuary 1996   POLYCARBONATE          POLYCARBONATE*                             Million lb.Market                       1994    1995Appliances                     22      23Lighting                       26      31Electrical/electronics  (including business  equipment)                 123      134Glazing                      112      134Information storage           44       54Packaging                     15       18Recreation                    18       19Transportation                97      105Other                         49       41Total                        506      559a: Includes PC used in blends and alloys.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightMODERN PLASTICS via NewsNetJanuary 1996   POLYETHYLENE TEREPHTHALATE PATTERN OF CONSUMPTION       POLYETHYLENE TEREPHTHALATE         Pattern of consumptionMarket                        Million lb.                             1994     1995Blow molding   Soft-drink bottles         1122    1606   Custom bottles               77      88Extrusion   Film (excluding recording    88      99           film)   Ovenable trays               22      24Other (cosmetics,              117     119pharmaceuticals,alcoholic and sportsdrinks)Total                         1426    1936Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightMODERN PLASTICS via NewsNetJanuary 1996   POLYSTYRENE         POLYSTYRENE*                 Million lb.Market          1994+   1995Appliances**    587     591Automotive      13      13Furniture       232     232Housewares      401     406Packaging       1775    1779Refrigerators   209     211Shoe heels      37      37Toys    119     121Miscellaneous   750     751Total           4123   4141* Injection molding, including structural foam; extrusion, includingextruded foam sheet.+ Some figures revised in light of new information.** Does not include refrigerators; includes TV, radio, and phonographs.Tables give data for consumption in Western Europe, which includes allEuropean Union countries plus  Norway, and Switzerland.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightMODERN PLASTICS via NewsNetJanuary 1996   UNSATURATED POLYESTER             UNSATURATED POLYESTER                               Million lb.Market                        1994    1995Composites  SMC/BMC                      129     137  Filament winding              71      75  Pultrusion                    23      24  Hand-, spray lay-up          339     355  Resin transfer molding        21      23  Sheet, flat and      corrugated                74      77  Other                         93      98Total composites               750     789Non-reinforced resin  Molding powders               68      73  Surface coatings              33      35  Other                         35      36Total non-reinforced           136     144Grand Total                    886     933Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightMODERN PLASTICS via NewsNetJanuary 1996   POLYPROPYLENE           POLYPROPYLENE                            Million lb.Market                     1994    1995Extrusion Film, sheet              2251    2315 Raffia                   1014    970 Fiber                    1907    1830 Other extrusion           714    1036Injection molding         5052    4939Blow molding               154     154Total                   11,092  11,244Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightMODERN PLASTICS via NewsNetJanuary 1996   VINYLS            VINYLS                         Million lb.Market                  1994*   1995Rigid PVC  Bottles                960     957  Film and sheet        1254    1166  Injection molding       88      84  Pipe and conduit      3113    3036  Profile extrusion     2237    2068  Records                 20      18  Other                  310     242Total rigid             7982    7571Flexible PVC  Coated fabrics         495     462  Film and sheet         680     792  Flooring               526     572Tubing and other profiles497     462Wire and cable           900     935Other                    658     539Total flexible          3756    3762Other applications (adhesives, paper,  coating, etc.)          18      15Grand total           11,756  11,348Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightMODERN PLASTICS via NewsNetJanuary 1996   ACRYLIC         ACRYLICMarket            Million lb.                 1994    1995Cast sheet       205     207Extruded sheet   156     165Molding          205     200Dispersions for kitchen-, bathroom-wares   35      35Total            601     607Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightMODERN PLASTICS via NewsNetJanuary 1996   ACETALS            ACETALS                         Million lb.Market                  1994    1995Appliances/power tools  19      21Consumer products       31      32Electrical/electronics  23      25Industrial              36      38Plumbing, hardware       8       8Transportation          94      99Other                   51      53Total                  262     276Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightMODERN PLASTICS via NewsNetJanuary 1996   LOW-DENSITY POLYETHYLENE      LOW-DENSITY POLYETHYLENE                     Million lb.Market              1994    1995Film                1629    1698Paper treating       496     518Wire and cable       176     181Injection molding    212     203Pipe                  62      68Blow molding          93     101Other                461     485Domestic total      3129    3254Export               430     509Total               3559    3763Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightMODERN PLASTICS via NewsNetJanuary 1996   HIGH-DENSITY POLYETHYLENE        HIGH-DENSITY POLYETHYLENE                            Million lb.Market                     1994    1995Injection molding          273     280Blow molding               395     408Film                       807     807Flat yarn                  132     130Fiber                       84      82Pipe                       165     170Other                      313     315Domestic total            2169    2192Export                     311     448Total                     2480    2640Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightMODERN PLASTICS via NewsNetJanuary 1996   POLYETHYLENE TEREPHTHALATE     POLYETHYLENE TEREPHTHALATE                      Million lb.Market               1994    1995Injection             31      35Bottle               388     388Film/sheet           494     538Total                913     961Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightMODERN PLASTICS via NewsNetJanuary 1996   NYLON                NYLON                               Million lb.Market                        1994    1995Nylon 6        Automotive               53      51        Electrical/electronic    26      31        Machinery                22      24        Film/monofilament        68      71        Other                    15      18        Domestic total          184     195        Exports                  57      62        Total                   241     257Nylon 66        Automotive               68      64        Electrical/electronic    35      40        Machinery components     13      15        Other                    11      13        Domestic total          127     132        Exports                  26      31        Total                   153     163Nylon 11, 12        Hose/tube                 4       4        Coating                   2       2        Injection                 6       6        Adhesive                  2       4        Wire encapsulation/          other                   2       6        Total                    16      22Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightMODERN PLASTICS via NewsNetJanuary 1996   POLYPROPYLENE             POLYPROPYLENE                               Million lb.Market                        1994    1995Injection molding             2503    2714Film                           970     990Flat yarn                      150     159Fiber                          159     172Blow molding                    88      84Extrusion                      459     490Other                          258     430Domestic total                4587    5039Export                         359     562Total                         4956    5601Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightMODERN PLASTICS via NewsNetJanuary 1996   ACRYLIC            ACRYLIC                           Million lb.Market                    1994    1995Molding materials          119     119Board materials            161     168Domestic total             280     287Export                      73      71Total                      353     358Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightMODERN PLASTICS via NewsNetJanuary 1996   POLYSTYRENE           POLYSTYRENE                            Million lb.Market                     1994    1995Electrical and        industrial parts    305     289Packaging                   304     305Foam                        205     217Others                      194     202Domestic total             1008    1013Export                      192     196Total                      1200    1209Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightMODERN PLASTICS via NewsNetJanuary 1996   ABS               ABS                         Million lb.Market                  1994    1995Vehicles                 161     159Electrical appliances    251     254Office automation        equipment        256     276Miscellaneous (includes        toys, leisure goods,        construction)    269     293Other                     35      35Domestic total           972    1017Export                   344     366Total                   1316    1383Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightMODERN PLASTICS via NewsNetJanuary 1996   POLYACETAL           POLYACETAL                            Million lb.Market                     1994    1995Electric/electronic         88      93Transport                   57      60Machinery components        26      29Other                       35      40Domestic demand            207     222Export                      90      99Total                      296     321Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightMODERN PLASTICS via NewsNetJanuary 1996   POLYBUTYLENE TEREPHTHALATE        POLYBUTYLENE TEREPHTHALATE                               Million lb.Market                       1994    1995Automotive and vehicle        49      46Electric and electronic       62      64Other                         13      15Domestic total               124     125Export                        26      31Total                        150     156Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightMODERN PLASTICS via NewsNetJanuary 1996   POLYVINYL CHLORIDE        POLYVINYL CHLORIDE                            Million lb.Market                    1994    1995Rigid                     2123    2099Flexible                  1882    1211Wire, other                664     701Domestic total            4669    4011Export                     609     765Total                     5278    4776Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightMODERN PLASTICS via NewsNetJanuary 1996   POLYCARBONATE         POLYCARBONATE                            Million lb.Market                     1994    1995Electric/electronic         82      88Transport/machinery         44      49Sheet/film                  46      51Medical                     18      20Other                       35      40Domestic demand            225     248Export                     190     205Total                      415     453Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightMODERN PLASTICS via NewsNetJanuary 1996   MODULAR INJECTION MACHINES SUIT A WIDE RANGE OF REQUIREMENTSBy:EDITED BY MERLE R. SNYDER   The Allrounder S models have further extended the degree of modularityin Arburg's injection molding machines to incorporate units for all levelsof sophistication. The company has introduced two models, with platentiebar distances of 220 by 220 mm. and 270 by 270 mm. Both accept clampunits with clamp forces of either 17 or 28 ton, and injection units withEuromap designations 60 and 150.   These are all standard equipment. The 60 injection unit takes cylindermodules with diameters of 18, 22, and 25 mm., while the 150 version takes25-, 30-, and 35-mm barrels. The standard control is the Selogica, with a32-bit multiprocessor and a monochrome flat screen.   The 220S model with 17-ton clamp replaces Arburg's 170CMD, which willcease production in the second quarter (Arburg gave up production of largerCMD models two years ago). These two new machines go into series productionin February, and are part of what will eventually be a complete line.   Arburg says special attention was paid to floor-space requirements,noise emissions (maximum noise level is 72 dB) and ergonomic design. Forexample, mold-temperature control units can be fixed onto the frame of themachine and plugged into cooling water distribution channels integratedinto the machine base. Other peripherals can also be positioned in theimmediate vicinity of the machine. With high-end Selogica controls,multi-axis robots can be programmed directly from the machine controlpanel.   Electrical interfaces are integrated into the base, at front and rear.The water-cooled electrical cabinet on the front of the machine is dividedin two, with 23-v. electronics on one side and 230-v. electronics on theother.   There are four pump combinations on the hydraulics. The basic machinehas a servo valve for movements and pressure hold, a main pump, and amanual cooling water distributor. Users can opt for extended hydraulics toenable injection and clamp movements to run parallel, motor capacity can beincreased, and there are levels of regulation for the injection unit andfor cooling water distribution.   The clamp unit employs a double-piston system that is highly compact andalso provides good force distribution. The hydraulic valves are attacheddirectly to the rear face or (for core pullers) on top of the third platen,and oil is pumped straight to the pistons, without need for hoseattachments.   The central hydraulics unit at the rear of the machine isself-contained, and is easily fixed to the machine base. Replacement wherepossible of hoses by fixed metal pipes makes assembly easier and alsoincreases precision in use, since the pipes have fixed volumes. ArburgInc., P.O. Box 311178, Newington, CT 06131Photograph(s):Photograph: Clean lines, compact build characterize Allrounder S models.[Photo, Arburg]Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightMODERN PLASTICS via NewsNetJanuary 1996   DIE DESIGN CUTS FLOW HANGUPS   Extrusion dies of the LI series for multilumen profiles are made fromCarpenter Custom 630 (17-4 PH) stainless steel, heat-treated to a hardnessof 44 Rockwell C, providing excellent corrosion resistance for manypolymers, high strength, and surface finish durability. All wetted surfacesare polished to an 8-micro-in. mirror surface finish. Smooth, profiled, andpolished resin flow paths reduce areas of melt stagnation. The LI dies aredesigned with a melt thermocouple immersed into the polymer stream toprovide exact melt temperature; also, a flow-through mandrel to insure webconsistency. Profile configurations are available with up to eight lumensand are supplied in an in-line die arrangement. Push-out screws are builtinto all precision diameter interfaces to ease disassembly. Dual-threadbushing permits operator adjustment with 0.014 in. (0.36 mm.) travel/turnof the adjuster screw for high-precision profile centering capability.Davis-Standard, 1 Extrusion Dr., Pawcatuck, CT 06379Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightMODERN PLASTICS via NewsNetJanuary 1996   PRECISION CLAMPING   Clamping fixtures hold injection molded and thermoformed automotiveparts in place so they can be inspected by coordinate measuring machinesfor correct dimensions and fit with other components of assemblies. Theclamps employ a toggle action to create their holding force. A heavy-dutyversion can exert from 100 to 1000 lb. of force. De-Sta-Co, A DoverResources Co., P.O Box 2800, Troy, MI 48007Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightMODERN PLASTICS via NewsNetJanuary 1996   TWIN-SHEET UNIT MAKES AUTO PARTS   TWIN-SHEET UNIT MAKES AUTO parts. The Model R-244 T/S rotarythermoformer, believed by the builder to be among the world's largest, hasbeen delivered to Thermoform Plastics in White Bear Lake, MN. Designed tomake single unit parts for the automotive industry, the unit can produce10- by 14-ft. components up to 0.5 in. thick with 50-in. draw. Measuring 38ft. high by 46 ft. across, the machine has a rotary wheel more than 40 ft.in diameter. Maximum tool weight is 9000 lb. top and bottom. Maximum drawis 50 in., and the electric motor turns the rotary wheel once every 7 sec.Other features include four 1000-gal. vacuum tanks, 45-in. sheet-sagclearance, 250-ton pressure station, hydraulic cylinder platens, and 24-in.I-beam construction. Platen weight is 17,000 lb. The machine has 1156individual ceramic elements in each of its ovens to control temperature inboth the pre-heat and final heating processes. Brown Machine Div., JohnBrown Plastics Machinery, 330 North Ross Street, P.O. Box 434, Beaverton,MI 48612Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightMODERN PLASTICS via NewsNetJanuary 1996   GRAVIMETRIC BLENDER   GRAVIMETRIC BLENDER. Model 400 VME-II combines the economy of slide-gatemetering with an accuracy that reportedly rivals auger metering. Its double``V'' slide gate design gives consistent material flow through thedischarge opening even when ingredient ratios are as low as 1%. This allowsthe computer to determine the amount of material falling between themetering device and the weigh hopper. To facilitate fast changeover, theunit has easily removable weigh hopper, slide gate and auger units andlarge clean-out doors. Menu-driven format simplifies operation. A movablecontrol panel stores up to 99 recipes, inventories all material, andcalculates average use rate. HydReclaim Corp., 3145 Copper Avenue, Fenton,MI 48430Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightMODERN PLASTICS via NewsNetJanuary 1996   COLOR MATCHING IS FAST   COLOR MATCHING IS FAST. Plastic-Master color-formulating software usesnine colorant levels in a data file and several resin types from uniformcalibration to provide accurate readings. It comes with a built-indata-transfer function that enables data to be collected at remotelocations and transferred back to a color lab. X-Rite also offersColor-Mail to provide transfer and response of color data from X-Riteequipment to remote locations. It works through AT&Ts EasyLink network,replacing earlier methods which limited electronic data transfer to localarea network (LAN) communications or other cost and other cost andtime-intensive means. X-Rite, 3100 44th Street, S.W., Grandville, MI 49418Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightMODERN PLASTICS via NewsNetJanuary 1996   TWO-MATERIAL MACHINE   TWO-MATERIAL MACHINE. The VL2000 coinjection molding machine is thelargest of its kind ever shipped by Milacron. Two injection units feed intoa manifold that directs and meters the two different melts. Injectioncapacity of each unit is 232 oz. Either or both of the injection units canbe backed out of the manifold for independent purging. The manifold canalso be independently purged. Both the units and the entire molding processare integrally controlled by the Milacron Camac 486 Plus control system. Inoperation, a pin in the manifold moves to open path A, path B, or bothpaths together. The control system integrates simultaneous operation of thetwo injection units. In most cases conventional molds can be used with nomodification. The operation is essentially an encapsulation process.Separate core and skin layers can be molded. The skin layer of virgin,transparent, or other resin types is injected first. Next, the core resinfollows the skin resin, pushing the skin out in front of it. The core resincan consist of regrind, post-consumer reclaim, or a structural material. Asmall finishing amount of skin resin is injected after the core to seal thegate and complete the encapsulation. Cincinnati Milacron, 4165 HalfacreRoad, Batavia, OH 45103Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightMODERN PLASTICS via NewsNetJanuary 1996   VERSATILE STAMPING SYSTEMS ENHANCE USER CAPABILITIESBy:Martin O'Neill, with Jennifer Gordon   The growing sophistication of control systems on hot-stamping machinesimproves the accuracy and versatility of the process. The use ofmicro-processor-based systems assures reliable digital control of keyfunctions. This allows for more consistent decorating, improvedtrouble-shooting, and less downtime. Touch-button access on many units alsodisplays messages of machine functions.   20 Examples include equipment from Acromark, Berkeley Heights, NJ, thatfocuses on exterior marking of cylindrical and tapered parts, and featuresimproved marking speed, repeatability and safety. Its line of direct-actingpresses ranges from 1/2 to 20-ton force, with die areas from 4 in. by 5 in.to 24 in. by 36 in. Model 730RR variants include automatic loading andunloading, plus double-sided versions with double silicone rollers toincrease output speed to close to 60 parts/min. Applications include foilor preprinted heat transfer decoration of cosmetics containers, canisters,and bracelets.   Cassco Machines, Don Mills, ON, Canada, offers a system controller asstandard, allowing operation with turntables, slide tables, peripheralroll-on attachments, foil strip delays, and pick-and-place units. Controlextends to a dual-speed heat-transfer indexing system for multi-color imageapplication in a single operation. High-speed, automated systems range inuse from a 1/4-ton hand-fed application to an 18-ton automated factorypress.   Kensol/Franklin Hot Stamping Machines, Norwood, MA, assembleshot-stamping machines and makes foils, dies, and tooling at three U.S.facilities. The KF Model 500 1/2-ton air-operated press features auser-friendly microprocessor control system, micrometer depth-stop control,and dual-hardened steel head guides, in ball bearings, suitable forsilicone rubber dies and rugged enough to stamp with metal engraved dies.   Meanwhile, Air Hydraulics Decorating Systems, St. Louis, MO, offers astandard line of heat-transfer and foil machinery including horizontal andvertical roll-ons. The horizontal Accu-Roll is used to apply large heattransfers while eliminating air entrapment and foil wrinkling. Standardfeatures include a non-contact infrared temperature sensor, overheatingprotection circuit, and variable carriage speed up to 4 in./sec. A coaxialair/hydraulic cylinder carriage drive with left to right stroke motionsupplies stroke lengths ranging from 15 to 27 in.   Baier, Rudersberg, Germany, makes both direct-imprint hot stampingequipment and label-stamping with die-cutting machines for labelproduction. The company's Geba 1/PPP is adapted to the plastics-processingindustry, with three heads mounted at different angles to stamp variousparts in one operation.   Cosmetics containers and closures demand refined, fashionable colors,and eye-catching matte or high-gloss effects to produce an elegant imageand add value to products. Baier developed its new Geba 60 model forhot-stamping round, oval, and conical shapes. Advantages include fasttooling changeover for dies and holders, and economic small-runcapabilities. For larger quantities, the machine can be equipped with amagazine feed system. Capabilities include line or motif stamping, or bothcombined.Equipment is specialized to meet diverse needs   Because of its cost advantage and durability, hot-stamping isincreasingly used for storage boxes. Hydraulic and hydro-pneumatic machinesare most suited to this application. Baier's model Geba 4/HY has a stampingpressure of 15 tons. The movement of the plunger is dependent not ondistance, but on pressure, allowing differences in material thickness to beovercome. Throat and insertion height allow the processing of voluminousparts.   Kurz, Furth, Germany, has an in-mold decoration (IMD) technique,combining injection and hot-stamping of multi-dimensional, flat, or curvedthermoplastics parts for automotive components, cosmetics containers,electronic equipment casings, domestic appliances, watch faces, pictureframes, door blinds, and nameplates. Foils are fed through a custom-builtinjection molding tool.   During resin injection, pressure and heat from the material causerelease of lacquer layers from the polyester carrier, which bond to thepart providing good chemical and scratch resistance. The thickness of thepolyester carrier depends on decoration depth, part size, injectionposition point, and the material being processed. The spent polyester iswound off. Kurz claims this technique reduces costs by 10 to 50%.   20 Maple Roll Leaf Co. Ltd., Windsor, ON, Canada, manufacturespigmented stampings for use in automotive, appliance, cosmetic, orpharmaceutical industries. The company says bright colors can be applied todark substrates.   Stamp-Rite, Lansing, MI, manufactures steel hot-stamping dies for longruns. Dies can be surface ground several times with no measurable change inthe stroke of characters. The manufacturing process forms raised characterson the die while it is in the hardened condition, reducing distortion orshrinkage possibilities.   Transfer Print Foils, Inc., East Brunswick, NJ, claims to provide a wideselection of hot-stamping foils and laminates for decorating plastics.Customization of printed foils is available for such items as homefurnishings, profiles, and appliances. Decorated laminates in roll or sheetstock are 2-ply and 3-ply, from 0.020 gage to 0.187 gage. The company sayslaminates are available on ABS, PVC, PC, styrene and acrylic.   United Silicone, Lancaster, NY, provides hot-stamping systems, tooling,and services. The 2-1/2-ton Model US 25 applies foil or heat transfers toflat or slightly flat crowned surfaces, and up to 90 deg. of a cylindricalpart's circumference. The US 25's foil-advance system iselectric-motor-driven and produces constant pulling torque for smoothadvance. The system features a foil-tensioning arm, which automaticallyremoves slack from the foil to eliminate wrinkling. Adjustable foil guidebars and guide rings provide flexibility and ease of adjustment without anytools.Photograph(s):Photograph: Packaging, trophies, and other items are decorated withmetallic and holographic hot stamping foils. [Photo, TPF]Photograph: Cassco Machines offers press-side application of multicolorimages to a variety of parts.Photograph: Acromark's model 730RR uses externally heated roller.Photograph: United Silicone provides US 25 model with DSP controller.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightMODERN PLASTICS via NewsNetJanuary 1996   HYDROGEN FLUORIDE IS CUT FROM COMPOUNDING PROCESSACID SCAVENGER ADDITIVES NUKE (NEUTRALIZE) NOXIOUS FUMESBy:GAIL S. NONNEMACHER AND DR. STEPHEN I. FOSTEREdited by William A. Kaplan   Hydrogen fluoride earns the highest hazard rating given by the U.S.Occupational Safety and Health Administration for dangerous materials inthe workplace. Even in low concentrations its effects can still causesignificant health problems. We have found that HF can be released frompolytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) micropowders during compounding, and reachimpermissible levels capable of causing physical injury to workers. The useof acid scavengers has been found to be highly effective in eliminating thepresence of this hazardous substance.20 While studying the compounding of micronized PTFE (also termedmicropowders) in general-purpose polystyrene (GPPS), we encountered anacrid odor. Although ventilation was used to mitigate the odor, itpersisted, especially in the vapor space of confined packages of themicropowder and the concentrate. Our micropowder supplier thought the odororiginated from residual mineral oil used as a lubricant in its processingoperation and could be controlled by ventilation. This explanation did notsatisfy us and we discovered, surprisingly, the odor was HF. Although HFcan be liberated when PTFE decomposes at approximately 600 degrees F., thisis well above the processing temperature used in our study.20 During the next compounding run, measurements at the vent port and dieface of the extruder as well as in the vapor space of the gaylords showedHF concentrations well above 20 p.p.m. HF was also detected in the extruderhoppers, which fed the concentrate for subsequent processing. Theconcentration of HF in air was measured using a Sensidyne Model 800 pumpwith hydrogen fluoride detector tubes. The estimates of HF concentrationdepend on the degree of color change in the detector tube and the amount ofair drawn through the tube, and can be used to measure HF from 0.25 to 50p.p.m. However, no HF could be detected outside the gaylords or the plasticliner, or at a distance of greater than 4 ft. from the compoundingextruder.   Micronized PTFE is normally prepared from virgin or scrap PTFE resin ofeither the fine powder or granular variety. In producing micronized powder,the PTFE is first coarsely ground and is then subjected to either electronor gamma irradiation to reduce the molecular weight of the polymer. Inlowering the molecular weight, the PTFE becomes more crystalline; hence,friable and grindable. The particle size can then be further reduced toapproximately 1 micron by air-impact grinding.MW reduction process is a factor   This processing sequence was followed by our micropowder supplier. Fromdiscussions with PTFE industry experts, we learned that during theirradiation process, the molecular weight of the PTFE is significantlyreduced from the 2- to 5-million range to approximately 200,000. This isaccomplished by breaking the carbon-carbon bond along the PTFE chains, aprocess which creates many free radical species where the chains areterminated. These reactive free radicals can combine with oxygen and/orwater from the air to form stable organic acids and acid fluorides. Theacid fluorides can further react with water to form organic acids,liberating HF gas. Higher temperatures accelerate the liberation of HF.Thus, when the micropowder is compounded, HF is liberated and slowlydiffuses out of the concentrate.20 For example, one sample of the concentrate made during our study thatcontained 20% PTFE was analyzed to determine the amount of hydrolyziblefluoride, i.e., potentially releasable HF. The results indicate that thepellets contained 5 p.p.m. hydrolyzible fluoride, which was assumed to beavailable as HF. Assuming that a gaylord contains 1000 lb. of 20%concentrate and that HF is an ideal gas, we calculated that, if all the HFwere instantaneously released, about 3000 p.p.m. could be found in thevapor space of the gaylord. This calculation indicated that while theamount of releasable HF in the pellet was small, there is enoughhydrolyzible fluoride in the concentrate to account for the HF measured inthe vapor space of the gaylords. The difference between the calculated andactual amounts of HF in a gaylord is probably due to diffusion-limitedrelease of HF from the pellets.20 We conjectured that HF generation during compounding was aggravateddue to the high melt temperatures that were employed, which ranged from 500to 550 degrees F. Reduction of heating setpoints and throughput yielded alower melt temperature of 490 degrees F., but did not significantly impactthe generation of HF. We also hypothesized that pre-baking the PTFEmicropowder prior to compounding might reduce or remove much of the HF.Several types of baked and unbaked, high and low irradiation PTFE wereobtained from our micropowder supplier and were compounded using our normalextrusion temperatures, i.e., 500 to 550 degrees F. However, the level ofHF generated from the baked and unbaked samples was far in excess ofindustrial hygiene limits.Potential scavengers selected   Based on the chemistry involved and our calculations indicating that theconcentration of HF in the pellets was exceedingly small, the use of anacid scavenger represented a realistic approach to solving this problem.Similarly, the suspected role of free radical chemistry in the productionof HF suggested that antioxidants, which scavenge free radicals, might alsobe useful in solving this problem.20 Acid scavenger candidates were: calcium stearate powders, DHT-4A (Mgsubscript 4.5 Al sbuscript 2 (OH) subscript 13 CO subscript3 .3 .5 Hsubscript 2 O), and magnesium oxide powder. The calcium stearate andmagnesium oxide were pre-compounded into GPPS resin. Irganox B225 (fromCiba-Geigy), an anti-oxidant, was also investigated, since it might reactwith the PTFE chain ends to form a stable, non-reactive chain.20 Blends of the 20% PTFE/80% GPPS concentrate and the potentialscavengers were re-compounded using typical operating conditions. (Table 1)Potential scavengers were initially evaluated at loadings of 1% to provideexcess scavenger based on the measured level of hydrolyzible fluoride andthe reaction stoichiometry. The residual HF level was measured bycollecting a 7- to 10-lb. sample of the concentrate in a 60-liter PE bag,sealing the bag for five minutes, and then measuring the HF evolved in theair space. Upon discovery of a scavenger that resulted in a non-detectablelevel of HF, the level of scavenger was halved and the experiment wasrepeated. The lowest scavenger level investigated was 0.20%. (Table 2)   Additional evaluation of successful scavengers considered theirhydroscopic nature and the expected likelihood to agglomerate. Also, toconfirm that enough scavenger remained to prevent HF formation duringadditional processing steps, the preferred acid scavenger was initiallycompounded at a level of 0.25% into the concentrate and the resultingconcentrate was re-compounded two times.   Calcium stearate, DHT-4A, and magnesium oxide were determined to beeffective acid scavengers at 0.25 weight percent in the production of 20%PTFE in GPPS concentrate. Irganox B225 was not effective at the levelstested. Based on these results, calcium stearate was selected as the leasthydroscopic and having the smallest probability of agglomeration due to itslower melting temperature and fine particle size. Re-compounding thismaterial two times produced no detectable HF after subsequent passes. Thus,calcium stearate was incorporated into the production of the concentrate atour contract compounder. No HF could be detected in the concentrateproduced, in sealed containers of the concentrate, or in any area of thefacility. Industrial hygiene monitoring has since been routinely conductedand has failed to detect any HF.20 It is reasonable to assume that the calcium stearate reacts with theHF or HF-precursor to produce calcium fluoride (CaF2) and stearic acid.Both of these reaction products are considered innocuous materials from anindustrial hygiene and reactivity standpoint, particularly at these lowconcentrations. Stearic acid is known to act as a processing aid but atthese low levels it did not appear to impact extrusion conditions.   This information may be useful to other processors, but it is importantto verify that acid scavengers will work in a particular system bymonitoring the level of HF in various areas.Table 1: Operating conditionsScrew, r.p.m.                   400Torque, %                        80Extruder pressure, p.s.i.g.     240Extruder zone   Extruder temperature, Degrees FZone 1              331Zone 2              376Zone 3              375Zone 4              375Zone 5              375       Table 2: Scavenger experiment resultsPotential          Weight,    HF detected,    Pumpscavenger            %         p.p.m.        strokes*Control (none)     0.00          2             0.5                   0.00       less 20          1Calciumstearate 15F       1.00          0             4                   0.50          0             4                   0.25          0             4Calciumstearate           0.25          0             4Magnesiumoxide              0.25          0             4DHT-4A             0.50          0             4                   0.25          0             4Irganox B225       0.20        less 15             1* Sensidyne HF detector tubes are designed to be used with either 4 or 7pump strokes. At high concentrations, fewer pump strokes were used andextrapolation of the HF concentration was based on volume pulled throughthe tube.About the Author(s):Ms. Nonnemacher, Project Leader, The Dow Chemical Company, P.O. Box 515,Granville, OH 43023-0515; Dr. Foster, Health and Safety Specialist, TheOhio State University, Columbus, OH.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightMODERN PLASTICS via NewsNetJanuary 1996   RELATIVE STABILITY IN SUPPLY AND PRICING IS PROJECTED FOR MARKETBy:Joseph A. Grande   After a blockbuster 1994, demand for polystyrene eased to what many termrealistic levels in 1995. The market took off early in the year but fizzledby mid-summer, as inventories soared, prices rose before settling in thefourth quarter, and demand softened.   In North America, demand dropped slightly. U.S. production of PSdeclined by 0.9%, according to the Society of the Plastics Industry, whilesales and captive use were off by 2.6% over 1994.   Western Europe and Japan were relatively flat as well. A bright spot inEurope was expandable PS, which posted a 4% gain from demand for buildinginsulation in eastern Germany.   The Far East enjoyed strong growth despite tight import restrictions inChina.   Throughout the decade, PS should grow by 3 to 4% annually, says EdwardGlatzer, principal with consultant Chem Systems Inc., Tarrytown, NY, whichrecently completed a study of the styrenics business. Glatzer said themodest gains are attributed to more mature markets in North America andEurope and the loss of export business in Japan to offshore companies.Surging economies in the Far East, particularly China and India, will yielddouble-digit growth in those areas.   Suppliers see ample availability of feedstocks this year. Costs,moreover, seem to have settled. Though prices rose through the summer inNorth America and Europe, they have dropped 20 to 25%. Fewer imports intoChina forced prices in the Far East to drop during the summer, says KarlFoerster, PS market manager for BASF, Ludwigshafen, Germany.   Market-wise, in the U.S., observers agree that polystyrene is under lesspressure for material substitution. ``The easy substitutions bypolypropylene have been done; it's a lot slower than 3 or 4 years ago,''said Marvin Sauers, PS business manager for Amoco Polymers, Alpharetta,GA.   In Europe, some volatility is possible, particularly in packagingapplications, because of the price gap between PP and PS (DM 0.90 to 1.20for PP versus DM 1.60 for PS), says Bruno Barbet, product manager for DowEurope, Horgen, Switzerland.   In North America and Europe, high-impact PS continues to penetrate thebusiness equipment market. As a less costly alternative to lower ABS andPC/ABS, polystyrene finds growing use in keyboards, monitors, and housingsdue to lower mechanical and thermal requirements.   In 1995, polystyrene completed its virtual replacement of ABS in 3.5-in.micro floppy disks, according to Richard Marchetti, director of marketdevelopment for Huntsman Chemical Co., Chesapeake, VA.   Oriented PS, meanwhile, is making strides in rigid food packaging.Grades with lower residual monomer don't affect the taste of packagedgoods.   BASF, Mt. Olive, NJ, will unveil this year high-impact,ultraviolet-light-stable grades that compete with PC/ABS in computerhousings. Under development are high-impact, high-gloss specialty gradeswith 20% better melt flow, equivalent gloss, and improved impact comparedto the company's workhorse grade ES 9524. The materials would compete withmedium-impact ABS in small appliances and other consumer durables.   There's not much expansion planned in the West this year, though BASF isadding capacity in Mexico and the U.S., and Novacor, Leominster, MA, isstarting up 70 million lb. in Springfield, MA.   Far East suppliers continue to build capacity, however, in response tostrong demand.   One project made Zhanjiang Zhongmei Chemical Industries Co., GuangdongProvince, China's largest PS producer, when it added a second88-million-lb./yr. line last year. The company is a Sino-American jointventure, 70% owned by American Pacific Enterprises Group, Los Angeles, CA.               POLYSYTRENE      Select nameplate capacities                    Million lb.                      (1995)BASF                   2506Dow Chemical           2285Huntsman               1757Elf Atochem            1014Chi Mei                 882Asahi Chemical          845Fina                    775Novacor                 708Source: Chem Systems Inc., Tarrytown, NYPhotograph(s):Photograph: PS has made strong penetration into the micro floppy diskettemarket. [Photo, Dow Plastics]Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightMODERN PLASTICS via NewsNetJanuary 1996   BIODEGRADABLE POLYMERS OFFER TAILORED RATES OF DEGRADATIONBy:EDITED BY ROBERT D. LEAVERSUCH   A number of biodegradable polymers have been developed that provideprecision-controlled degradation. These polymers are considered to be aviable approach to plastics waste disposal in selected end-uses. Theyinclude:   -- Polyester amide is said to compost without residue at a ratecomparable to lettuce leaves. The semi-crystalline yet translucent materialresists solvents and light, has a melting point of 125C., and works in filmand fiber extrusion, and molding. Potential applications are garbage bags,disposable flower pots, and mulch sheet. Bayer AG, Bayerwerk, D-51368,Leverkusen, Germany   -- Starch-based thermoplastic made from cereal feedstocks hasantistatic properties. The basic structure is comprised of copolyesters. Aplasticizer is blended on-line with the copolyester to form an antistaticbiodegradable material. Household and packaging films display toughness andgood elongation at break. BASF, Carl-Bosche Straabe 38, D-67056Ludwigshafen, Germany   -- Polyhydroxybutyrate (PHB) stays flexible from sub-zero to 130C.temperatures, and biodegrades in a few months. The thermoplastic polyesteris a joint development of Biomer (a manufacturer of biodegradables) and PCDPolymere, the European polyolefin supplier. Injection molding grades withproperties comparable to PS and PP run on conventional equipment. machines.PCD Polymere, Danubiastrabe 21-25, A-2323, Schwechat-Mannsworth, Germany   -- Aliphatic polyester works in PE, PP, and PS. Bionolle processes onconventional processing equipment at 140 to 260 degrees C., in blown andextruded films, foams, and injection molded products. Application areas arepaper lamination, trash bags, diapers, and cosmetic and beverage bottles.Showa Highpolymer Co. Ltd., Tokyo, Japan   -- Aliphatic polyester that biodegrades in soil as well as fresh andocean water areas, decomposes to water and carbon dioxide. Skygreen's rateof degradation depends on grade, product shape, and level ofmicrobiological activity. Typically, degradation of a 40-mil-thick filmtakes two months. Odorless material has properties similar to those of PEand PP and can be readily processed on conventional equipment. SunkyongIndustries Ltd., Kukdong Bldg., Choogmuro, Jung-Gu, Seoul 100-705, SouthKoreaPhotograph(s):Photograph: (BEFORE) (AFTER 10 DAYS) Polyester amide is composted withoutleaving residues. Shown here: film after contact with bacteria for 10 days.[Photo, Bayer AG]Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightMODERN PLASTICS via NewsNetJanuary 1996   PBT MAKES A CLEAN SWEEP   Thermoplastic polyesters allow the redesign of vacuum cleaner motors bythe Electrolux Group, Luton, U.K., yielding cost-performance benefits. Themotor's one-component, input air guide is molded from polybutyleneterephthalate, providing a smooth surface (for reduced turbulence) andparts consolidation. The part had been a 10-component, stamped-metalsystem. The air guide snapfits to a PET (Rynite 530) housing, eliminatingmechanical attachments. System cost is cut by less materials use andsimplified manufacturing. DuPont Engineering Polymers, P.O. Box 80713,Wilmington, DE 19880-0173Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightMODERN PLASTICS via NewsNetJanuary 1996   PRICING FORECASTBy:COMPILED BY PHILLIP TOWNSEND ASSOCIATES, INC.Illustration(s):Illustration: Graph: Polypropylene HomopolymerTable: Pricing pressures (This table is not available electronically.Please see January 1996 issue.)Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightMODERN PLASTICS via NewsNetJanuary 1996   FILM-GRADE HDPE   FILM-GRADE HDPE makes blown bag and sack-liner films with an excellentbalance of strength, stiffness and processability. Petrothene LP 5103-00, a0.949-g./cc. density material, provides excellent drawdown and bubblestability, and much-reduced die buildup. Intended markets are merchandisebags, barrier sheet and multi-wall sack liners. The 0.33-g./10-min. meltindex material offers film properties that include a 1% secant modulus of112,000 p.s.i. (MD) and 450% elongation at break (MD). Quantum ChemicalCo., P.O. Box 429550, Cincinnati, OH 45249Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightMODERN PLASTICS via NewsNetJanuary 1996   POLYETHERIMIDE RESINS   POLYETHERIMIDE RESINS are said to improve processability and to optimizethe balance of heat and impact properties. Ultem HTX is targeted atreplacing stainless steel or high-performance polymers in medical and foodservice markets. Notched Izod impact strength is 500% higher than astandard polyetherimide grade. The new grade also features improvedchemical resistance for medically sterilizable applications. Ultem ATX is anext-generation PEI/PC blend providing high impact strength, intermediatethermals, and reduced cost. Unreinforced, the heat-distortion temperatureis 165 degrees C to 190 degrees C. Resin is for food-service applications(microwaveable cookware, utensils), and also has potential in automotiveheadlamp reflectors (it can be metallized without costly basecoatprocedures). GE Plastics, One Plastics Ave., Pittsfield, MA 01201Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightMODERN PLASTICS via NewsNetJanuary 1996   COPOLYMER   COPOLYMER improves processing capability of a conventionalstyrene-butadiene resin by 15 to 25% when used in injection molding.K-Resin BK10 has a nominal flow rate of 15 g./cc., which encourages use inthin-walling parts, or cycle time reduction. Other benefits are highsurface gloss, good stiffness and excellent clarity. Potential is in moldedcontainers, bottles, medical moldings, overcaps and toys. Phillips ChemicalCo., 2625 Bay Area Blvd., Houston, TX 77058Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightMODERN PLASTICS via NewsNetJanuary 1996   WEATHERABLE PC   WEATHERABLE PC is key to a decorative Christmas lawn display molding byIndustrial Molding Corp., Lubbock, TX. Demands on the material, Calibre303-15, are severe: it must survive harsh weather, allow molding-in ofsecure sockets (for attached lights), and show UV stability, toughness andclarity. Color, molded frames accent light, even in daytime. Dow Plastics,P.O. Box 1206, Midland, MI 48641Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightMODERN PLASTICS via NewsNetJanuary 1996   FLEXIBLE PVC   FLEXIBLE PVC is the target matrix for a group of environment-friendly,lead- and cadmium-free heat stabilizers. To replace leads in wire andcable, supplier offers grades for 60 to 75C. and 90 to 105C. dryinsulation, and for plenum cable roles. Replacements for cadmium-containingstabilizers are Therm-Check 6260 and 6264. These high- temperaturestabilizers are for jacketing and footwear. Grade 6260 offers premium earlycolor and long-term dynamic stability. Finally, a brace of liquidbarium-zincs is for extrusion and molding (e.g., wire jacketing, stairtread, and automotive trim). Grade 152 is optimized for high-clarity andhigh-shear applications. Grade 154 is for opaque applications requiringearly color hold (e.g., tape films, wire jacketing, and wallpaper). FerroCorp., 1000 Lakeside Ave., Cleveland, OH 44114Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightMODERN PLASTICS via NewsNetJanuary 1996   PEARLESCENT PIGMENTS   PEARLESCENT PIGMENTS are high-purity, high-intensity products forinjection molding, blow molding, and extrusion. Mearlin Dynacolor lustergrades exhibit two-color play: at the specular angle, an interference coloris seen; at the flop angle, the absorption color becomes visible. Materialsalso offer production benefits, including dispersion ease. Ratio ofcolorant to pearl pigment remains constant. Mearl Corp., 41 E. 42 St., NewYork, NY 10017Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List WT02-B35-6IA095-001021-B004-152http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/ch18.html 205.156.212.5 19970121223705 text/html 54344HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Tuesday, 21-Jan-97 22:35:05 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:41:58 GMTContent-length: 54159Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ch18.html Sample Issue Copyright PESTICIDE & TOXIC CHEMICAL NEWS via NewsNet January 3, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES THE GOVERNMENT SHUTDOWN (126 words) DELANEY CLAUSE (54 words) A CHEMICAL SPILL (87 words) UNKNOWN ENVIRONMENTAL HAZARDS (111 words) MONSANTO's ROUNDUP (58 words) TRICHLORFON, AN ORGANOPHOSPHORUS INSECTICIDE, (139 words) METHYL BROMIDE AND PENTACHLOROPHENOL STUDIES (86 words) EPA FACING MANDAMUS WRIT REQUEST ON SEWER GROUT (455 words) INDUSTRY CALLS PROPOSED WPS DECONTAMINATION CHANGES TOO COSTLY (598 words) EPA, HEALTH CARE PRODUCTS ARGUE OVER TIMING ISSUES (524 words) EPA NOTICE LISTS SPECIFIC, CRISIS AND QUARANTINE EXEMPTION ACTIVITY (2458 words) INDUSTRY, ENVIRONMENTAL GROUPS DISAGREE ON IMPACT OF TAKINGS BILL (766 words) SORGHUM PRODUCERS GROUP CHALLENGES GRANULAR CARBOFURAN CANCELLATION (398 words) BIOLOGICAL PEST CONTROL AGENTS MINOR-USE PROGRAM SOUGHT (1725 words) CopyrightPESTICIDE & TOXIC CHEMICAL NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996THE GOVERNMENT SHUTDOWN THE GOVERNMENT SHUTDOWN dragged on this week, with congressional and White House negotiators still exchanging philosophical barbs on Wednesday, Jan. 3, but offering no real retreat from hard-line positions for public view.  The Wall Street Journal summarized:  "Success is not at hand."  The EPA parking lot was at least half full, however, begging the question as to whether a plethora of regulations and proposals would drop into the hopper once the government reopens.  More than a handful of "non-essential" workers were sneaking into their offices anyway.  Unlike past involuntary "furloughs," questions were raised as to whether employees would get their paychecks, half a paycheck or none at all.  The questions were even more pressing for government contractors, who were looking at the possibility of layoffs.  Back to Headline List CopyrightPESTICIDE & TOXIC CHEMICAL NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996DELANEY CLAUSE DELANEY CLAUSE decisions by EPA's OPPTS were among the key matters left hanging by the government shutdown.  EPA must decide whether to cancel some pesticide tolerances because of the anti-cancer provision of the law and whether to apply the clause to dried agricultural products under a definition which considers drying to be "processing."Back to Headline List CopyrightPESTICIDE & TOXIC CHEMICAL NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996A CHEMICAL SPILL A CHEMICAL SPILL in Bogalusa, La., in October is attracting dozens of lawyers, according to a Jan. 2 Fox-TV presentation "A Current Affair," with 50 cases already filed.  Prominently featured was Johnnie Cochran of O.J. Simpson case notoriety, who accused EPA and the community of negligence in their emergency plan and said "somebody is going to be held responsible" (See Dec. 6, Page 2).  Gaylord Chemical Corp., the company involved in the freight train spill of nitrogen tetraoxide, was said to be holding transportation officials responsible.Back to Headline List CopyrightPESTICIDE & TOXIC CHEMICAL NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996UNKNOWN ENVIRONMENTAL HAZARDS UNKNOWN ENVIRONMENTAL HAZARDS are unlikely to be the cause of elevated breast cancer mortality rates in the Northeast, two Maryland epidemiologists wrote in the Dec. 20 Journal of the National Cancer Institute.  "Further reassurance is provided by the near absence of regional differences among younger women, plus the convergence of breast cancer rates across the country over time," wrote William Blot and Joseph McLaughlin of the International Epidemiology Institute in Rockville, Md.  Their conclusion was based on an NCI statistical analysis of the regional distribution of breast cancer mortality in 1987.  More research is needed to determine the role of genetic and/or environmental factors in breast cancer development, they said.Back to Headline List CopyrightPESTICIDE & TOXIC CHEMICAL NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996MONSANTO's ROUNDUP MONSANTO's ROUNDUP was noted in the Jan. 2 Wall Street Journal as having continued success and even dominance, despite the growth of competition.  The journal said Monsanto plans to introduce "Roundup-ready" soybean seeds for plants resistant to the herbicide during the 1996 spring planting season.  It was also noted that the firm aggressively cut prices during 1995.Back to Headline List CopyrightPESTICIDE & TOXIC CHEMICAL NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996TRICHLORFON, AN ORGANOPHOSPHORUS INSECTICIDE, TRICHLORFON, AN ORGANOPHOSPHORUS INSECTICIDE, has been suggested as the cause of such congenital abnormalities as Down's Syndrome among a small Hungarian population who ate fish contaminated with the substance in the late 1980s, said researcher Andrew Czetzel of the World Health Organization in a letter to the editor in the January 1996 issue of Epidemiology.  According to Czetzel, of 15 births in a small village in Hungary in 1989-90, 11, or 73%, were affected by congenital abnormalities.  Several of the women who gave birth had consumed fish contaminated with 100 mg per kg of dichlorvos, which is slowly released in fish treated with trichlorfon, he said.  In the study, researchers ruled out teratologic factors, familial inheritance and consanguinity.  Czetzel added that the cluster ceased when the chemical treatment of farmed fish with trichlorfon was banned in March 1991.Back to Headline List CopyrightPESTICIDE & TOXIC CHEMICAL NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996METHYL BROMIDE AND PENTACHLOROPHENOL STUDIES METHYL BROMIDE AND PENTACHLOROPHENOL STUDIES by the California EPA Department of Pesticide Regulation are not yet complete, and giving manufacturers additional time to complete them "is a question of process and fairness, not a health and safety issue," said department director James Wells.  Wells said that California Gov. Pete Wilson Dec. 29 called a special legislative session to consider legislation in the state that would allow DPR to grant manufacturers of the two pesticides additional time to complete the last of several required toxicology studies. Back to Headline List CopyrightPESTICIDE & TOXIC CHEMICAL NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996EPA FACING MANDAMUS WRIT REQUEST ON SEWER GROUTEPA is faced with an inability to answer as the U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia considers a request for a writ of mandamus to compel an agency response on its proposed ban of acrylamide sewer grout (See Oct. 25, Page 9).The court on Dec. 14 upheld a mandamus request from the National Association of Sewer Service Companies, ordering an EPA response within 21 days to a NASSCO demand for an EPA answer.  EPA then filed a request for additional time, citing the furlough imposed by the government's budget impasse.NASSCO attorneys Lynn Bergeson and Lisa Campbell opposed the extension in a Dec. 22 briefing that traced the chronology of the proposal and argued that EPA has had plenty of time.  Among the statements by the attorneys for Weinberg, Bergeson & Neuman were:-- "EPA issued the proposed rule at issue over four years ago.  The proposed rule seeks to abate human health risks that, despite the passage of time, EPA continues to characterize as 'unreasonable.'  These human health risks are apparently not unreasonable enough for EPA to take action, however.-- "The Office of Management and Budget rejected the draft final rule and returned it to EPA on Oct. 18, 1995.  EPA informed NASSCO on Oct. 30, 1995, that it would not be withdrawing the rule by the end of October, nor would EPA commit to withdrawing the rule at any time in the future.  Within 24 hours of being so advised, NASSCO submitted the petition on Nov. 1, 1995.-- "Respondent (EPA) was served with the petition by first class mail on Nov. 1, 1995, a full seven weeks ago.  Counsel for respondent, Jon Lipschultz, called on or about Nov. 15, 1995, five weeks ago, to state that he had received the petition and would be working on it.  Indeed, NASSCO notified EPA that it intended to bring court action to compel the issuance or withdrawal of the proposed rule last summer, long before respondent was actually served with the petition on Nov. 1, 1995.  -- "Respondent's claim for the need for time beginning with the court's Dec. 14, 1995, order thus inaccurately reflects the amount of time that respondent has had to work on its response to the petition....-- "Respondent claims that the current furlough of federal workers affects it ability to prepare its response.  As stated above, respondent had ample time before the court's order was issued and before the furlough commenced to prepare its response to the petition...."NASSCO  concluded that "every day of continued delay in the issuance or withdrawal of the proposed ban harms NASSCO members." ((6PTCN 1002, 8 pages, $6)Back to Headline List CopyrightPESTICIDE & TOXIC CHEMICAL NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996INDUSTRY CALLS PROPOSED WPS DECONTAMINATION CHANGES TOO COSTLYEPA's proposed modifications to Worker Protection Standard decontamination rules would place an economic hardship on growers, industry groups and trade associations said in comments submitted to the agency.  Requiring decontamination facilities even after a crop has been harvested would be "an unjust and unduly burdensome economic expense to the producer," the Coalition for Sensible Farmworker Protection said.  EPA published proposed WPS decontamination changes in the Sept. 29 Federal Register (See Aug. 23, Page 2; Sept. 27, Page 19).  The agency proposed to shorten the amount of time in which growers must provide decontamination facilities to between one and 15 days for most pesticides.It would cost $4,400 to provide decontamination sites for 1,000 acres, the coalition said, criticizing EPA's estimate of compliance costs as "quite low."  "[T]he undersigned organizations continue to believe that it is inappropriate for the agency to require decontamination facilities at the end of the restricted entry interval," the coalition said.  The group includes state departments of agriculture, university agriculture departments and several trade associations.  Decontamination facilities should be required only when workers are present and have contact with pesticide-treated surfaces, it said.   The coalition also criticized EPA's proposal to require decontamination sites for pesticides with REIs longer than four hours.  Such determinations should be based on a risk-based, sound science standard, not solely on length of exposure, it said.The Yuma (Ariz.) Vegetable Shippers Association also said it would be expensive for growers to comply with the proposed decontamination requirements.The Society of American Florists asked EPA to apply the proposal to all pesticides, instead of only to those with REIs of four hours or longer.In its comments, the American Farm Bureau Federation proposed a zero-day decontamination period for all pesticides with REIs less than four hours.  A zero-day decontamination requirement for these pesticides would encourage the use of low-toxicity pesticides, it said.  "This makes lower-risk products more cost competitive."  Like the Coalition for Sensible Farmworker Protection, the federation called the cost of decontamination kits "significant."The federation also asked EPA to:-- "eliminate the requirement for a decontamination site after crops are harvested; -- "eliminate the decontamination requirement when the REIs expire, and-- "allow field workers to bring decontamination kits into treated areas as early entry.  EPA should allow growers to make similar arrangements for provision of decontamination kits for all types of agricultural workers."The Georgia Department of Agriculture asked EPA to simplify the proposed changes by limiting the number of exceptions to the WPS.  "[T]here are already too many 'if/then' statements or exceptions....  Regulations that are simple, easily comprehended and have few exceptions are more likely to be followed....  More exceptions usually mean more complexity and the more likely the regulated community is to be confused, which adversely affects enforcement," it said.  GDA proposed a seven-day decontamination site requirement after the REI expires.Columbia, Md., resident Louis True Jr., a former EPA official, said EPA failed to indicate why the agency plans to depart from its 1992 WPS regulations.  He asked the agency to repropose a WPS standard instead of modifying the current one.  "Absent such a step, there will have been no reasonable opportunity for public comment on a rational presentation of the basis for the proposed changes, and any conclusions drawn by EPA would be arbitrary and capricious," he said.The WPS changes EPA seeks can be achieved by a case-by-case review of labeling requirements rather than revising the 1992 regulation, he said.  ((6PTCN 1001, 24 pages, $10)Back to Headline List CopyrightPESTICIDE & TOXIC CHEMICAL NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996EPA, HEALTH CARE PRODUCTS ARGUE OVER TIMING ISSUESArguments over minute details, particularly concerning timing, continued in the EPA FIFRA case against Health Care Products as EPA filed -- just before the furlough clamped down on the government -- an extensive brief with the Office of Administrative Law Judges (See Dec. 6, Page 20).EPA noted its earlier request to have the hearing proceed under the name Smartel Communications instead of Celltech Media or Health Care Products, noting that ALJ Daniel Head had not allowed the filing and had ordered a schedule of motions from both parties.Following the end of a first furlough last November, EPA said, attempts were made to contact Health Care Products attorney James Piccozi to set up the schedule, but to no avail.  EPA's problems with the later and current furlough were described in the agency's brief:-- "Judge Head's Nov. 14, 1995, order, which was filed following a feverish and pointedly irregular flurry of telephonic and letter writing attempts by counsel for petitioner/respondent to circumvent established agency procedures, clearly set forth the mechanism by which petitioner/respondent's requests for any schedule changes were to be decided.-- "In anticipation of federal shutdown which loomed and which in fact occurred on the very day that the judge issued his order, Judge Head directed that the parties consult with one another concerning the schedule and any alternative dates to be set immediately following the end of the federal shutdown.  It was clear from the judge's order that no responses to pending motions should be filed during the time period between the judge's order and the reopening of the federal government and the parties' taking the steps ordered by the judge.-- "In flagrant disregard of the judge's Nov. 19, 1995, fax-served order, on Nov. 19, 1995, petitioner/respondent dispatched its response to the Oct. 23, 1995, motion.  It did so even with the knowledge that complainant/respondent intended to file an amendment to its motion and could not do so at the time of the still-crippling federal shutdown....-- "Petitioner/respondent appears to have attempted to exploit the absence of counsel for complainant/respondent and their inability to take any actions in this litigation to its unfair advantage.  It filed a document which was affected by the judge's order and which it should have known should have only been filed following the ordered consultation with counsel for the agency and the parties' subsequent report to the judge."The brief pointed out that in addition to the controversy over use of the name "Smartel Communications," Piccozi had raised an issue as to whether the company should be called "Health Care Products" or "Health Care Products, Inc."  Accusing Piccozi of demanding changes in EPA's work schedule, agency counsel Philip Ross, Bret Williams, Carl Eichenwald, Davina Pujari and Scott Garrison complained:  "... Counsel for petitioner/respondent seems to think that the agency should 'drop everything' to meet the needs and convenience of complainant/respondent and its counsel.  Though counsel for complainant/respondent may have difficulty realizing that the agency has other matters to which it must attend other than business that pertains to his client, such is indeed the case."Back to Headline List CopyrightPESTICIDE & TOXIC CHEMICAL NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996EPA NOTICE LISTS SPECIFIC, CRISIS AND QUARANTINE EXEMPTION ACTIVITYIn a notice published Dec. 13, EPA granted specific exemptions to several states for the control of various pests.  Specifically, EPA granted specific, crisis and quarantine exemptions to the:Arizona Department of Agriculture for the use of avermectin B1 on melons to control leafminers, June 30, 1995, to June 29, 1996, and for the use of bifenthrin on cauliflower and leaf lettuce to control whiteflies, Sept. 28, 1995, to May 15, 1996;Arkansas State Plant Board for the use of fomesafen on snap beans to control morningglory and pigweed, June 2, 1995, to Sept. 10, 1995; California Environmental Protection Agency, Department of Pesticide Regulations, for the use of carboxin/thiram (ProGro) on onion seed to control onion smut, Sept. 11, 1995, to May 31, 1996; for the use of avermectin B1 on melons to control leafminers, June 30, 1995, to Nov. 1, 1995; for the use of avermectin B1 on bell peppers to control leafminers, Aug. 24, 1995, to Aug. 23, 1996; for the use of cypermethrin on green onions to control thrips, June 15, 1995, to June 14, 1996; for the use of metalaxyl on mustard greens to control white rust, Aug. 21, 1995, to Aug. 20, 1996, and, on the state's initiative, for the use of myclobutanil on tomatoes to control powdery mildew, Sept. 29, 1995, to June 16, 1996;Florida Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services for the use of imidacloprid on escarole, endives, spinach and parsley to control aphids, Sept. 29, 1995, to June 1, 1996, and for the use of lactofen on tomatoes and green peppers to control nightshade, Sept. 1, 1995, to Aug. 31, 1996;Idaho Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services for the use of pirimicarb on alfalfa grown for seed to control alfalfa aphids, pea aphids and lygus bugs, June 16, 1995, to Aug. 31, 1995; Kansas Department of Agriculture for the use of cymoxanil, dimethomorph and propamocarb hydrochloride on potatoes to control late blight, June 27, 1995, to Sept. 30, 1995;Maryland Department of Agriculture for the use of clomazone on snap beans to control broadleaf weeds, Aug. 9, 1995, to Sept. 10, 1995; for the use of clomazone on summer squash to control broadleaf weeds, Aug. 9, 1995, to Sept. 30, 1995, and for the use of metolachlor on spinach to control weeds, Aug. 2, 1995, to May 1, 1996;Michigan Department of Agriculture for the use of fomesafen on dry beans to control weeds, June 28, 1995, to Aug. 15, 1995, and, on the state's initiative for a crisis exemption, for the use of avermectin on peas to control mites and psylla, Sept. 5, 1995, to Sept. 30, 1995;Minnesota Department of Agriculture for the use of bentazon on peas to control Canada thistle, June 23, 1995, to July 15, 1995;Mississippi Department of Agriculture and Commerce for the use of carbofuran on cotton to control aphids, June 30, 1995, to Sept. 15, 1995; Montana Department of Agriculture for the use of pirimicarb on alfalfa grown for seed to control alfalfa aphids, pea aphids and lygus bugs, June 16, 1995, to Sept. 30, 1995;Nebraska Department of Agriculture for the use of cymoxanil, dimethomorph and propamocarb hydrochloride on potatoes to control late blight, Sept. 6, 1995, to Sept. 30, 1995;Nevada Division of Agriculture for the use of cymoxanil, dimethomorph and propamocarb hydrochloride on potatoes to control late blight, Aug. 15, 1995, to Sept. 15, 1995;Nevada Department of Business and Industry for the use of pirimicarb on alfalfa grown for seed to control alfalfa aphids and blue alfalfa aphids;New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection for the use of metolachlor on spinach to control weeds, Aug. 2, 1995, to Nov. 1, 1995;Ohio Department of Agriculture for the use of cypermethrin on green onions to control thrips, June 15, 1995, to June 30, 1995; Oklahoma Department of Agriculture for the use of fomesafen on snap beans to control morningglory and pigweed, June 2, 1995, to Sept. 10, 1995; for the use of carbofuran on cotton to control aphids, June 29, 1995, to Oct. 15, 1995, and for the use of metolachlor on spinach to control weeds, Aug. 31, 1995, to Nov. 15, 1995;Oregon Department of Agriculture for the use of metolachlor on grasses grown for seed to control weeds, Aug. 31, 1995, to Nov. 15, 1995; oxyfluorfen on grasses grown for seed to control weeds, Aug. 31, 1995, to Jan. 15, 1996; for the use of pronamide on grasses grown for seed to control weeds, Aug. 31, 1995, to Jan. 20, 1996; for the use of lactofen on snap beans to control weeds, April 28, 1995, to July 31, 1995, and for the use of pirimicarb on alfalfa grown for seed to control alfalfa aphids, pea aphids and lygus bugs, June 16, 1995, to Sept. 1, 1995;Pennsylvania Department of Agriculture, on its own initiative for a crisis exemption, for the use of fomesafen on snap beans to control weeds, June 30, 1995, to Aug. 15, 1995;Texas Department of Agriculture for the use of carbofuran on cotton to control aphids, June 9, 1995, to Sept. 30, 1995, and for the use of metolachlor on spinach to control weeds, Aug. 2, 1995, to Aug. 15, 1995;Virginia Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services for the use of clomazone on snap beans to control broadleaf weeds, Aug. 9, 1995, to Sept. 10, 1995, and on summer squash to control broadleaf weeds, Aug. 9, 1995, to Sept. 30, 1995; Washington Department of Agriculture for the use of pirimicarb on small seeded vegetable seed crops to control aphids, June 30, 1995, to Sept. 15, 1995, and on alfalfa grown for seed to control alfalfa aphids, pea aphids and lygus bugs, June 16, 1995, to Aug. 31, 1995, andWyoming Department of Agriculture for the use of pirimicarb on alfalfa grown for seed to control alfalfa aphids, pea aphids and lygus bugs, June 16, 1995, to Aug. 31, 1995.  In the same notice, EPA said that crisis exemptions were initiated by the:Colorado Department of Agriculture Aug. 15 for the use of cypermethrin on green onions to control thrips (program ended);Florida Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services July 23 in a request for a quarantine exemption for the use of naled on utility poles, tree trunks and other inanimate objects to control the oriental fruit fly;Michigan Department of Agriculture Aug. 17 for the use of fosetyl-al on blueberries to control alternaria fruit rot;Minnesota Department of Agriculture June 16 for the use of clopyralid on canola to control Canada thistle and perennial sowthistle (program ended);Missouri Department of Agriculture June 13 for the use of fomesafen on snap beans to control pigweed (program ended);Montana Department of Agriculture June 21 for the use of clopyralid on canola to control Canada thistle and perennial sowthistle (program ended);New Mexico Department of Agriculture Sept. 2 for the use of triadimefon on peppers to control powdery mildew (program ended);North Carolina Department of Agriculture Sept. 1 for the use of tebufenozide on cotton to control beet armyworms (program ended);North Dakota Department of Agriculture Aug. 1 for the use of bifenthrin on canola to control the Bertha armyworm (program ended) and June 17 for the use of clopyralid on canola to control Canada thistle and perennial sowthistle (program ended);Oklahoma Department of Agriculture Sept. 1 for the use of  tebufenozide on cotton to control beet armyworms (program ended);Texas Department of Agriculture Aug. 31 for the use of bifenthrin on grain sorghum grown for seed to control banks grass mites (program ended) and June 2 for the use of esfenvalerate on grain sorghum to control sorghum midge (program ended);Virginia Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services Aug. 28 for the use of bifenthrin on peanuts to control two-spotted spider mites (program ended); Wisconsin Department of Agriculture July 21 for the use of bentazon on peas to control weeds (program ended);USDA's Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service Aug. 24 for the use of permethrin on horses and cattle to control nonindigenous parasites and Aug. 4 for the use of paraformaldehyde to decontaminate high-security biocontaminant laboratories of microoganisms (program ended).EPA also noted the granting of a quarantine exemption to USDA for the use of paraformaldehyde in laboratories to control infectious diseases to expire June 5, 1998; the denial of a specific exemption request from the Oregon Department of Agriculture for the use of pendimethalin on grasses due to agency "endangered species concerns," noting that the state had also requested use of metolachlor for the same spectrum of weeds; and the withdrawal of a specific exemption from the Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection for the use of avermectin on pears to control pear psylla.     Other Specific Exemptions Granted, Denied, EPA Notes In another Dec. 13 notice, EPA granted specific exemptions for the control of various pests.  Specifically, EPA granted exemptions to:Alabama Department of Agriculture and Industries, having initiated a crisis exemption, for the use of tebufenozide on cotton to control beet armyworms, July 18, 1995, to Sept. 30, 1995;Arizona Department of Agriculture for the use of imidacloprid and bifenthrin on melons to control the sweet potato whitefly, June 9, 1995, to June 9, 1996;Arkansas State Plant Board for the use of tebufenozide on cotton to control beet armyworms, July 18, 1995, to Sept. 30, 1995;California Environmental Protection Agency for the use of myclobutanil on strawberries to control powdery mildew, July 28, 1995, to July 27, 1996;Florida Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services for the use of melathion on atemoya and sugar apples to control Annona seed borers, July 12, 1995, to July 12, 1996;Georgia Department of Agriculture for the use of tebufenozide on cotton to control beet armyworms, July 18, 1995, to Sept. 30, 1995;Idaho Department of Agriculture for the use of propamocarb hydrochloride, dimethomorph and cymoxanil on potatoes to control late blight, July 14, 1995, to Sept. 30, 1995;  Louisiana Department of Agriculture and Forestry for the use of tebufenozide on cotton to control beet armyworms, July 18, 1995, to Sept. 30, 1995;Michigan Department of Agriculture for the use of triadimefon on asparagus to control asparagus rust and for the use of chlorothalonil on asparagus to control purple spot, June 21, 1995, to Nov. 1, 1995;Minnesota Department of Agriculture for the use of triclopyr on aquatic sites to control purple loose strife, July 26, 1995, to Sept. 15, 1995;Mississippi Department of Agriculture and Commerce, having initiated a crisis exemption, for the use of tebufenozide on cotton to control beet armyworms, July 18, 1995, to Sept. 30, 1995;Montana Department of Agriculture for the use of cyhalothrin on small grains to control cutworms, May 17, 1995, to July 1, 1995;New Jersey Environmental Protection Agency for the use of cymoxanil on tomatoes, July 27, 1995, to April 1, 1996, with the agency determining that the exempted use is not expected to either be a "hazard to nontarget organisms" or to pose a "threat to surface and/or ground water," and for the use of propamocarb hydrochloride on tomatoes to control late blight, July 27, 1995, to April 1, 1996; New York Department of Environmental Conservation for the use of vinclozolin on snap beans to control white and gray mold, June 1, 1995, to Sept. 15, 1995;North Dakota Department of Agriculture for the use of sethoxydim on buckwheat to control volunteer cereal grains, July 18, 1995, to June 30, 1995;Tennessee Department of Agriculture for the use of tebufenozide on cotton to control beet armyworms, July 18, 1995, to July 30, 1995;Texas Department of Agriculture for the use of carbofuran on cotton to control aphids, June 9, 1995, to Sept. 15, 1995; Washington Department of Agriculture for the use of propamocarb hydrochloride, cymoxanil and dimethomorph on potatoes to control late blight, July 7, 1995, to Sept. 30, 1995; Wisconsin Department of Agriculture, Trade, and Consumer Protection for the use of mancozeb on ginseng to control leaf and stem blight, May 23, 1995, to Aug. 31, 1995, andWyoming Department of Agriculture for the use of pirimicarb on alfalfa grown for seed to control alfalfa aphids, pea aphids and lygus bugs, June 16, 1995, to Aug. 31, 1995.  EPA also noted that several states were granted an emergency exemption for the use of propamocarb hydrochloride on potatoes to control light blight, June 23, 1995, to Sept. 30, 1995, with the expiration date extended to Oct. 31, 1995, in Oregon and June 22, 1996, in Florida.  The exemptions were granted to the Delaware Department of Agriculture; Florida Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services; Georgia Department of Agriculture; Maine Department of Agriculture; Maryland Department of Agriculture; Michigan Department of Agriculture; Minnesota Department of Agriculture; New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection; New York Department of Environmental Conservation; North Dakota Department of Agriculture; Ohio Department of Agriculture; Oregon Department of Agriculture; Pennsylvania Department of Agriculture; South Dakota Department of Agriculture; Virginia Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services, and Wisconsin Department of Agriculture, Trade, and Consumer Services.The agency also noted that the Montana Department of Agriculture initiated a crisis exemption July 15 for the use of bifenthrin on canola to control diamondback moth larvae.  This program has ended.In the same notice, EPA denied specific exemption requests from the California Department of Pesticide Regulations for the use of fenpropathrin on tomatoes to control silverleaf and greenhouse whiteflies; the Montana Department of Agriculture for the use of tralkoxydim on wheat to control weeds since the situation is "routine and not urgent," and to the Minnesota, North Dakota and South Dakota Departments of Agriculture for the use of propiconazole on wheat and barley to control fusarium head blight because residue chemistry indicated the crops would contain carcinogenic residue in processed foods, triggering the Delaney "anti-cancer" clause.  The agency also denied specific exemption requests for use of Pirate on cotton to control beet armyworms since it is unregistered due to "risk of unreasonable adverse effects to nontarget birds, aquatic organisms and the environment."  EPA added that an exemption for a registered alternative, tebufenozide, was granted to control the pest in the Southeastern Cotton Belt region.  Exemption requests were denied to:Alabama Department of Agriculture and Industries; Arkansas State Plant Board; Georgia Department of Agriculture; Louisiana Department of Agriculture and Forestry; Mississippi Department of Agriculture and Commerce, and Tennessee Department of Agriculture.Back to Headline List CopyrightPESTICIDE & TOXIC CHEMICAL NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996INDUSTRY, ENVIRONMENTAL GROUPS DISAGREE ON IMPACT OF TAKINGS BILLA broadly worded bill in the Senate that would compensate property owners and businesses adversely affected by federal regulation is drawing widely different reactions from environmental and business groups. The so-called takings bill could weaken pesticide regulations by making it prohibitively expensive for the government to impose usage restrictions, environmentalists said.  Business groups said the measure would give growers and landowners much-needed regulatory relief.  Either way, both agreed it could have a far-reaching impact on pesticide regulation.Both the Senate and the House are working on so-called takings bills.  But while the House bill targets wetlands, endangered species and water use, the Senate version, recently approved by the Senate Judiciary Committee, contains broad language that could subject any regulatory agency to takings claims from private citizens, according to environmentalists. "Some restriction on the application of a particular pesticide that has the effect of reducing the yield of the land and therefore the short-term or long-term real estate values could be a taking under the definition of takings in this bill," said John Echeverr, general counsel for the National Audubon Society.  "As written, S 605 is extraordinarily broad and applies to any type of governmental regulation under any federal law," he said."The one exception to the bill is that if an activity constitutes a nuisance, then regulation on the activity does not constitute a taking.  But pesticide application as a nuisance generally doesn't have strong roots in common law," Echeverr said.Agricultural Groups Support Bill's ImplicationsJim Egenrieder, director of regulatory affairs for the Agricultural Retailers Association, said his group supports the broader implications of the takings bill.  "The growers are prohibited from using certain materials in certain areas without any recognition of the financial impact of some of those initiatives, and without going through any cost-benefit analysis," said Egenrieder.  "I think this takings legislation is asking 'Should a person be compensated when he or she can no longer use that land because of regulatory or legislative action?'"Floyd Gaibler, vice president of governmental affairs for the Agricultural Retailers Association, said a broad group of 15 agricultural associations and companies signed a Dec. 5 letter supporting the bill.  "We say it would clarify the takings standards that courts have not been able to clearly articulate," said Gaibler. The letter says, "The agriculture community increasingly is impacted by regulations which prohibit ordinary land uses just as effectively as if a highway were built across private land."  The letter goes on to say that farms are often collateral for operating loans, and that the accumulated value of land is often a landowner's primary source of retirement income.Sierra Club Calls Measure Anti-environmentalThe Senate takings bill "is a radical anti-environmental bill," said Roni Lieberman, media director for the Sierra Club.  "The bill distorts the meaning of American property rights.  In the case of pesticides, corporations could say they should be compensated for having to add environmental controls to their properties," he continued.Lieberman also said the bill would subject agencies to costly review to determine possible takings effects of new regulation.  "This is not about property rights, which are protected under the constitution," said Lieberman.  "It is about boosting profits," he said.Clinton Vows to Veto Senate Takings BillThe Clinton administration charged that the Senate bill would create "one of the most expensive new federal spending programs in recent history" and block new laws to protect public health and safety.  In a Dec. 14 letter to Senate Judiciary Committee Chairman Orrin Hatch (R-Utah), Clinton said he would veto S 605 or any similar legislation.  This drew a quick response from Hatch. Hatch Says Regulators Would Need to Step Lightly Around Property Rights"President Clinton astonishingly says this bill does not protect legitimate private property rights," said Hatch, who added that the bill creates a "system of incentives for agencies to reduce the number and size of the takings they commit." Hatch said a Congressional Budget Office report released in October suggests that the bill will not burden federal regulatory agencies with a lot of takings actions.  "That estimate concludes that the bill will have only minimal costs and will achieve the stated goals of the bill by encouraging agencies to change their behavior," said Hatch, adding that the provisions in the bill come out of current case law.  "So when we debate this bill, let's remember that many of the provisions of the bill are simply codifying what the Supreme Court has said the Fifth Amendment requires," he said.Back to Headline List CopyrightPESTICIDE & TOXIC CHEMICAL NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996SORGHUM PRODUCERS GROUP CHALLENGES GRANULAR CARBOFURAN CANCELLATIONThe National Grain Sorghum Producers Association is preparing oral arguments in its challenge of EPA's decision to cancel sorghum uses for granular carbofuran.  Oral arguments in the case are scheduled for Feb. 22 before the U.S. Court of Appeals for Washington D.C.The association said in its Nov. 22 pleading that EPA has no basis in the record for its conclusion that granular carbofuran poses an unreasonable risk to birds.  It also contended that EPA failed to hold a hearing on its final decision."EPA relied solely on avian mortality as the basis for its decision not to allow the continued use of granular carbofuran," the association said.  "After more than 10 years of study, there is no evidence of birds killed by granular carbofuran applied in sorghum in accordance with its label."The pleading charges that EPA "misapplied" data allegedly supporting its conclusion about avian deaths.  For instance, the agency referred to 41 incidents of alleged bird kills attributable to direct granular carbofuran poisoning, 25 of which were water fowls in rice fields in a single area in California, the pleading says, adding that this data is not relevant because new agricultural practices have eliminated water fowl deaths in rice fields.EPA also emphasized alleged raptor kills by granular carbofuran without strong evidence that reported raptor incidents were the result of exposure to the chemical, the association argued."Not only was the analysis EPA employed deeply flawed, the agency ignored studies that did not support its desired conclusions," the group said, claiming that EPA ignored Maryland and Florida field studies suggesting that granular carbofuran, when used properly, did not cause bird deaths.The association also accused EPA of denying its request for a hearing before the pesticide was canceled.  "A trial-type hearing would have allowed petitioner to more fully demonstrate the lack of evidence supporting cancellation of granular carbofuran on sorghum," it said.The association claimed that cancellation of granular carbofuran would cause hardship on farmers who would not be able to find an affordable alternative to control chinch bugs.  "An alternative to granular carbofuran for controlling chinch bugs, flowable carbofuran, is more expensive and requires different equipment for application," said the pleading, which adds that the additional expense of this application equipment is too expensive for sorghum producers farming fewer than 250 acres.  ((6PTCN 1003, 39 pages, $14)Back to Headline List CopyrightPESTICIDE & TOXIC CHEMICAL NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996BIOLOGICAL PEST CONTROL AGENTS  MINOR-USE PROGRAM SOUGHTBeyond Integrated Pest Management, biological control methods development needs much more research, more government coordination and a program similar to the minor-use pesticide development program.  These were major recommendations this week of a committee of the National Research Council's Food and Nutrition Board.The report, "Ecologically Based Pest Management -- New Solutions for a New Century," was developed by the Food and Nutrition Board's Committee on Pest and Pathogen Control through Management of Biological Control Agents and Enhanced Cycles and Natural Processes, headed by Ralph Hardy of the Boyce Thompson Institute, Ithaca, N.Y.The committee saw an "urgent need for an alternative approach to pest management that can complement and partially replace current chemically based pest management practices."  Noting the introduction of synthetic chemical pesticides in the 1940s, the committee said:"It is now clear that their use has some unfortunate consequences.  Many consumers believe that trace residues of synthetic chemicals in food are undesirable and represent a significant food safety risk.  In some cases, undesirable environmental impacts of synthetic pesticides have caused consumers to oppose the use of these materials in agriculture and caused governments to regulate or outlaw their use."Ecologically based pest management (EBPM) as proposed by the committee would go beyond Integrated Pest Management's reliance on synthetic controls and "rely primarily on inputs of pest biological knowledge and secondarily on physical, chemical and biological supplements for pest management."  The description continued:-- "The EBPM systems will be built on an underlying knowledge of the managed ecosystem, including the natural processes that suppress pest populations.  It is based on the recognition that many standard agricultural practices disrupt natural processes that suppress pests.-- "In contrast to standard practices that disrupt and destabilize the agrosystem, agricultural practices recommended by EBPM will augment natural processes.  These practices will be supplemented by biological-control organisms and products, resistant plants and narrow-spectrum pesticides."As to EBPM's improvement over integrated pest management, the committee said:  "Early IPM innovators should be recognized for conceiving a framework for an integrated approach to arthropod, weed and pathogen pest management....  The practice of IPM, unfortunately, is not always consistent with the theory of IPM.  The focus of early IPM programs was devoted to control of insects, setting a precedent for the focus of IPM on arthropod pest management.  In many cases, this management was limited to pest scouting and precise applications of insecticides.  Consequently, this focus has been at the expense of IPM of weed and pathogen pests."The three fundamental goals of EBPM were outlined as:  "(1) safety, (2) profitability and (3) durability."The acute and chronic toxicities associated with synthetics generally have not been found with biological-control organisms, the committee said, elaborating on the second and third goals with:-- "For EBPM to be successful, it must also be profitable for the grower....  Because producers will implement only those pest control methods that lower economic risks and enhance profits, they will insist on assurances that biologically based tools are cost-effective and provide consistent responses....-- "EBPM strategies also must be long-lasting to have a positive impact on crop protection....  Decreasing the pest's rate of development of resistance to new inputs is essential for the durability of EBPM."Noting a "large annual research and development investment of more than $500 million" for the production of organic pesticides, the committee said, "... An increased investment in research of biological processes will be needed to support the development of EBPM."Monitoring, Certification Seen as NeededFollowing an extensive description of biological control programs to date, the committee outlined implementation steps for EBPM as including:Small-market support -- "Some of the most effective biological-control organisms and products in EBPM are projected to have modest uses or small markets, and will require public-sector support for regulatory approval as well as for research....  [T]he costs associated with obtaining registration can discourage commercialization of biological-control organisms, as is the case now for minor use chemical pesticides, products needed on small acreage or in such small markets that they lack commercial appeal.  In the same way that public funds help with approval processes of minor use chemical pesticides by regulatory agencies, public investment can ensure continued progress for biological technologies."Certification -- "Organized efforts to increase distribution of high-quality biological tools will facilitate grower acceptance of EBPM.  The procedure of crop seed certification by state agencies guarantees that new cultivars are genetically pure and that noxious weeds, arthropods and pathogens are below detection limits.  Each certification board tests, increases, releases and distributes new field crops according to predetermined standards....  Such a process of release benefits the individual grower with valuable information on product performance and quality, lowering the risk of adoption."Monitoring pests -- "Monitoring for the potential development of resistance by pest organisms is key to managing the long-term viability of ecologically based systems....  The importance of monitoring pest populations in individual fields is critical to the accurate assessment of tactics aimed at delaying pest resistance to biological control."Emphasizing the importance of "durability" of biological solutions, the committee said it "must be managed through collective action" and continued:-- "An effective mechanism currently used to delay pest resistance is the coordination of pest control activities among growers (National Audubon Society, 1994); sharing pest monitoring activities and collected information is useful in developing countermeasures that will limit additional crop losses.-- "Practices, comparable to the use of mixtures and multilines to conserve the durability of plant resistance genes, can be developed and put into practice in order to enhance the durability of valuable biological-control organisms and products.  Efforts to do this can be coordinated by industry, perhaps modeled on such organizations as the fungicide resistance working group, which is dedicated towards developing practices and implementation recommendations to enhance the long-term use of fungicides.  Cooperative efforts among researchers, industrial suppliers and growers can increase the durability of these biological tools."Gaps and Inconsistencies in Public Oversight ListedAfter devoting 19 small-type pages to research priorities and methods of accelerating research, including changes in institutional approaches, the committee's report delved into public oversight.  Listing "gaps and inconsistencies in current oversight" programs, the committee said in part:-- "... The complexities and anomalies of the current system may be attributed to the overlapping jurisdiction of several agencies and the diversity of organisms to be regulated, and the attempt to make the decision-making 'template' developed for registration of conventional chemical pesticides applicable to biologically based controls.-- "Current federal oversight generally evaluates the risks of biological-control macroorganisms using the procedures developed for exotic plant pests under the Federal Plant Pest Act (FFPA); microbial biological-control agents are subject to oversight procedures developed for chemical pesticides under (FIFRA).  Neither set of procedures is tailored for registration of biological-control agents; therefore, both pose unnecessary barriers to registration of biological-control organisms." 'Dual Review' at EPANoting that EPA reviews killed products under TSCA and others under FIFRA, the committee said the situation "results in a dual review process within EPA, with the manufacturing portion of the process reviewed separately from the field release of the killed microbial pesticide."  The distinctions in TSCA and FIFRA for review of "chemical intermediates" is irrelevant for microbial pesticides, the committee said.  The discussion of oversight continued:-- "The existing fragmented oversight process employs different assessment criteria to biological-control organisms that pose similar human or environmental risks, resulting in unnecessary scrutiny of some low-risk organisms and almost complete lack of regulatory review of others.-- "The most important inconsistency is the differential treatment of macroorganisms by USDA/APHIS under FFPA and of microorganisms by EPA under FIFRA.  For example, neither EPA nor APHIS regulates nonpathogenic nematodes, whereas both agencies regulate microorganisms.  In addition, microbes are exempt from oversight if vectored by a nonpathogenic, indigenous macroorganism (such as a nematode).  There is no clearly defined process for risk assessment of biological-control macroorganisms that are not plant pests, resulting in indecisiveness in granting permits for field release....-- "To provide appropriate oversight of biological-control organisms and products, USDA, EPA and other federal and state agencies with oversight authority should jointly develop criteria and protocols specifically for the testing, registration and use of living control organisms, biological-control products or plants resistant to pests or diseases.-- "No formal oversight structure exists for traditionally bred resistant plants, whereas genetically engineered resistance will, it appears, be subject to close scrutiny.  A question confronting policy makers is whether host plant resistance accomplished through genetic engineering should receive a higher degree of scrutiny than resistance achieved through traditional plant breeding.  Such a distinction embedded in regulatory practice would not necessarily reflect differences between actual human or environmental health risks posed by the two technologies."Options for Improvement OutlinedCalling for departure from current oversight practice, the committee said agencies' criteria for risk assessment must vary with the possibilities presented by each organism, product or resistant plant.  Suggesting the desirability of Technical Advisory Groups, the committee characterized these as "a consortium of representatives from government and research established to provide advice to the government on the safety of biological organisms for weed control."  The committee emphasized:"The U.S. EPA and the USDA, currently responsible for oversight of pesticide regulations, should develop and publish a guide to risk criteria, data requirements and oversight procedures that apply to importation, movement, introduction, testing and release or registration of biological-control organisms or products."The 89-page report concluded:-- "... Principles of ecology that lay the foundation of EBPM must be incorporated into implementation and oversight.  An important goal of EBPM is to restore and preserve balance to the managed ecosystem by duplicating natural processes to the maximum extent possible.  -- "Risk assessment also should reflect that principle.  Biological-control products must be developed and implemented in ways that complement managed ecosystems and facilitate the biological and natural controls already existing to suppress pests.-- "Monitoring of new products and processes is key.  The resultant information will lead to early identification of durability problems.  The knowledge gained from this monitoring of the dynamic interactions among organisms will increase the understanding needed to manage old and new pests in a safe, profitable and durable way."Back to Headline List WT02-B35-7IA095-001021-B004-187http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/ch20.html 205.156.212.5 19970121223726 text/html 43602HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Tuesday, 21-Jan-97 22:35:28 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:41:56 GMTContent-length: 43417Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ch20.html Sample Issue Copyright PLATT'S INTERNATIONAL PETROCHEMICAL RPTS via NewsNet January 5, 1996 Vol. 15, No SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES CHINA TO CUT LPG, OLEFIN IMPORT TARIFFS TO 6% BY APRIL 1 (257 words) METHANEX TO BUILD 900,000 MT/YR METHANOL PLANT IN CHILE (138 words) NEWS UPDATE INDIAN CHEMICALS MINISTRY WANTS IMPORT DUTY CUTS (619 words) 1995 REVIEW NWE POLYMERS PRICES REACH EXTREMES IN VOLATILE 1995 MARKET (1127 words) ASIAN BENZENE PRICES SLUMP IN 1995 (775 words) US OLEFINS PRICES WEAKEN STEADILY AS DEMAND DWINDLES (2215 words) NEWS DIGEST: ASIA JAPAN'S SHIN-ETSU CHEMICAL CO LTD (81 words) ETHYLENE (136 words) KOREA ETHYLENE DEREGULATION (134 words) JAPAN'S IDEMITSU PETROCHEMICAL (82 words) NEWS DIGEST: EUROPE/MIDDLE EAST POLYETHYLENE TEREPHALATE (145 words) LPG (69 words) NEWS DIGEST: US/LATIN AMERICA SUPERFUND (142 words) UNION CARBIDE CORP (70 words) PROPYLENE OXIDE (124 words) PRICESCORE PLATT'S AVERAGE MONTHLY PRICES (29 words) CopyrightPLATT'S INTERNATIONAL PETROCHEMICAL RPTS via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996   Vol. 15, NoCHINA TO CUT LPG, OLEFIN IMPORT TARIFFS TO 6% BY APRIL 1By:David Hanna, Christopher Park, Platt's TokyoChina this week announced plans to cut in half tariffs on chemical importseffective Apr 1, pledging to 'open the chemical sector wider to foreigninvestment'. Included in the change are import tariff cuts for olefins andLPG to 6% from 12%. The International Business Journal under Ministry ofForeign Trade and Economic Cooperation published two lists of new tariffrates for a total of 363 items, mostly related to petrochemical andchemical industries. Import tariffs for liquefied ethylene, propylene,butylene, butadiene will also be slashed by 50% to 6%. Rates for propaneand butane will be slashed by 3% to 6% starting April. New rates forimported benzene, toluene and xylene will be lowered to 6% from the present12% by then. China said it would cut import tariffs of over 4,000 items byan average 35% to 23% from Apr 1. No information was forthcoming on dutiesfor polymer imports. Traders in Korea and Japan peg current duty rates oncommodity polymers at 15-30%. China's Ministry of Chemical Industryforecasts that the industry's output value will grow by 8% from 1995 toYuan 245-mil ($306-mil) in 1996. Meanwhile, chemical imports grew by 8% to$5-bil, while exports rose 20.9% to $3.8-bil during the first half of 1995.Industry sources believe these figures should rise once the new tariffs gointo effect.Illustration(s):Table: China's New Import Duties (This table is not availableeletronically. Please see January 5, 1996 issue.)Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightPLATT'S INTERNATIONAL PETROCHEMICAL RPTS via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996   Vol. 15, NoMETHANEX TO BUILD 900,000 MT/YR METHANOL PLANT IN CHILEBy:Louise Egan, Santiago   Methanex, the world's largest methanol producer which owns a methanolplant in Cape Horn, Chile, will build a second plant in Cabo Negro, in thesouthern region of the country. The new facility will have a capacity of900,000mt/yr of methanol. Enap, the Chilean national oil company, which isthe principal supplier of natural gas for the project, has stated thatconstruction will be completed in December 1996. The Chilean government hasauthorized $350-mil in additional investments by the Canadian company forthe project. Together with the Cape Horn plant, Methanex will be producing1.7-mil mt/yr, or 12% of world demand for methanol. Methanex Cabo Negroplans to eventually export methanol to other Latin American countries.Chilean consumption is expected to reach 100,000mt/yr in the short term.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightPLATT'S INTERNATIONAL PETROCHEMICAL RPTS via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996   Vol. 15, NoINDIAN CHEMICALS MINISTRY WANTS IMPORT DUTY CUTSBy:Neel Patri, New Delhi   The Indian ministry of chemicals and petrochemicals has soughtacross-the-board cut in the import duty on several chemicals andpetrochemicals to a uniform 10% from the present levels that range from 15%to 50%, officials said.   In its memorandum to the finance ministry which is preparing the 1996federal budget, the ministry has also suggested hiking duties on somecatalysts.   The chemicals recommended for duty reduction to 10% include carbon blackfeedstock which bears 30% tariff at present, napthalene which carries 30%duty, high purity limestone that is subject to 50% duty at present, andcumene that carries 20% duty now.   However, the import tariff on methanol may be set at 40% compared withthe present 50%. The ministry is seeking a cut in methanol duty from 50% to40%.   The items for which duty hikes have been recommended include fourspecific catalysts used in the manufacture of ethylene, formaldehyde,de-sulphurisation process, and methyl ethyl ketone from secondary butylalcohol (from the present 25% to 50%.   Simultaneously, the ministry has favored reduction in import tariff onspecific pesticides to 30% from the present 40% and in order to encouragecaustic soda chemical manufacturers to shift to membrane cell technologyfrom mercury cell process of manufacture, total exemption of capital goodsimports needed for this switch-over has been recommended. The present dutyis 25% on capital goods imports.   'The idea is to keep duties on basic rawmaterial low and the endchemicals onthe higher side.' 'The idea is to keep duties on basic rawmaterial low and the end chemicals on the higher side to make import offormer cheaper for export after value addition. Some sort of protection forthe indigenous industry against cheap imports and dumping has been one ofthe criteria,' explained a senior ministry official.   Meanwhile, Tamil Nadu Industrial Development Corp has selected NorskHydro and the Madras-based WS Industries as partners for a proposed 150,000mt/yr PVC resin project, expected to cost around Rupee 7.5-bil ($214-mil),TIDCO officials said this week.   Company directors have approved a proposal to offer 51% of the equity toNorsk Hydro, while WS Industries would hold 10% and TIDCO 11%. The equitysharing proposal would have to be approved by the Tamil Nadu government,which owns TIDCO.   The PVC project is likely to be located at Ennore, south of Madras,where a new port is proposed to be built by the government. The portproject includes building a chemicals import terminal.   The PVC project entails importing 124,000 mt/yr of ethylene dichlorideand 48,000 mt/yr as feed. A market survey commissioned by TIDCO showed thatthe demand for PVC was growing in the southern region, and that freshcapacity was called for.   At present, there are two major PVC producers meeting demand in southernIndia, Chemplast Sanmar with 48,000 mt/yr capacity, and DhrangadharaChemical Works with 42,000 mt/yr capacity. Both are located in Tamil Nadu.   State-owned Hindustan Organic Chemicals Ltd has been allotted land atBaikampady village near the New Mangalore port in southern Karnataka stateto build a chemical terminal, a company release said.   HOC will invest some Rupee 360-mil ($10-mil) in the 50,000 kl terminal,to be built in two stages. HOC, a major importer and exporter of chemicals,is currently renting storage tank facilities at the New Mangalore Port foroperations at Cochin, as well as for exporting phenol and acetone.   'In all, 10 storage tanks are expected to be constructed under phaseone. It is proposed to handle a diverse range of chemicals, includingbenzene, toluene, xylenes, cumene, phenol, acetone, and methanol. The firststage is expected to be completed during 1996-97,' the release said.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightPLATT'S INTERNATIONAL PETROCHEMICAL RPTS via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996   Vol. 15, NoNWE POLYMERS PRICES REACH EXTREMES IN VOLATILE 1995 MARKETBy:Elinor Else, Platt's London   European polymer prices rollercoastered in 1995, peaking on high demandand tight supply but then crashing as a slower economy, high stocks andhigher prices undermined buying interest. Another major influence on Europewas the Asian market, whose demand was the main motor behind marketbalances world- wide.   All the polymers started the year at relatively high price levels, withthe polyolefins averaging around DM1.80/kg FD Germany in early January, PVCa few pfennigs lower and general purpose polystyrene a little overDM2.00/kg FD Germany.   There were some difficulties related to local currencies weakeningagainst the deutschmark in the UK and Italy which held back prices in thosemarkets. New import tariffs on polymers moving into the EU temporarilyslowed shipments from Mexico and eastern Europe. But underlying demand wasgood and supply was balanced to tight in most markets.   PVC, polystyrene and PP were all firm through the first quarter of 1995as producers pushed through targets and supply was either tight - as in thecase of PVC which suffered a series of monomer and polymer outages - or atleast balanced to supply.   But towards the end of the first quarter the first few signals of changestarted to emerge. Firstly, demand for low density polyethylene began toslip late in Q1 as consumers started to run down stocks built at the end of1994. Also, prices adjustments were made to bring countries that hadsuffered from a weak currency against the German mark back into line.   This meant a push for price adjustments in the UK, Italy and France butit also meant German prices had to be held steady while the rest of the EUcaught up.   Meanwhile, relative strength in German prices started to attract theattention of east European importers as well as sellers of other exotics.This began to undermine the German LDPE market, the market which tends tolead price levels around Europe.   During April and May PVC prices were stabilizing as demand for pipesproved slower than expected and finished pipe stocks were said to be high.Polypropylene and polystyrene were both benefiting from strongerfundamentals and prices for both of these polymers remained firm.   Two things happened: the traditional summer slowdown and a crackdown onVAT collection and smuggling of polymers into China.   The effect of the 'summer lull' is a regular seasonal effect and isfactored into most people's forecasts for supply and demand during theyear: in later July, demand will tend to slacken off as converters in muchof Europe close their factories for all or part of Aug. Demand in Sep isusually slow to start but will pickup until Oct, which is usually a 'normalmonth'.   However, the sudden halt to Chinese buying, along with the pressure onAsian prices from ample US export availabilities, was not expected. Theinitial effect was to divert a significant proportion of US and otherexports into Europe. Longer term, the effect was an overall dampening ofglobal polymer demand and a sense among consumers in Europe that there wasplenty of material available to cover their needs.   Prices for PVC, PE and PP started to erode in June as European buyerssensed a price decrease to come as the Asian problems emerged and Europeandemand was set to slow for the summer.   PS resisted as producers pushed for another increase and succeeded inboth June and July.   But by the end of July, all polymer prices were on a downtrend that wasonly to bottom out at the very end of the year. With Chinese buying onhold, exotic availabilities were plentiful and west European producersfound it more difficult to control stocks by selling excess supplyoverseas.   In addition, the summer lull lasted through Oct, adding several weeks ofvery low demand to the expected period as consumers rode down their stocksand were confident that prices would be lower in the coming weeks.   This process of destocking and buying hand-to-mouth characterised thelatter half of 1995.   The lack of forward buying kept up considerable pressure on producersand attempts to control stocks through cutting production were onlypartially successful.   There was considerable competition to maintain market shares in thevarious European markets: for example in the UK market there were severalinstances of producers undercutting each others' prices for PP and PE.Exports were moved out at discount prices to ease pressure on mountingstocks.   Through Oct and Nov, the production cutbacks did have an effect onproducers' stock levels which were better balanced by the end of the yearexcept for some cases in the PE market. The re-entry of Chinese buyers inNov lent some support to European and US markets, even if that demand wasonly a form of prebuying ahead of import license changes in 1996.   But prices in Europe had hit bottom and with or without China, many inthe industry said that with prices below available cost in many cases,there was no room for further price erosion.   PP, PE, and PVC all ended the year with the low end of the price rangefirmly below the DM1/kg FD Germany level. PS had fallen steeply but hadstabilized close to DM1.50/kg FD Germany for general purpose material andDM0.10/kg higher for high impact.   Increases were announced for Jan 1 for PP and PE, which were felt tohave reached unsustainably low levels. PS has not seen a price increaseannouncement and suppliers say they are looking to rollover prices from Decinto Jan. However, consumers say there is still room for a slight erosionin PS prices and as Chinese demand is not expected to pick up until laterin Feb, the impetus for price increases seems likely to be limited untillater in Q1.   PVC pipe grade has seen a period of poor demand, the summer too dry toallow for much construction or cable-TV pipe laying and the winter beingthe traditionally low demand season. Some are indicating price increasescould be on the cards for Mar or Apr.   In broader terms, most in the industry expect there to be someimprovement in early 1996 as demand and prices both recover to more normallevels.   Consumer stocks are more balanced now and prices are seen as eitherstable or firming, producers argue, so that when demand kicks in in lateJanuary, coverters will come into the market to top up low stocks.   Overall growth in underlying demand for polymers is expected to grow ataround 3% in 1996 and both buyers and producers are hoping for a lessvolatile year in 1996.Illustration(s):Illustration: Graph: Spot German Polymer Prices 1995Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightPLATT'S INTERNATIONAL PETROCHEMICAL RPTS via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996   Vol. 15, NoASIAN BENZENE PRICES SLUMP IN 1995By:Joanna Lim, Platt's Singapore   Asian benzene prices began the year bullish, driven largely by strongstyrene demand. In response to spiralling styrene prices, Japanese andKorean producers cranked up operations at their plants, with less benzenesubsequently available in the spot market.   The strength of the US benzene market also led to less deepsea productmoving into Asia. At the same time, plant turnarounds in Japan and Korea inMar through June also heightened the region's shortage.   Benzene prices climbed $5-10/mt monthly during the first quarter, withprices peaking in April at $395-400/mt FOB Korea from $365-370/mt in Jan.   In May, styrene prices in Asia started to deteriorate, brought on byChina's sudden withdrawal from styrenic derivative imports, dueto Beijing'smeasures to crack down on smuggling and tax invasion in China's ports.   Local traders had been evading a 17% value added tax on imported resinsby negotiating private agreements with local authorities. State officialswere despatched to the ports to enforce the VAT collection, and thisbrought business to a halt.   Styrene producers throughout the region reduced their operating rates inorder to cope with high inventory. Japanese producers cut operations to by20-30%; Taiwan producers reduced production by 30-50% and in Korea, YukongOxichemical had a unscheduled shutdown of its 300,000 mt/yr styrene plantfor one week, citing bearish market conditions for the outage.   Furthermore, ethylene plants throughout Asia cut runs by 15-20% in July.Lack of Chinese demand for ethylene-derivative products had led to drasticdrop in its prices, prompting ethylene producers to run their plants justenough for their own downstream requirements, dropping their export ratioaltogether.   In Nov, benzene prices firmed in Asia, driven by a surge in Chinesedemand for styrenic derivatives. This time the Chinese government was knownto be planning to reduce the export rebate on the value added tax nextyear.   From Jan 1 1996, the current 17% VAT and 14% rebate for exports will berevised to a 9% rebate. The new rebate will apply to imported materialdelivered into China from Jan 1.   Traders also report that import licenses for 1995 are due to expire onDec 20, and that the Chinese government is expected to severely limit thenumber of new licenses issued next year.   These two factors prompted Chinese end-users - who were already low onstocks because of a clampdown on imports and speculative trading since May- to buy large quantities before the end of the year.   Last week Korea rejected bids at $240/mt FOB, holding out for $250/mtand above. The last trade into India last week was at $290/mt C+F. Thisweek sellers have brought up their offers to around $300/mt C+F, followingthe US Jan contract price nomination at 90 cts/lb, 10 cts/lb over Dec.   Meanwhile other consumers in Asia are staying sidelined amid uncertaintyover the benzene price trend. Most agree that in the short term the marketis firm. However, they refer to waning Chinese demand for styrene andethylene derivatives as the basis for a possible return to weak benzeneprices in Asia.   Toluene began the year on a bearish note in Asia, with ample deepseacargoes outpacing demand. It was only towards mid-March that the marketbegan to firm, as Korean producers began their plant turnarounds.   Between May and July, toluene prices held up relatively better thanbenzene due to its comparatively tighter supply. And, unlike benzene,toluene enjoyed relatively steady demand from China where it is used toupgrade 95 RON unleaded gasoline to 97 RON.   But toluene's decline escalated with the unplanned shutdown of two TDPunits in Korea in early Aug. In order to cope with their benzene andxylenes surpluses Korea's Yukong Ltd and HanWha Energy shut down their TDPunits indefinately from early August, and the surplus in Korean toluenewhich subsequently followed led to increasingly bearish market sentiments.Bearish benzene prices also severely softened the toluene markets.   Producers also had been quick to decrease their prices in order to tokeep arbitrage cargoes out of the region.   Taiwan's Chinese Petroleum Corp is known to issue monthly toluene buytenders for delivery two months out, thereby extending eligibility to US,NWE and other deepsea product.   Asian producers therefore did not rule out the possibility of thetraders shipping out additional toluene to Asia along with CPC's volumesespecially in times of weak market conditions in the US.   Currently toluene prices have firmed in line with tight supply and alsobecause of strong benzene and MTBE markets in north and southeast Asia.Illustration(s):Illustration: Graph: Spot Asian Benzene, Toluene 1995Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightPLATT'S INTERNATIONAL PETROCHEMICAL RPTS via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996   Vol. 15, NoUS OLEFINS PRICES WEAKEN STEADILY AS DEMAND DWINDLESBy:Richard Capuchino, Platt's Houston; Nicholas Towasser, Platt's New York   US olefin markets experienced a downturn in prices through 1995, howevernone more drastically than ethylene and refinery grade propylene. Bothproducts lost about 10 cts/lb in contract prices from the beginning to theend of the year.   Ethylene began 1995 settling up 1 ct/lb in Jan, Feb and Mar to placemost contracts in 29-33 cts/lb range, while spot prices were at 31-34cts/lb FOB USG by the end of Mar.   The National Petroleum Refiners Association reported Q1 1995 inventoriesat 1.28-bil lbs, up from the 1.11-bil lbs in Q1 1994. Meanwhile, Q1 1995production totaled 11.64-bil lbs, down from the 11.70-bil lbs in Q1 1994.   By late Mar, demand began to fall, while spot prices also fell from thelow 30s to 28-29 cts/lb. Producers rolled over contract prices from Marchto 29-33 cts/lb in April and May.   Jun brought the first decrease in ethylene prices, when producers agreedto settle contracts down 0.50 cts/lb. Contract prices for Jul also settleddown 1 ct/lb to 27.50-31.50 cts/lb. Spot prices in Jul had also fallen to25.50-26.50 cts/lb due to consumers meeting commitments from contractmaterial.   The NPRA reported that both inventories and production increased in Q2.Inventories in Q2 totalled 1.88-bil lbs, a two-year high, while Q2 outputntotaled 11.95-bil lbs.   High Q2 inventories were due to turnarounds scheduled for Sep and Oct.High stocks and decreased demand from polyethylene producers caused severalethylene producers to cut production rates to about 80% capacity. By lateSep producers had settled Aug and Sep contracts down 1.50 cts/lb placingSep contracts at 24.50-28.50 cts/lb, with spot prices at 22-23 cts/lb FOBUSG.   By early Oct, at least one producer made a three-month nomination of Octdown 1 ct, November down 0.50 ct and a rollover for Dec. Some sourcesdoubted the nomination's chances of acceptance, and by mid-Nov it seemedmost consumers had chosen to take a month-by-month approach.   Around the same time a rumor circulated that Union Texas had offered tosettle October volumes with a formula of 75-80% at an Oct contract price of1.5 cts down from September and 20-25% at a Oct spot price of 15.5 cts/lb.Two Texas producers said they settled some accounts for Oct at a level'competitive' with the formula. One producer said the formula resulted in acontract price of 20.70 cts/lb for Oct, and settled some accounts at thatlevel.   Also complicating the Oct contract price was the question of at whatlevel exactly the Sep price had been. According to one report Exxon, in aneffort to devise a contract price that would more accurately reflect themarket price and eliminate the need for discounts, revised its Sep contractprice from 24.50 cts/lb to 23.50 cts/lb. However, another producer refusedto revise its Sep contact price, and maintained an Oct contract of 23cts/lb.   Early in Oct there was unconfirmed talk of some customers demanding anadditional 0.25 ct/lb discount on the Sep contract price, in addition tothe original 1.5 cts/lb decrease from Aug.   By late Nov, most sources reported settling Oct at 22-23 cts/lb, down1.5 cts/lb from Sep, though another producer, who had not yet settledaccounts, did report hearing an Oct contract of 21 cts/lb as a referencepoint.   By the year's end, neither Nov nor Dec had definitively settled. Someproducers reported invoicing or settling Nov down 1 ct/lb. One producerreported settling half its accounts with a two-month settlement: Nov at 20cts/lb, down 1 ct/lb, and Dec at 19.50 cts/lb, down a further 0.50 cts/lb.   Another producer reported some participants were working toward atwo-month agreement. He said a reduction of 1 ct/lb for Nov was tentativelyagreed, and that talks centered around whether Dec would settle down 0.50ct/lb or 1 ct/lb. However, one consumer reported offers to settle Nov atmore than 1 ct/lb down.   This week, one producer reported that settlements for Nov varied fromdown 1 ct to 1.50 cts/lb, and that Dec negotiations were still ongoing.   To compound the year-end confusion, in Dec several US PE producersannounced a 5 cts/lb US domestic price increase for all grades of PEeffective Jan 1. Similarly, one producer expected higher feedstock pricesas the colder weather might make producers less inclined to giveconcessions.   Fiber grade ethylene glycol began the year tight due to strong globaldemand for polyester, while weather continued to affect demand ofanti-freeze grade. Spot prices for A-F grade began the year at 30-31 cts/lbFOB USG. Industrial grade was pegged at 29-31 cts/lb at first of the year,with contract prices for fiber grade at 28.5 cts/lb.   Strong demand for PET kept the MEG market tight. Fiber grade was tight,with spot supply almost non-existent at the beginning of the year.   In Mar, producers nominated a 2 ct/lb increase for fiber grade due tostrong demand and extremely low inventories. By mid-Apr, fiber grade hadsettled at 30.5 cts/lb, while industrial and A-F grade were at 30-32 cts/lbfor spot deals.   In mid-Apr sources reported that A-F grade buyers were looking to indusgrade market for incremental volumes. Export demand for fiber grade wasdescribed as 'phenomenal' in May.   In early Jun, one producer nominated 2 ct/lb increases on all grades forboth list and off-list prices. Stocks on all three grades remainedrelatively low.   Spot prices in late Jun were seen at 30-34 cts/lb FOB USG for industrialand fiber grade.   Mid-Jul saw fiber grade contracts settle at 33.5 cts/lb FD USG, whilespot prices for A-F and industrial grades around 33-35 cts/lb FOB USG.Strong demand and low inventories forced some producers in late Jul to buymaterial in the spot market.   A traditional seasonal decrease in A-F grade demand saw a 'lull' indemand. By late Aug spot prices for industrial and A-F grades fell to 29-31cts/lb FOB USG, while demand for fiber grade continued strong. The decreasein demand also allowed for a slight buildup in inventories.   Mid-Sep saw producers cautiously building up stocks, recalling theprevious winter's mildness.   Throughout Q4 sources reported generally less-than-dynamic A-F gradesales. In mid-Oct there was talk of Mexican and Venezuelan industrial gradematerial available at 26-27 cts/lb FOB USG, but few buyers were seen. Somesources believe the A-F grade buying season will continue into 1996, asconsumers maintain low stocks.   For propylene, the year began with contract prices for all grades in thehigh teens and low 20 cts/lb range.   Jan contracts for all grades settled up 1 ct/lb from Dec, with polymergrade at 21.75 cts/lb, chemical grade at 20.25 cts/lb and refinery grade at18.50-19 cts/lb. Spot polymer grade showed a 10 ct/lb premium abovecontract, chemical grade had a 2-4 ct/lb premium, but spot refinery gradewas about 1-1.50 cts/lb below contract.   Some tightness in supply was noted in the market when several producerstook turnarounds at FCC units along the Gulf Coast early in the year.Strong demand and scheduled outages kept market snug for several months,with producers having little opportunity to build inventories.   Alkylation values for refinery grade propylene were at 7-8 cts/lb inFeb, with values depressed by low gasoline prices. Values of 6-7 cts/lb inlate Mar continued to encourage producers to sell refinery grade on thespot market where it commanded a higher value. Excess refinery gradematerial was entering the US Gulf from California, the Midwest and SouthLouisiana.   By early Mar, producers were building inventories. Contract and spotprices slipped for refinery grade propylene by early Jun to 15.75-18.25cts/lb and 15.00-15.50 cts/lb FOB USG respectively, due to overproductionand low alkylation values. However, contract prices for polymer andchemical grade had added 1 ct/lb in Feb, Mar and Apr to 24.75 cts/lb forpolymer grade and 23.25 cts/lb for chemical grade for Apr.   Although an increase was passed in Apr, discussions were drawn out dueto the levelling off in ethylene prices and the decline in the refinerygrade market. Discussions for Apr included talk of a 0.5-1 ct/lb decreasein prices. However, after the 1 ct/lb increase in Apr, consumers settledMay as a rollover.   By mid-May, outages at several Gulf Coast fluid catalytic cracking unitshelped firm the market, while alkylation values as high as 15-17 cts/lbwere attributed to the onset of the driving season.   Due to excess supply of polymer grade material, spot prices fell to25-26 cts/lb FOB USG for polymer grade and 23-24 cts/lb FOB USG forchemical grade in Jun. Demand for the higher grade propylene was softer dueto falling polypropylene demand.   By mid-Jul the weak polymer market was also affecting refinery gradepropylene producers who upgrade material via splitting, and spot prices forall grades had fallen below contract prices by late Aug. Polymer grade spotwas at 20.50- 21.50 cts/lb FOB USG, while chemical grade at 19.50- 20.50cts/lb and spot refinery grade at 14.25-15.00 cts/lb ex-tank FOB USG.   Inventories for Q2 totaled 965-mil lbs, while production totaled 6.7-billbs. By late Sep, spot prices had declined further due to ample supply andlower demand for all three grades. All spot prices had fallen considerablybelow contracts prices by the end of Q3.   Although some US sources reported settling Oct polymer and chemicalgrade propylene down 1.5 cts/lb, Nov down 1.5 cts/lb and Dec down 1 ct/lb,the Dec contract price for both grades seemed to be very much in questionby the year's end.   One source reported discussions were divided between a large number ofproducers who contended Dec should be down 1 ct/lb, and some consumers whocontended it should be down 1.5 cts/lb.   By early Dec, polymer grade was heard in the pipeline at 11 cts/lb and10 cts/lb in railcars. Chemical grade was heard at 10 cts/lb in pipelineand 9.5 cts/lb in railcar. Refinery grade propylene also dropped tosignificant lows. Its Dec contract price settled between 9.00 and 9.50cts/lb, while Dec spot was reported between 8.50 and 9.00 cts/lb.   Butadiene contracts began the year settling up 1 ct to 25 cts/lb, whilespot prices were at 25-27 cts/lb CIF USG. Jan 1 inventories totalled221-mil lbs/yr, up 39-mil lbs/yr from Dec 1994.   Feb 1 inventories totaled 229-mil lbs/yr, while spot market at 23-24cts/lb CIF USG. Producers that were seeking to build inventories inanticipation of turnarounds allowed stocks to total 235-mil lbs on Mar 1,and reported approaching capacity at storage tanks by early Mar.   After rolling over in Feb and Mar at 25 cts/lb, butadiene contractssettled down 2 cts to 23 cts/lb in Apr. Apr 1 inventories totaled 225-millbs/yr, which was the first decline in stock levels since Nov 1994. Spotprices in mid-Apr were at 22-23 cts/lb CIF USG.   May 1 inventories totaled 249-mil lbs, while spot prices were pegged at20-22 cts/lb CIF USG. However, the industry was at odds over the reportingof Jun 1 inventories at 145-mil lbs. The decrease was due to downtime atethylene and butadiene units, decreased imports and high freight rates.Contracts settled at a rollover at 23 cts/lb in both May and Jun.   Spot prices in early Jul were pegged at 23-24 cts/lb CIF USG. Jul 1inventories rebounded somewhat to 166-mil lbs/yr, but this figure waswithout the participation of one large consumer that took issue with theJun 1 figure.   Jul contract prices settled late in the month at 25 cts/lb, while Augcontracts settled unchanged. Aug 1 inventories totaled 173-mil lbs. In Sepbutadiene derivative markets reported weakness, though this was offset bythe turnaround of two major butadiene plants. Sep 1 inventories totaled200-mil lbs, which was ascribed to expected turnarounds in Oct and toseveral tanks taking on extra material for operators whose other tanks wereout of service.   Contracts rolled over in Sep at 25 cts/lb. Spot transactions wereminimal due to high inventories. By the end of Sep, spot butadiene waspegged at 23-23.5 cts/lb CIF USG.   In late Oct, Lyondell, Texas Petrochemical and Shell nominated the Novcontract price at 23 cts/lb, down 2 cts from Oct. The downward push came ata time of high stocks.   From Jul to Oct, consultants Hodson & Co reported a sustained rise in USbutadiene inventories. Oct 1 inventories were reported at 226-mil lbs, anincrease of 13% over Sep.   As consumers sought to work off butadiene bought at 25 cts/lb, the spotmarket seemed to vanish by mid-Nov. Aside from the uneconomic pricing ofimported material, sources also said storage was often an issue.   As the year closed, high inventories continued to weigh on the market,and there was unconfirmed talk of at least a large consumer demanding yetanother price decrease for Jan of 2 cts/lb, pushing the contract down to 19cts/lb.   In early Jan, one trader heard reports that three producers are indeedsettling at this level. Two producers have reportedly settled 19 cts/lb forJan, while a third has granted a 'temporary volume allowance', in thetrader's words, bringing the net contract price to 19 cts/lb, butpreserving 21 cts/lb as a basis for Feb negotiations.Illustration(s):Illustration: Graph: Spot US Ethylene, Propylene Prices 1995Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightPLATT'S INTERNATIONAL PETROCHEMICAL RPTS via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996   Vol. 15, NoJAPAN'S SHIN-ETSU CHEMICAL CO LTD   Japan's Shin-Etsu Chemical Co Ltd plans to construct its second PVCplant in the US with a capacity of 400,000 mt/yr, local press reported.Shin-Etsu reportedly plans to startup the PVC plant in early 1998.   Meanwhile, the company's US subsidiary, Sintech, is currently surveyingpossible plant locations along the Gulf of Mexico. The company willreportedly makes its decision in the spring of 1996. Total investment inthe new PVC plant is estimated at $700-mil.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightPLATT'S INTERNATIONAL PETROCHEMICAL RPTS via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996   Vol. 15, NoETHYLENE   Shanghai is to invest an estimated Yuan 40-bil ($4.8-bil) to build anethylene plant in a joint venture with neighbouring Zhejiang province, theShanghai Star bi-weekly newspaper reported.   The plant would be built in the Caojing chemical base near Hangzhou Bayand would produce 600,000 mt/yr, with production starting as soon aspossible, according to the report.   'Foreign funds would be introduced to promote the project,' the reportquoted Yu Dexiong, a senior chemical industry industry official, assaying.   Yu said Shanghai's strategy was to develop the chemical industry notonly in the city but also in the Yangtse river valley.   The Shanghai Chemical Industry Bureau was recently transformed into anentreprise and renamed Shanghai Chemical Shareholding (Group) Co in a moveto give new impetus to the chemical industry.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightPLATT'S INTERNATIONAL PETROCHEMICAL RPTS via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996   Vol. 15, NoKOREA ETHYLENE DEREGULATION   Eight of Korea's ethylene producers plan to negotiate with thegovernment on matters regarding deregulation of investment policy on napthacracker expansions, according to a Korean press report last week.   A meeting was held recently of senior officials from eight of thenation's top petrochemical producers who are discussing how to bettercoordinate investments in naphtha cracker expansion projects.   According to an industry source, the government is concerned about thenew round of ethylene expansions based on negative results from previousexpansions.   However, the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Energy is set to deregulatethe petrochemical industry in mid-1996 and is reportedly set to authorizeHyundai Petrochemical's new naphtha cracker expansion project by early1996. Currently, all investments geared toward expansion projects must meetapproval from the Ministry.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightPLATT'S INTERNATIONAL PETROCHEMICAL RPTS via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996   Vol. 15, NoJAPAN'S IDEMITSU PETROCHEMICAL   Japan's Idemitsu Petrochemical has sold its 15% stake in a polyethylenejoint venture based in Malaysia to UK's BP Chemicals, a Petronas sourcesaid last week.   BP now has a 60% controlling interest in the 200,000 mt/yr PE plant inKertih, on the northeast coast of the Malaysian peninsula, with Malaysiannational oil company Petronas holding 40% as before, the source said.   The plant produces high density polyethylene and linear low densitypolyethylene using BP technology.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightPLATT'S INTERNATIONAL PETROCHEMICAL RPTS via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996   Vol. 15, NoPOLYETHYLENE TEREPHALATE   Continental Pet Espana announced plans to construct a newbottle-manufacturing plant that will more than double polyethyleneterephalate demand to 55,000 mt/yr.   The facility, to be located in Madrid, is expected to be completed in1997. A possible second phase would boost PET demand to 70,000 mt/yr.   Although the Continental Pet Europe subsidiary, which currently has fourplants in Spain, usually buys raw material from central European producers,local supply is poised to increase.   In November, Seda de Barcelona subsidiary Catalana de Polimers announcedplans to boost PET production to 150,000 mt/yr from 40,000 mt/yr byyear-end 1996.   Meanwhile, Eastman Chemical is building a 120,000 mt/yr PET plant in SanRoque in southern Spain, in conjunction with Cepsa subsidiary Interquisadoubling purified terephthalic acid capacity to 400,000 mt/yr. Bothprojects are also scheduled to be completed by year-end 1996.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightPLATT'S INTERNATIONAL PETROCHEMICAL RPTS via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996   Vol. 15, NoLPG   Saudi Aramco and Kuwait Petroleum Corp have announced January LPGpostings for propane at $205/mt FOB, an increase of $10/mt over theDecember price. Butane has been set at $188/mt FOB, unchanged from theDecember level.   Last week, BP announced January North Sea prices at $230/mt FOB forpropane, an increase of $50/mt, while butane was posted at $155/mt, down$7/mt from December.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightPLATT'S INTERNATIONAL PETROCHEMICAL RPTS via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996   Vol. 15, NoSUPERFUND   The Republican balanced budget plan vetoed by President Clinton includeda short-term extension of the Superfund excise tax on petroleum andchemical feedstocks and a corporate environmental tax.   The tax was due to expire midnight Dec 31, and will not be collectedafter that date until there is a budget agreement between the White Houseand houses of Congress.   The excise tax on petroleum and chemical feedstocks was extended fornine months, pending efforts to overhaul and reauthorize the existingprogram. The budget plan also extended the 5 cts/bbl oil spill liabilitytax, which was due to expire Dec 31.   The fund is close to its $1-billion cap, at which point collectionscease. The 0.1 ct/gal tax to clean leaks from underground storage tanksalso expired Dec 31, and is not extended under the Republican plan.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightPLATT'S INTERNATIONAL PETROCHEMICAL RPTS via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996   Vol. 15, NoUNION CARBIDE CORP   Union Carbide Corp has named William H Joyce president and chiefexecutive effective Jan 1. Joyce succeeds Robert D Kennedy, who retired atthe end of Dec but who remains on the board.   Joyce was elected chief executive officer in April, having beenpresident and chief operating officer since 1993. Joyce is on severalboards including the Chemical Manufacturers Association and AmericanPlastics Council.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightPLATT'S INTERNATIONAL PETROCHEMICAL RPTS via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996   Vol. 15, NoPROPYLENE OXIDE   Dow Chemical and its subsidiaries plan to expand propylene oxidecapacity at Freeport, Texas; Stade, Germany; and Aratu, Brazil, by a totalof 250,000mt/yr through continuous process technology improvements, thecompany said.   In 1994, Dow announced the addition of more than 227,000mt/yr of POcapacity at its Plaquemine, Lousiana; Freeport, Stade and Aratu facilities.All of these expansions will be completed by the end of 1996.   Dow will now add an additional 45,000mt/yr at its Freeport plant by theend of 1996, bringing the plant's total capacity increase to 160,000mt/yrsince 1994.   An additional 205,000mt/yr of capacity will be added at the Stade andAratu sites. Dow expects to achieve these two increments between mid-1998and early 1999.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightPLATT'S INTERNATIONAL PETROCHEMICAL RPTS via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996   Vol. 15, NoPLATT'S AVERAGE MONTHLY PRICESIllustration(s):Table: PLATT'S AVERAGE MONTHLY PRICES ($/tonne unless indicated): December1995 (This table is not available eletronically. Pleas see January 5, 1996issue.)Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List WT02-B35-8IA095-001021-B004-215http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/ch09.html 205.156.212.5 19970121223747 text/html 64982HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Tuesday, 21-Jan-97 22:35:47 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:42:00 GMTContent-length: 64797Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ch09.html Sample Issue Copyright STEREOCHEMICAL TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet JANUARY 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES INDUSTRY NEWS What's Ahead for Chiral in '96 (325 words) 5.5 Million ChiRex Shares Offered (299 words) Celgene Adds to Its Board (103 words) Chiroscience Turns to Generic Bulk Actives (567 words) DRUGS Chiral Technology Aided by AIDS (552 words) Sepracor Makes Improvements (451 words) (R)-Lomefloxacin Eliminates Headaches (424 words) Ketoprofen Gains Market Share (306 words) Motilin Focus of Two-Pronged Effort (224 words) Ergo Uses Ergot for Diabetes (162 words) ASYMMETRIC SYNTHESIS Enantiomeric Sertraline Synthesized by Pfizer (110 words) SmithKline Produces Camptothecin Analogs (218 words) Oxazolidinones Show Diabetes Potential (169 words) UOP Provides Good Yield (422 words) Supercritical Fluids Yield Higher Purity (149 words) Fredericamycin A Is Scripps First (196 words) USC Characterizes Stable Tetracation (141 words) PerSeptive Introduces New PNA Chemistry (221 words) BIOCATALYSTS Arrhythmia Drug Uses Bioreduction (195 words) Process Not Picky About Enzymes (329 words) Thermostable Enzymes Are Enantioselective (75 words) SEPARATIONS Hoechst Makes A Fast Switch (441 words) Continuous Sampling Elucidates Absorptions (700 words) ANALYSIS Beckman's New Analysis Method (450 words) COMPANY PROFILE Chiroscience Blends Chemistry, Enzymes (653 words) CALENDAR (190 words) CopyrightSTEREOCHEMICAL TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996What's Aheadfor Chiral in '96The past year saw chiral technology transition from being more thanjust a niche in some corner of a pharmaceutical company to becomea major part of drug-development efforts. With the breathtakingrevelations of enzymes, receptors, and genes as new potentialtargets for therapeutic interventions being made, Big Pharma nowfinds it obliged to team with combinatorial chemistry firms just tokeep up with all the exploding opportunities. To be sure, not allthe potential therapeutic molecules are chiral, but the majorityare so.Stereochemical technology has applications also innonpharmaceutical areas, such as pesticides, flavors, aromas, dyes,liquid crystals, and polymers. The new year is not yet the timewhen we will see maturation in the pharmaceutical sector, however,and these other fields will likely remain minor outlets, exceptperhaps for liquid-crystal applications, which will continue to besignificant. Will chiral technology firms miss the "ground floor"opportunities to be had in these other areas, or are their platessimply too full as it is?The unfolding year will undoubtedly yield new, dazzling feats inthe synthetic duplication of natural molecules.  Most of them,however, will likely continue to be marvels of academicaccomplishment but will be commercially inviable because of pooryields, impractical complexity, or costly raw materials.  Theywill, though, point up new possibilities for asymmetric chemicalcatalysts and resolving agents.Biocatalysts -- live microbes and refined enzymes -- will probablycarve out significant new roles for themselves in 1996. Theyalready have an important place in stereochemical technology, butorganic chemists are beginning to look more favorably on them asuseful tools, in part because genetic engineering, proteinengineering, and new screening technologies are delivering up newerand better enzyme performances.Synthesis and separation will continue to be opposing strategiesfor chiral molecule manufacture this new year. But companiesincreasingly see the virtue of combining the two in a way thatmakes both economically feasible and efficient.Back to Headline List CopyrightSTEREOCHEMICAL TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 19965.5 Million ChiRexShares OfferedSepracor Inc. (33 Locke Drive, Marlborough, MA  01752;  Tel:508/481-6700, Fax: 508/481-7683) and Sterling Organics Ltd.(Sterling Place, Dudley, Cramlington, Northumberland NE23 7QG,U.K.), a fine chemical company, will join forces to create a newchiral technology company, ChiRex Inc.The two companies jointly announced the filing by ChiRex Inc. of aregistration statement with the Securities and Exchange Commissionrelating to a proposed offering of 5,500,000 shares of ChiRexcommon stock.  Net proceeds from the proposed offering will be usedto combine Sepracor Inc.'s chiral chemistry business, which isconducted through its wholly-owned subsidiary, SepraChem Inc., withSterling Organics' in a newly formed U.S. company.  The offeringwill be managed by CS First Boston, Lehman Brothers, and SmithBarney Inc.  The S-1 has been filed with a proposed maximumoffering price of $16.50 per share.ChiRex Inc. will combine SepraChem's chiral chemistry processtechnology with Sterling Organics' large-scale chemicalmanufacturing capability.  SepraChem, established in 1994, suppliesSepracor and pharmaceutical companies with chiral pharmaceuticalintermediates and active ingredients.The business of Sterling Organics was established in the 1960s tomanufacture pharmaceutical intermediates for Sterling Winthrop Ltd.(4 New Horizons Court, Harlequin Ave., Brentford, Middlesex  TW89EP, U.K.), of which it was a division.  Eastman Kodak Co. (343State St., Rochester, NY  14650; Tel: 716/724-4000,  Fax: 716/477-3681) sold Sterling Winthrop to Sanofi Winthrop (1 Onslow St.,Guilford, Surrey  GU1 4YS, U.K.) in September 1994, which in turnsold the Sterling Organics operation to a group consisting ofSterling Organics management investors and Montagu Private EquityLtd., the European private equity arm of the HSBC Group (10 LowerThames St., London EC3R 6AE, U.K.).Following the offering, ChiRex is expected to have approximately9.8 million shares outstanding, of which Sepracor is expected toown approximately 38%.Back to Headline List CopyrightSTEREOCHEMICAL TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Celgene Addsto Its BoardCelgene Corp. (7 Powderhorn Drive, Warren, NJ  07054;  Tel:908/271-1001,  Fax: 908/271-4184) reports that its board ofdirectors elected Richard C. E. Morgan to be acting chairman andchief executive officer effective Jan. 1, 1996, filling the postheld by Richard G. Wright, who is retiring.   Morgan, a director ofCelgene since 1986, is a general partner of Wolfensohn PartnersL.P. (New York) and serves as a director of several medicaltechnology companies.Separately, Celgene said Sol J. Barer, president, chief operatingofficer, and director, will replace Wright on the board's executivecommittee, which also includes Chairman Frank T. Cary, and Morgan.Back to Headline List CopyrightSTEREOCHEMICAL TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Chiroscience Turns toGeneric Bulk ActivesChiroscience (Cambridge Science Park, Milton Road, Cambridge CB44WE, U.K.) is entering the intermediates market for generic drugswith an initial goal of grabbing a 10% market share of global salesof the bulk active ingredient for the anti-inflammatory andanalgesic medicine S-naproxen.  The company will concentrate ondevelopment of technologies for low-cost production of generic bulkactives, rather than manufacturing the materials itself.Naproxen is one of the largest selling enantiomeric drugs, havingworldwide sales in the prescription market of about $1 billion,perhaps $300 million in the U.S. alone.  Sales should go evenhigher now that the over-the-counter market is being tapped.Syntex is the major producer of naproxen and is its patent holder.Naproxen is coming off patent, however, and Syntex has collaboratedwith Procter & Gamble to market an OTC naproxen under the nameAleve.  Lederle intends to enter the market with a generic version.Chemically, naproxen is 2-(6-methoxy-2-naphthyl)propionic acid.  Itis, therefore, a chiral 2-substituted propionic compound, acharacteristic shared with the profens.  The substance is marketedas the single S isomer, which has 28 times the biological activityof the other isomer.Chiroscience intends to license its technologies or use contractmanufacturers for supply of bulk actives, which the company willsell to generic drug formulators.  The company will use atechnology licensed from DuPont (Wilmington, DE  19810; Tel:302/695-5234,  Fax: 302/695-5286), using a catalyst for asymmetrichydrogenation, to produce s-naproxen.  Other processes will bedeveloped using Chiroscience's own enzymatic catalyst technology.Alan Shaw, sales director for technical services, says his companybelieves it can significantly reduce process costs whilemaintaining normal margins due to its chiral technology know-how.Chiroscience currently provides chiral building blocks as well asactive ingredients for new chemical entities being developed byother pharmaceutical firms.  The other component of the company'sbusiness focuses on developing pharmaceuticals for marketing on itsown.  One category of pharmaceuticals in its development portfoliois identified as "fast-track single isomers," which are single-enantiomer versions of drugs already on the market.Chiroscience estimates that the current worldwide market for bulkS-naproxen is around 2,000 tons per year, worth $200 million.  Thiscould rise, however, to 3,000 tons, worth $300 million, by the year2000, mainly as a result of introduction of OTC naproxen in WesternEurope.Stereochemical Stock Watch(At close, Jan. 2, 1996)The big winner in our portfolio this month is Chiron, on the newsthat its beta-interferon for multiple sclerosis has received afavorable nod by an FDA committee. Vertex got a boost when itsmarketing partner Glaxo Wellcome announced commencing a clinicaltrial of the company's protease inhibitor for HIV/AIDS (seearticle, this issue).                                    Current   LastCompany                     Symbol  Price     Month     ChangeAbbott Labs                 ABT     41.625    39.375    +2.250Arco Chemical Co.           RCM     48.875    48.250    +0.625Biosepra                    BSEP    3.500     5.125     -1.625Celgene Corp.               CELG    13.000    10.125    +2.875Chiron Corp.                CHIR    108.593   99.500    +9.093Ethyl Corporation           EY      12.875    12.375    +0.500Genzyme Corp.               GENZ    63.500    66.625    -3.125Glaxo Holdings plc          GLX     28.125    26.625    +1.500IBIS Technology Corp.       IBIS    9.000     10.468    -1.468Merck & Co. Inc.            MRK     64.375    61.625    +2.750Pfizer n Inc.               PFE     62.000    58.500    +3.500Regis Corp.                 RGIS    23.750    23.250    +0.500Rhone-Poulenc Rorer Inc.    RPR     52.250    48.500    +3.750Sepracor Inc.               SEPR    18.250    16.062    +2.188Vertex Pharmaceuticals      VRTX    25.750    21.000    +4.750Zeneca Group plc            ZEN     59.250    61.000    -1.750Source:  BCC Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightSTEREOCHEMICAL TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Chiral TechnologyAided by AIDSThe AIDS pandemic provides a virtual goldmine for chiraltechnology, since almost all the drugs available and in developmentfor treating this disease and its associated conditions areenantiomeric.In 1995, the worldwide total sales of all currently marketed HIVreverse-transcriptase inhibitors amounted to about $450 million.Nucleoside types have about two-thirds of this market, or $300million worldwide in 1995, while non-nucleosides have about one-third, or $150 million.The newest to join the arsenal of AIDS antivirals are HIV proteaseinhibitors, which prevent the action of the enzyme needed by thevirus to convert directly transcribed precursors into matureproteins as part of its replication process.  The first of thistype to receive regulatory approval, which came in December 1995,is Invirase (generically called saquinavir) from Roche (Pf. 4002,Grenzachenstrasse 124, Basel CH-4002, Switzerland; Fax:011/410/616/911-111; and 340 Kingsland St., Nutley, NJ 07110; Tel:201/235-5000, Fax: 201/235-7034).Most likely to reach the market next is Ritonavir from AbbottLaboratories (1 Abbott Park Road; Abbott Park, Illinois 60064-3500;Tel: 708/937-6100, Fax: 708/937-2013). Abbott reports recentresults from a clinical trial showing this protease inhibitorsignificantly reduced plasma viremia and elevated counts of CD4lymphocytes.Vertex Pharmaceuticals (40 Allston St., Cambridge, MA 02139; Tel:617/576-3111, Fax: 617/576-2109), developing its own HIV proteaseinhibitor, reports that its partner, Glaxo Wellcome (Berkeley Ave.,Greenford, Middlesex UB6 OHE, U.K.; Fax: 071/493-4809), hascommenced Phase I/II clinical trials in the U.S. and Europe. Thiseffort is being supported also by Kissei Pharmaceutical (Matsumoto,Japan).Although monotherapy with one compound or another does a reasonablejob at keeping the virus at bay, it seems probable that combinationtherapy with a reverse-transcriptase inhibitor and a proteaseinhibitor will constitute the future direction of treatment. Thevirus may develop a resistance toward one drug type, but it facesa greater obstacle to its replication when confronted with bothtypes. It seems possible that while the RTIs will rise to perhaps$500 million by 2000, for an average annual growth rate of 1.9% inthis five-year period, the PIs will rise rapidly from zero to $500million themselves, before settling down to a more normal growthrate.Numerous other drugs, appproved or experimental, also treat AIDS orAIDS-associated conditions. The short list includes gamma-globulin,alpha-interferon, ganciclovir, fluconazole, pentamidine,erythropoietin, foscarnet, itraconazole, atovaquone, rifabutin,dronabinol, megestrol acetate, trimetrexate, clarithromycin,trimethoprim, doxorubicin, and amphotericin B (see table)To these can be added target-specific antibodies, antigen-basedvaccines, immune-boosting cytokines, immunomodutar chemcals, andherbal medicines. Almost every biopharmaceutical and Big Pharmacompany has some sort of involvement with AIDS drugs.Availability of AIDS DrugsDrug                                                    SupplierReverse-Transcriptase Inhibitors:Nucleoside Types --AZT (Retrovir, zidovudine)           WellcomeDidanosine (Videx, ddI)              Bristol-Myers SquibbGS-393* and prodrug form GS-840*     GileadFddA*                                U.S. BioscienceFddI*                                U.S. BioscienceLamivudine (3TC)                     BioChem Pharma/Glaxo WellcomeStavudine (Zerit, d4T)               Bristol-Myers SquibbZalcitabine (Hivid, ddC)             RocheNonnucleoside                        Types--Delavirdine                          UpjohnLovaride                             JanssenL-697661*                            UpjohnNevirapine                           Boehringer IngelheimProtease Inhibitors:Saquinavir (Invirase)                RocheRitonavir (ABT-538)*                 AbbottAG-1343*                             AgouronBCDS:Cu                              ProCyteCrixivan (MK-639)*                   MerckDMP-450*                             DuPont/MerckGS-2992*                             GileadKinostatin 272*                      Yoshiaki Kiso, KyotoPharm.Univ.L-524*                               MerckPolypyrrolinone compound*            Smith and Hirschmann, Univ.Penn.U-96988                              UpjohnVX-478**                             Vertex/WellcomeIntegrase Inhibitors:AR-177                               Aronex* In developmentSource: STN (BCC Inc.)Back to Headline List CopyrightSTEREOCHEMICAL TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Sepracor MakesImprovementsSepracor Inc. (33 Locke Drive, Marlborough, MA  01752;  Tel:508/481-6700, Fax: 508/481-7683) has been granted its eleventh andtwelfth U.S. patents for Improved Chemical Entities (ICE).U.S. Patent 5,470,868 covers the use of R-ondansetron as anantiemetic.  Marketed by Glaxo Wellcome (Lansdowne House, BerkeleySquare, London W1X 6BZ, U.K.; Tel: 1714934060) as Zofran, racemicondansetron already is a leading antiemetic used to treat nauseaand vomiting associated with chemotherapy treatments and surgery.Sepracor estimates that emesis occurs in 70% of the 3.6 millionchemotherapy episodes and 30% of the 23 million surgical proceduresperformed in the U.S. each year.  The sales of Zofran in 1994 wereapproximately $600 million.Despite its effectiveness for emesis, racemic ondansetron has showna meaningful incidence of adverse side effects such as tachycardia,angina, and electrocardiographic alterations, including second-degree heart block most prevalent in nonchemotherapy uses.Sepracor believes that the single isomer of ondansetron provides anopportunity for development of a safer, more effective antiemetic.Preclinical trials have indicated that R-ondansetron has superiorantiemetic activity compared with the racemic product.In preclinical studies, Sepracor has discovered that a purifiedversion of itraconazole retains full antifungal activity withreduced risk of drug-drug interaction.  Marketed by JanssenPharmaceuticals Inc. (1000 E. Garvey Ave. S., West Covina, CA91790; Tel: 818/918-8510, Fax: 818/918-2862) as Sporanox,itraconazole is a leading antifungal agent.  The product had 1994worldwide sales of $276 million and is protected until June 1998under its composition-of-matter patent.Sporanox is a complex molecule consisting of several isomers.Despite its effectiveness for treating fungal and yeast infections,Sporanox carries a warning label about certain drug interactionsthat cause adverse effects, such as cardiac arrhythmia, ventriculartachycardia, and torsades de pointes.  Other adverse effectsinclude liver toxicity, nausea, vomiting, and hypersensitivityreactions.  U.S. Patent 5,474,997 claims pharmaceuticalcompositions containing (2R,4S)-itraconazole is a way of treatinglocal and systemic fungal and yeast infections while avoiding theconcomitant liability of adverse effects associated with the drug.David S. Barlow, president of Sepracor Pharmaceuticals, said thatthe improvement in safety profile may ultimately help enable theswitch of itraconazole from a prescription drug to an over-the-counter product. That would help extend the franchise for the drugand expand its market.Sepracor additionally seeks to commercialize norastemizole, athird-generation antihistamine and potentially improved allergytherapy. Norastemizole is an active metabolite of astemizole, thenonsedating antihistamine marketed by Janssen under the brand nameHismanal. The astemizole product may produce cardiac arrhythmia,however.  Preclinical studies by Sepracor indicate thatnorastemizole may avoid this side effect.  The fact thatastemizole, as well as norastemizole, are nonchiral entities pointsup that Sepracor does not deal exclusively with chiral molecules.Back to Headline List CopyrightSTEREOCHEMICAL TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996(R)-LomefloxacinEliminates HeadachesJames W. Young of Sepracor Inc. (33 Locke Drive, Marlborough, MA01752;  Tel: 508/481-6700, Fax: 508/481-7683) has been issued apatent for methods and compositions that treat bacterial infectionusing optically pure (R)-lomefloxacin (U. S. 5,476,854). Opticalpurity is important since certain isomers may actually bedeleterious rather than simply inert. For example, it has beensuggested that the D-enantiomer of thalidomide was a safe andeffective sedative when prescribed for the control of morningsickness during pregnancy, and the corresponding L-enantiomer wasa potent teratogen.It has been discovered that the optically pure (R)-isomer oflomefloxacin is effective in treating infection in a human whileavoiding adverse effects associated with the administration ofracemic lomefloxacin, including headache, stomach discomfort,gastrointestinal disorders, hypoglycemia, renal and hepaticdysfunction, allergic reactions and respiratory distress, andarthropathy, such as cartilage lesions and erosion andabnormalities in bone growth in immature patients.Many organic compounds exist in optically active forms, i.e. theyhave the ability to rotate the plane of plane-polarized light. Indescribing an optically active compound, the prefixes D and L or Rand S are used to denote the absolute configuration of the moleculeabout its chiral center(s).  A specific stereoisomer may bereferred to as an enantiomer, and a mixture of such isomers isoften called an enantiomeric mixture. A 50:50 mixture ofenantiomers if referred to as a racemic mixture.Stereochemical purity is of importance in the field ofpharmaceuticals, where 12 of the 20 most prescribed drugs exhibitchirality. A case in point is provided by the L-form of the b-adrenergic blocking agent, propranolol, which is known to be 100times more potent than the D-enantiomer.Sepracor's development includes methods for treating the above-described conditions in a human while avoiding the adverse effectsthat are associated with the racemic mixture of lomefloxacin byadministering the optically pure (R)-isomer of lomefloxacin.Lomefloxacin is currently available commercially in Argentina,Japan, Mexico, and other countries in Asia and Eastern Europe asthe racemic mixture.  Racemic lomefloxacin, having the chemicalname 1-ethyl-6,8-difluoro-1,4-dihydro-7-(3-methyl-1-piperazinyl)-4-oxo-3-quinolinecar-boxylic acid, belongs to the quinoline class ofantibiotics. The quinoline antibiotics, in general, exhibit a broadspectrum of antibacterial action, demonstrating effectivenessagainst both gram-positive and gram-negative bacterial strains.Quinoline antibiotics have been shown to be effective in treatinginfections of the respiratory, genito-urinary, and gastrointestinaltracts.  Racemic lomefloxacin exhibits a broad spectrum ofantibacterial action, demonstrating effectiveness against bothgram-positive and gram-negative bacterial strains. Lomefloxacin hasshown to be more effective against gram-negative bacteria.Back to Headline List CopyrightSTEREOCHEMICAL TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Ketoprofen GainsMarket ShareThe chiral drug, ketoprofen, sold under the Orudis KT brand name bythe Whitehall-Robins Healthcare Division of American Home Products(5 Giralda Farms, Madison, NJ 07940; Tel: 201/660-5000), hasachieved a 3.7% share of the $2.75 billion OTC pain reliever marketin the U.S., according to A.C. Nielson. The survey covers just thetwo-month period ended Dec. 16, since introduction of the producton Nov. 9. The share figure translates into sales of $102,000,which comes to $610,000 on an annualized basis, although it's tooearly to foretell the actual full-year performance.To achieve even this modest share so quickly, Whitehall-Robinsundertook the largest overnight delivery of new medication toretail stores it has ever made.  In a 24-hour, nationwidedistribution effort, more than 20,000 trucks were mobilized todeliver the Orudis KT to more than 30,000 retail outlets. Retailersapparently confirm the product's market acceptance. Says JohnSpellman, analgesic category manager of American Drug Stores,"Orudis KT has made a surprisingly strong, early impact on theover-the-counter pain-relief category at [the company's] stores."Meanwhile, the consumer Care Division of Bayer (1 Mellon BankCenter, 500 Grant St., Pittsburgh, PA 15219; Tel: 412/394-5500,Fax: 412/394-5586) has entered the arena, with its Actron brand ofketoprofen. Although the tablet has the same strength as AmericanHome Product's Orudis, Bayer's advertising campaign will emphasizeActron's smaller tablet size. Promotion of Actron will includenewspaper displays in the top 20 markets and televisionadvertising. As Gary Balkema, president of Bayer Consumer Caresays, "The powerful medicine in Actron delivers safe and effectiverelief of many types of pain.  And its unique size offers a new,tangible benefit for consumers: it's very easy to swallow."Ketoprofen chemically is in the same class as ibuprofen andnaproxen, a 2-substituted propionic acid that gives the moleculeits chiral character.Back to Headline List CopyrightSTEREOCHEMICAL TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Motilin Focus ofTwo-Pronged EffortMotilin is a recently discovered peptide hormone found in thegastrointestinal tract and has a molecular weight of around 2,700daltons.  Its function is to stimulate gastric movement.  Effortsto imitate and to suppress motilin's action is the subject of drugdevelopment by several companies.In one recent development, Sanwa Kagaku Kenkyusho (35 Higashi,Sotobori-cho, Higashi-ku. Nagoya 461, Japan; Fax: 052/951-7650), arelatively small pharmaceutical firm, has developed an orallyabsorbable form of motilin. Instead of the natural molecule, Sanwauses a derivative, L-leucine-13-motilin-homoserine.  The agent'sformulation includes a special surfactant that includes a bilesalt, a saponin, and a polyethylene glycol/higher alcohol ether.The surfactant acts as an inhibitor of peptide cleaving enzymes.Too much gastrointestinal activity can be as bad as too little, andit commonly manifests itself as "nervous stomach" -- diarrhea andthe like. The pharmaceutical division of BOC's subsidiary, Ohmeda(110 Allen Road, Liberty Corner, NJ 07938; Tel: 908/647-9200, Fax:908/647-9245) has invented motilin analogs that antagonize thehormone's receptor and thereby inhibits gastrointestinal motoractivity.The analogs are optically active isomers of the amino acids thatmake up motilin, but some have the D instead of the natural Lconfiguration, e.g. D-arginine, D-lysine, D-ornithine, D-glutamine,D-asparagine, or D-alanine. Unnatural amino acids also may be partof the composition, e.g. D-2,4-diaminobutyric acid, ahalophenylalanine, and cyclohexylalanine.Back to Headline List CopyrightSTEREOCHEMICAL TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Ergo Uses Ergotfor DiabetesErgo Science Corp. (Boston, MA; Tel: 617/241-6816) finds thatbromocriptine, an ergot alkaloid derivative having five chiralcenters, can benefit in the treatment of Type II diabetes.  Theformulated product, brand-named Ergoset, is currently in Phase IIIclinical trials.In an animal study using seasonally obese, hyperinsulinemic Syrianhamsters, a carefully timed administration of bromocriptineproduced a significant reduction in noctural lipolysis and hepaticglucose production accompanied by a 75% decrease in circulatinginsulin and improved daytime glucose tolerance.  Timedbromocriptine may improve glucose tolerance by inhibiting lipolysisand free fatty acid oxidation through a central and possiblyperipheral effect that increases the ratio of dopamine tonoradrenaline activity. An increasing body of evidence points tothe influence of circadian rhythm on human metabolism.Bromocriptine already has medical use as an anti-Parkinson'sdisease drug, e.g. Sandoz's Parlodel, where the substance acts asa dopamine receptor agonist. The substance also inhibits thesecretion of prolactin, a hormone that stimulates milk production.Back to Headline List CopyrightSTEREOCHEMICAL TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Enantiomeric SertralineSynthesized by PfizerPfizer markets sertraline under the brand name Zoloft.  It is anantidepressant drug and, in fact, is one of the top-selling ones,with worldwide sales in the area of $720 million annually.The company has devised a new multistep process for synthesizingsertraline that involves first synthesizing the (4S) enantiomer of4-(3,4-dichlorophenyl)-3,4-1(2H)-naphthalenone in high opticalpurity. The process starts with the familiar 4-(3,4-dichlorophenyl)-4-ketobutanoic acid, then proceeds through anesterification with isopropyl or tert-butyl alcohol, a reduction ofthe keto to hydroxy (creating the 4R configuration), and ultimatelyyielding the key (4S) naphthalenone intermediate.Subsequent transformations of the intermediate finally yield cis-(1S)(4S)-N-methyl-4-(3-,4-dichlorophenyl)-1,2,3-4-tetrahydro-1-naphthaleneamine, in other words, sertraline.Back to Headline List CopyrightSTEREOCHEMICAL TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996SmithKline ProducesCamptothecin AnalogsCamptothecin is an alkaloid originating from the Chinese tree,Camptotheca acuminata, and chemically it is 4-ethyl-4-hydroxy-1H-pyrano-[3',4':6,7]indolizinol[1,2-b]quinoline-3,14(4H, 12H)-dione.The substance has anticancer activity by virtue of its acting as aninhibitor of topoisomerase I, also called "DNA-relaxing enzyme."This enzyme uncoils double-helix DNA, the first step in replicationof the genetic material during the process of cellularproliferation.SmithKline Beecham (1 Franklin Plaza, Philadelphia, PA 19101; Tel:215/751-4000) is clinically evaluating camptothecin relatives forbreast and colon cancers, and one such compound has the designationSKF-104864. The company describes a process for the asymmetrictotal synthesis of camptothecin analogs.In the process, a cis-dioxolanone having the same desired absoluteconfiguration as the end compound is converted to a diester in away that conserves the chirality.  This substance then is convertedto one bearing either a good leaving group, a cyano, a carboxylicacid, or an N-aryl carboxylic amide.  This is converted to acompound incorporating a propargyl or substituted propargyl, whichfinally is converted to the end camptothecin analog.The chief rival to SB in this arena is Rhone-Poulenc Rorer, whichhas in clinical development a camptothecin analog, calledirinotecan and  brand-named Campto, the company licensed fromYakult Honsha.  The latter also licensed Upjohn, which uses thebrand name Camptosar for the same compound.Back to Headline List CopyrightSTEREOCHEMICAL TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Oxazolidinones ShowDiabetes PotentialCelgene (7 Powder Horn Drive, Warren, NJ 07059; Tel: 908/271-1001,Fax: 908/271-4184) sees potential in oxazolidinones as therapeuticagents for diabetes and hyperglycemia. The company developed astereopreferential synthesis of the (R,R) diastereoisomers of 3-(1-phenylprop-2-yl)-5-phenyloxazolidin-2-ones as intermediates for thefinal compounds.The method starts with a reduction of the addition salt of an (R)-N-protected-N-phenylcarboxymethyl-1-phenylprop-2-ylamine to form asecondary alcohol of predominantly the desired enantiomericconfiguration at the two chiral centers. The next step is a removalof the protecting group that forms a secondary amine.  Then thesecondary amine is reacted with a carbonyl source. The overallprocess results in a chemical purity and an optical purity both inexcess of 99%.Chemical drugs other than insulin for the control of diabetes andhyperglycemia has combined worldwide sales of perhaps $3.5 billionannually, at present. The major fraction of these sales come fromsulfonylurea drugs. They are under challenge by new contendersbecause of their tendency to produce hypoglycemia, a seriousproblem of its own.Back to Headline List CopyrightSTEREOCHEMICAL TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996UOP ProvidesGood YieldDavid W. House of UOP (E. Algonquin Road, Des Plaines, IL  60017;Tel: 708/391-3963,  Fax: 708/391-3804) has worked out a way toconveniently racemize benzyl alcohols having a chiral center at thebenzylic carbon by treatment with solid acids that are stronglyacidic cation-exchange materials (U.S. Patent 5,476,964).It has been known for some time that for medicinals having at leastone chiral center the pharmacological effectiveness of theenantiomers of the racemic mixture may substantially differ.Although the recognition of the desirability of using thepharmacologically and pharmaceutically more acceptable enantiomeris old, nonetheless the use of optically pure medicinals generallyis relatively new, simply because of the difficulty and cost ofresolution of the racemic mixture and/or the difficulty and cost ofasymmetric synthesis of the desired enantiomer.With modern chemical advances, especially in asymmetric synthesis,has come both an increase in the feasibility of selectivelypreparing the more acceptable enantiomer of a given chiralmedicinal, as well as increasing pressure on the pharmaceuticalindustry to make available only that enantiomer. An instructiveexample, pertinent to the subject matter of this invention, is theclass of serotonin-uptake inhibitors exemplified by fluoxetine(whose racemate is available as Prozac), tomoxetine, andnisoxetine.Enantioselective synthesis depends on chiral reagents of highenantiomeric purity that can be quite expensive. Consequently,another general approach is based on the efficient resolution of anearly precursor, used as a raw starting material in synthesis, withhigh enantiomeric purity, followed by subsequent conventionalsynthetic techniques that maintain high enantiomeric purity inintermediates through final product formation.When one enantiomer is more desirable than the other in practiceonly the more desirable enantiomer will be utilized in subsequentsynthesis. Unless one is willing to accept the economic burden ofdiscarding the less desirable (or even undesirable) enantiomer --which is half of the starting material -- it is imperative tosomehow recycle the undesired enantiomer. This application isdirected precisely to this need to afford a cost-effective solutionto the preceding problem.Racemization of benzyl alcohols may be effected generally in therange from 20-150C in aqueous or partly aqueous systems incombination with a water-miscible organic solvent to improvesolubility of the alcohol. Similar racemizations may be effectedfor benzyl ethers and esters. This process is valuable forrecycling of unwanted enantiomers obtained in the resolution ofracemic mixtures.   The purpose of this invention is to racemizedbenzylic alcohols, ethers, and esters, especially in a continuousprocess, with high specificity and good yield.Back to Headline List CopyrightSTEREOCHEMICAL TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Supercritical FluidsYield Higher PurityChemists at Duke University (Durham, NC) have teamed up with LosAlamos National Laboratory (Los Alamos, NM) to get highenantiomeric purities without resorting to toxic solvents.  Thescientists find that they are able to get as great or greaterenantiomeric excesses by catalytic hydrogenation in supercriticalcarbon dioxide as in organic solvents.Above its critical temperature of 31C, nonflammable, non-toxiccarbon dioxide is compressible to densities of 0.5 g/ml, meaningthat users can vary solvent properties by manipulating pressure.Organic chemistry professor Mark J. Burk and coworkers reported inthe Journal of the American Chemical Society [117, 8277, 1995] onthe hydrogenation of substituted a-acetaminoacrylic acid tosubstituted N-acetylalanines in carbon dioxide at 5,000 psig totalpressure and 40C with an asymmetric diphosphine-rhodium catalyst.The team was able to get 88.4% enantiomeric excess of a-acetamin-oisobutyric acid, the highest ever achieved from the acrylic acidprecursor.Back to Headline List CopyrightSTEREOCHEMICAL TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Fredericamycin AIs Scripps FirstScientists at the Scripps Research Institute (Claremont, CA) haveachieved the first total synthesis of both enantiomers of theantitumor-anitbiotic agent fredericamycin A. While the naturalproduct exhibits potent in vitro cytotoxic activity and has shownantitumor activity in vivo, not much is known about its site ofaction or the structural features responsible for its activity.  Inan effort to identify the origin of its biological properties, DaleBoger, Ottmar Hter, Kapiamba Mbiya, and Minsheng Zhang of Scriptsaccomplished a convergent total synthesis of its two enantiomers.As reported in the Journal of the American Chemical Society [117,11839, 1995], the scientists used a Michael addition to add the DEring system to an F ring precursor, a benzannulation reaction toconstruct the AB moiety, and then an aldol closure reaction toclose the C ring in between.This research complements earlier attempts at total syntheses ofracemic fredericamycin A by other groups.  Boger and coworkersfound that natural fredericamycin A and its enantiomer exhibitessentially equivalent cytotoxic activity.  This comparablecytotoxic potency should permit the use of the two enantiomers indistinguishing the site and potential mechanism of action offredericamycin A.Back to Headline List CopyrightSTEREOCHEMICAL TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996USC CharacterizesStable TetracationChemists at the University of Southern California (Los Angeles, CA)have prepared and characterized the first stable tetrahedrallyoriented tetracation.  The synthesis was carried out bypostdoctoral associate Nicholas Head, working with chemistryprofessors G. K. Surya Prakash and George Olah.As reported in the Journal of the American Chemical Society [117,12005, 1995], an adamantane tetrahedrally substituted with fourester groups was first converted to a tetraol.  The tetraol is thenionized to the tetracation under superacid conditions at -80C.The tetracation is stable up to -40C.Tetracations are very rare and long-lived tetracarbocations thatwere previously unknown.  According to Prakash, the researchershope to use the tetracation to catalyze the polymerization of othermolecules to yield hyper-branched polymers.  They see the potentialfor using the tetracation as a building block in the constructionof self-assembling supramolecular structures.Back to Headline List CopyrightSTEREOCHEMICAL TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996PerSeptive IntroducesNew PNA ChemistryPeptide and oligonucleotide synthesis chemistry comprise a bedrockof chiral technology applications, for both research molecules andpotential therapeutics.  A new development is the emergence of"peptide nucleic acids (PNA)," a hybrid type that uses a peptide-like backbone with nucleotide pendants. Such hybrid molecules havethe complementary binding capabilities of oligonucleotides fornucleic acid sequences, but resist the degradative action ofnuclease enzymes.PerSeptive Biosystems (500 Old Connecticut Path, Framingham, MA01701; Tel: 508/383-7700, Fax: 508/383-7851) introduces a new lineof products for the synthesis of peptide nucleic acids.Applications include affinity purification, in situ  hybridization,enhanced PCR, improved Southern blots, single-point mutationanalysis, and antisense research.The chemistry employs new monomers with Fmoc (9-flurenylmethoxycarbonyl) and Bhoc (benzhydryloxycarbonyl)protecting groups. Syntheses are run on solid-phase supports usingmild conditions and automated instrumentation. PerSeptive hasapplied for a patent on its new class of PNA synthons. Says MichaelEghold, director of PNA research at PerSeptive, "PNA is now beingused in over 100 labs worldwide as a tool for molecular biology anddiagnostic research and functions in very different ways from anyprevious molecule."Having taken over the Biosearch Milligen business from Millipore inAugust 1994, PerSeptive is now the second leading supplier ofmaterials for peptide and oligonucleotide chemical synthesis. Italso supplies the synthesis equipment.Back to Headline List CopyrightSTEREOCHEMICAL TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Arrhythmia DrugUses BioreductionMerck is developing a new drug for cardiac arrhythmia, designatedMK499.  Its production makes use of an asymmetric bioreduction, bywhich 6-bromotetralone converts to (S)-6-bromo-2tetraol.  Thereductive activity is furnished by the yeast Trichosporon captatumMY-1890 (ATCC 74312) which, along with the substrate forconversion, is cultivated in a medium incorporating glycerol, soypeptone, and yeast extract.  An optical purity greater than 98% isobtained.Arrhythmia is an irregularity of the heart beat. A cluster ofspecialized cells, located at the junction of the superior venacava and the high right atrium, called the sinoatrial (or sinus)node, forms the pacemaker of the heart. These cells produce arhythmic electrical discharge that initiates the regularcontraction of the heart muscle, which in turn forces (pumps) thecirculation of blood. The sinoatrial cells are modulated byautonomic nerves and by circulating catecholamines.Antiarrhythmic drugs to regularize the heart beat had worldwidesales in 1995 of about $900 million. The Group I antiarrhythmics,which behave as sodium channel antagonists, have about an 89% shareof this market, while calcium channel blockers, potassium channelblockers, beta blockers, and miscellaneous others comprise the restof the antiarrhythmics.Back to Headline List CopyrightSTEREOCHEMICAL TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Process Not PickyAbout EnzymesResearchers at Bristol-Myers Squibb Co. (345 Park Ave., New York,NY 10154-0004; Tel: 212/546-4000) have refined a method of chiralepoxidation of benzopyran or pyranopyridine derivatives usingmicroorganisms (U.S. Patent 5,478,734). The enzymatic epoxidationprocess is advantageous in that it provides high yields of thechiral epoxides of the compounds with high optical purity.The invention is a novel process for preparing a chiral epoxideand/or a (+)-trans dihydroxy compound.  The process comprises thestep of treating a compound with an enzyme or microorganism capableof catalyzing the stereoselective epoxidation of the compounds toform the chiral epoxide or the stereoselective hydroxylation toform the chiral dihydroxy compound.It has been found that in the presence of one or more epoxidizingenzymes or microorganisms producing epoxidizing enzymes, thestereoselective epoxidation of the compounds is achieved. When thereaction is carried out at ambient temperature, for example, anoptical purity of greater than about 80% may be obtained with areaction yield of greater than about 50%. Preferably, an opticalpurity of greater than 85% with a reaction yield of greater thanabout 60% may be obtained.In addition to the chiral epoxide, the method comprises thestereoselective hydroxylation of compounds to produce the chiraltrans-dihydroxy compounds.  The chiral dihydroxy compounds may beprepared from the racemic trans diols by treatment of the racemictrans diols with lipase, esterase, or microorganism capable ofsupplying lipase or esterase.Any enzyme or microorganism having the ability to catalyze thestereoselective epoxidation or stereoselective hydroxylation of thecompounds as described may be employed in the processes. Two ormore -- as well as single -- species of microorganism may beemployed.  Various enzymes, regardless of origin or purity, aresuitable for usefor example, the enzymes may be in the form ofanimal or plant enzymes or mixtures thereof, cells ofmicroorganisms, crushed cells, extracts of cells, or of syntheticorigin.  The use of genetically engineered organisms is beingcontemplated.Back to Headline List CopyrightSTEREOCHEMICAL TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Thermostable EnzymesAre EnantioselectiveA startup biotechnology company, ThermoGen (2201 W. Campbell ParkDrive, Chicago, IL 60612; Tel: 312/226-6500, Fax: 312/226-9686)offers enzymes derived from thermophilic organisms that haveenhanced stability, that perform well at both elevated and roomtemperatures, and that have a generally greater tolerance toorganic solvents.The first of ThermoGen's offerings are 20 new ester-hydrolyzingenzymes having diverse enantioselectivities and substratespecificities. The company has been developing custom enzymes forindustrial applications since 1988.Back to Headline List CopyrightSTEREOCHEMICAL TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Hoechst MakesA Fast SwitchHoechst Aktiengesellschaft (Frankfurt, Germany) researcher JavierManero has invented a process for preparing highly pure enantiomersof oxirane alcohols (U.S. Patent 5,478,954)  The process involvesrecrystallizing a mixture of the isomeric oxirane alcohols, inwhich the desired enantiomer is present in an excess of at least60%, in a solvent or solvent mixture at a temperature just belowthe melting point of the oxirane alcohol.  Oxirane alcoholsprepared according to the invention are distinguished by highenantiomeric purity.For almost 150 years, chemists have endeavored to produce chiralcompounds in the form of largely pure enantiomers, either bysynthesis of a single enantiomer or by separation of the twoenantiomers. Chiral compounds are in general optically active, i.e.they rotate the plane of polarized light by a certain amount. Thisamount is of the same magnitude for the two enantiomers but hasdifferent signs.Particularly in the field of biochemistry, it is known that onlyone of the two enantiomers usually shows a certain given activity,even when the two can have completely different activities. In manyother fields of chemistry and industry it is important to work withenantiomeric compounds that are as pure as possible. Examplesinclude plant-protection chemicals and ferroelectric liquidcrystals, i.e. those which contain chiral molecules and form tiltedsmectic phases.Clark and Lagerwall have been able to show that the use offerroelectric liquid-crystal systems in very thin cells leads tooptoelectric switching or indicating elements that, as comparedwith the conventional twisted nematic (TN) cells, have switchingtimes that are shorter by a factor of up to 1000.  The opticalswitching time of ferroelectric liquid-crystal systems depends onthe rotational viscosity of the system on the spontaneouspolarization and the electric field strength.It is also known to obtain pure enantiomers of compounds by addingseed crystals of the desired enantiomer to the solution of the twoenantiomers. This so-called spontaneous resolution of racematessucceeds only if the racemic mixture crystallizes as aconglomerate, i.e. as a mixture of crystals of one enantiomer ineach case, which is the case for only a few compounds.  It was agoal at Hoechst to provide a process to more easily obtain oxiranealcohols of an even higher purity of the enantiomers.Hoechst found, surprisingly, that oxirane alcohols withoutdetectable contamination by the other diastereomers or enantiomerscan be obtained by recrystallization in suitable solvents attemperatures that are just below the melting point of the oxiranealcohol. The interval between the melting point and the temperatureof the recrystallization can be the wider, the higher the meltingpoint of the compound.Back to Headline List CopyrightSTEREOCHEMICAL TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Continuous SamplingElucidates AbsorptionsThe University of Kansas (Lawrence, KS) has developed an interfacefor use with a multiple-sample acquisition device and a capillaryelectrophoresis separation device (U.S. Patent 5,449,064). The useof continuous sampling can permit the user to better elucidate thepathways and kinetics of absorption of a particular compound ofinterest to determine how the compound is transformed within thebody and to determine the rate at which the compound is eliminatedfrom the living organism. This information is often necessary topermit the researcher to fully assess the safety of bothpharmaceutical and environmental compounds.One might desire information about the reaction of an analgesicchiral compound in a living organism. To determine this, a knownamount of the compound could be given to the organism, andcontinuous tissue samples (e.g., brain fluid) are obtained. Byanalyzing the brain fluid samples that were withdrawn at varioustime intervals after giving the analgesic to the animal, one couldobtain a great deal of information about the manner in which thespecific analgesic functioned within the living organism.By continuously obtaining samples, it is also possible to determinethe amount of time required to remove the particular analgesicsystem from the living organism. Knowing the rate of elimination ofthe analgesic can be especially important for enabling itsmanufacturer to either adjust the dosage or alter the drug (such asthrough micro encapsulation) to enable the drug to achieve a propertiter within the living organism for a proper time period.One goal when performing continuous or semi-continuous sampling isto improve the temporal resolution of the sampling and detectionprocess. Temporal resolution relates to the number of data pointsthat one can obtain over a given time span. Figures for temporalresolution are typically given in units of time span. To say thata particular experiment had a temporal resolution of 1 minute meansthat a data point was taken (or capable of being taken) eachminute. The factor limiting temporal resolution is the timerequired to accumulate and collect a sample of a size adequate forthe particular detection method being used in conjunction with thesampling.Methods for obtaining time-interval type, sequential multiple-sample chemical information from tissues of living systems haveusually involved either a postmortem analysis taken at several timepoints or the use of biosensors implanted in vivo. Postmortemanalyses typically require the use of a large number of animalswith only a single sample being taken from each animal. The "pseudocontinuity" of samples is achieved by taking the samples from thedifferent animals at different points in time.The use of postmortem analyses to construct a temporal plot ofchemical events is difficult and often provides ambiguous results.While several compounds can be determined at each time point (andhence from each sample), each animal can provide data for only asingle time point. It is therefore preferable in terms of both thequality of data obtained and the number of experimental animalsneeded that the entire time course (data set) be obtained from oneanimal by taking a large number of samples over a span of time.Although this can be accomplished through the use of a biosensor,biosensors suffer the drawback of providing less chemicalinformation since they are usually limited to monitoring only asingle chemical species.To overcome the sampling difficulties, some researchers use amicrodialysis sampling technique. Microdialysis sampling isaccomplished by implanting a microdialysis probe that consists ofa small, semi-permeable membrane fiber at the site of interest.This fiber is slowly perfused with a sampling solution. Thesemipermeable microdialysis membrane allows certain molecules ofinterest to pass from the animal into the sampling solution.Small molecules in the extra-cellular space can diffuse into themicrodialysis membrane fiber and are swept away by the samplingsolution to be collected for analysis. Microdialysis probes can beimplanted in many tissues with minimal discomfort to theexperimental animal.  A limitation of microdialysis has been thelimited temporal resolution that has been achievable to date. Whilemicrodialysis is a continuous sampling technique, it is typicallycoupled to a separation method that requires discrete samples.Back to Headline List CopyrightSTEREOCHEMICAL TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Beckman's NewAnalysis MethodThe rapid analysis-time characteristic of capillary electrophoresis(CE) has allowed Beckman Instruments (2500 Harbor Blvd., Fullerton,CA  92634; Tel: 800/742-2345 or 714/871-4848,  Fax: 714/870-8083)to develop an easy-to-use, ultrafast chiral separation method forthe analysis of optically active drugscyclodextrin-array chiralanalysis.Andras Guttman, Anthony Aumatel, Sandy Brunet, and Nelson Cooke ofBeckman reported the results of separations utilizing the newmethod in American Laboratory [27, 18, 1995]. Earlier, STN(November 1995) reported on Beckman's integrated capilllaryelectrophoresis system that uses special software for computer-based analysis of the data.Cyclodextrin-mediated capillary electrophoresis of enantiomers wasfirst introduced by employing several native cyclodextrinsentrapped in polyacrylamide gels.  Later, a similar methodology inan open tubular-separation mode was applied.  Natural a-, b-, andg-cyclodextrins (CDs) are cyclic oligosaccharides of 6, 7, and 8glucopyranose units, respectively.  The diameter and volume of theDC cavity are determined by the number of glucose units in the CDring.The most energetically stable form of this ring structure resemblesa truncated cone in aqueous solution with the linking glycosidicand glucopyranose oxygens pointing inward and the C-6 hydroxylsopposite to the C-2 and C-3 hydroxyls.  As a result, the chemicalcharacteristics of the cavity are determined by the hydrogensprojecting into the cavity and the nonbonding pair of electronscontributed by each of the ring-forming oxygens.To obtain chiral separation with CD, it is necessary for differentinteractions to take place between the enantiomer and the CD.These interactions are as follows:  electrostatic, dipole-dipole,inductive, hydrogen bonding, and hydrophobic interactions.  If atleast one of these interactions is stereochemically dependent,chiral separation of an enantiomeric solute is possible.Recently, a rational approach to predicting the electrophoreticmobility differences for enantiomers of weak acids and bases in CEusing different natural and derivatized CDs as chiral selectors wasintroduced.  Three types of CD-based chiral CE separations wereidentified, differentiated by the selective interaction of theionic/nonionic forms of the enantiomer.In desionoselective separation, selective interaction occurs onlybetween the nondissociated form of the enantiomer and the CD.  Inionoselective separation, selective interaction occurs only withthe dissociated form of the enantiomer.  In duoselectiveseparation, selective interaction occurs with both the charged anduncharged forms of the enantiomer.CD-array chiral analysis uses an array of chiral selectors, such asb-, g-, hydroxypropyl-b-, and dimethyl-b-DCs, in variousconcentrations to accommodate different types of solutes.  Afterthe application of the CD array on CE, the appropriate CD type isusually identified in conjunction with the suitable pH.  Other,more typical CE separation parameters, such as field strength andtemperature, can be varied in order to influence the separationefficiency and, thus, resolution.Back to Headline List CopyrightSTEREOCHEMICAL TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Chiroscience BlendsChemistry, EnzymesChiroscience Ltd. (Cambridge Science Park, Milton Road, CambridgeCB4 4WE, U.K.; Tel: 44/01/223-420430, Fax: 44/01/223-420440) makesthe claim of being the world's leading chiral technology company.At the very least, it is one of the larger companies specializingin this field. The company was founded by Chris Evans and is headedby Nowell Stebbing.  Andrew Headland is the marketing manager, andJoe Carey runs international collaborations.The company has a willingness to employ both chemical reagents andenzymes to make chiral compounds.  Moreover, it is wedded toneither resolution nor asymmetric synthesis, accepting bothapproaches to the furnishing of enantiomers. The company, however,does regard itself as a pharmaceutical firm, excluding otherapplications of chiral technology from its portfolio of interests.Recently, Chiroscience acquired a license to phospholane asymmetrichydrogenation catalysts from Du Pont.  Hydrogenation is one of themost common reactions in preparative chemistry. The company notesthat rhodium complexes of Du Pont's DuPhos ligand family haveapplicability to obtaining single-enantiomer amino acids by anasymmetric hydrogenation of prochiral enamides.The reductions have high turnovers of catalyst, a low requirementof hydrogen pressure, stereoconvergent  transformation of Z/Emixtures, and high enantiomeric excesses. The phospholane catalystswere discovered by Mark Burk at Du Pont, and he continues to workat Duke University (North Carolina).  His latest advance is thehydrogenation of b,b-disubstituted enamides in a medium ofsupercritical carbon dioxide, giving the highest enantiomericexcesses so far attained for the reduction of such tetrasubstitutedolefins.Chiroscience also licenses ligands from Professor Barry Trost atStanford University (Palo Alto, CA), which the company uses forpalladium catalysts to promote asymmetric allylic substitutionreactions, for instance, the generation of carbovir (an antiviral)and aristeromycin. The Trost catalysts can also be used to convertallylic carbonates and acetates into useful synthons by reactionwith nitrogen, carbon, oxygen, and sulfur nucleophiles, providingaccess to a wide range of chiral cyclic molecules. Eitherenantiomer can be produced.Unnatural amino acids are of increasing importance as components oftherapeutic peptides, by modifying the receptor selectivity of thepeptide, and by enhancing its metabolic resistance to degradationor by improving its bioavailability.  Chiroscience has developed a"one-pot" route to unnatural amino acids using an immobilizedacylase for the resolution of the BOC derivative.  The unwantedisomer recovered after the resolution is racemized and put backinto the process stream. The company now seeks to apply this methodto the production of cyclic amino acids as analogs of proline orpipecolic acid.When a D-acetyl amino acid is racemized with acetic anhydride, anazlactone is formed as an intermediate.  This intermediatespontaneously racemizes via its achiral enol tautomer, butazlactones also can be biotransformed.  For instance,  theintroduction of n-butanol into  tert-leucine azolactone  using alipase takes place only on the L isomer, but the D isomerspontaneous racemizes, channeling all the material toward the L ina process known as "dynamic resolution.  Additionally, whenazlactones are made by condensation of an N-acyl glycine (such ashippuric acid) with an aldehyde, the resulting olefins can beopened to enamides, which then serve as substrates for the DuPhoshydrogenation.The g-lactam synthon (-)-azabicyclo[2.2.1]hept-5-en-3-one is anintermediate for the synthesis of carbocyclic nucleosides havingthe same configuration as the natural ones they mimic.Chiroscience's chemistry has the capability of producing not onlythe lactam but also more advanced downstream intermediates.  Thecompany uses a proprietary resolution methodology based onenantiocomplementary biotransformations by lactamases selected byscreening microorganisms of the natural environment.  Applying thisprocess ultimately results in at least a 20,000- fold improvementin biocatalyst cost relative to early biocatalysts.Among the pharmaceutical compounds for which Chiroscience hasdeveloped production methods are a protein kinase C inhibitor, animmunosuppressant, a k-opioid analgesic, and a dopaminergicagonist.Therapeutic Compounds from ChiroscienceSource: Chiroscience Ltd.Back to Headline List CopyrightSTEREOCHEMICAL TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996CALENDARFebruary 5-7, 1996, PrepTech '96, East Rutherford, NJ.  Contact:Joan Lantowski, Conference Coordinator, ISC Technical ConferencesInc., 30 Controls Drive, P.O. Box 559, Shelton, CT  06484; Tel:203/926-9300, Fax: 203/926-9722.February 20-21, 1996, Industrial Biocatalysis: Making It Happen(INBIO '96), Manchester, England. An international conference thataddresses industrial biocatalysis in the chemical and processindustries. Topics include potential solutions to technologybarriers, recent developments in production-scale biocatalysis,biocatalysts for cleaner production, and more. Contact: SpringInnovations Ltd., 185A Moss Lane, Bramhall, Stockport, Cheshire SK71BA, U.K.; Tel. 44(0)/161-440-0082, Fax: 44(0)/161-440-9127.February 25-29 1996, AIChE Spring National Meeting, New Orleans,LA.  Contact: G. Glenn Lipscomb, University of Toledo, Dept. ofChemical Engineering, Toldeo, OH  43606-3390; Tel: 419/537-2730,Fax: 419/537-4080.March 3-8,  Pittcon 96, Chicago, IL.  Registration and housingbegin in October 1995.  Contact: Alma Johnson, Program Secretary,Pittsburgh Conference, 300 Penn Center Blvd., Suite 332,Pittsburgh, PA  15235-5503; Tel: 412/825-3220, Fax: 412/825-3224.March 24-28, 1996, American Chemical Society National Meeting, NewOrleans, LA. Tel: 202/872-4451, Fax: 202/872-4370.April 23-26, Analytica '96, Munich, Germany.  Contact: MesseMnchen GmbH, Messegelnde, D-80325 Mnchen; Tel: +49(89) 51070,Fax: +49(89) 5107506.Back to Headline List WT02-B35-9IA095-001021-B004-244http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/ch22.html 205.156.212.5 19970121223807 text/html 59875HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Tuesday, 21-Jan-97 22:36:09 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:41:56 GMTContent-length: 59690Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ch22.html Sample Issue Copyright TOXIC CHEMICALS LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNet January 2, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES SUIT ALLEGES AEC RAN SECRET RADIATION TESTS ON OREGON PRISON INMATES (645 words) DEATH BENEFIT AWARDED FOR ETS EXPOSURE AT VA HOSPITAL (655 words) NC CT.: OFFICIAL NOTICE OF CONTAMINATION STARTS CLAIM CLOCK RUNNING (351 words) ED VA JUDGE DENIES MOTION TO REMAND LEAD POISONING LITIGATION TO STATE COURT (520 words) CA JUDGE DENIES MOTION TO VACATE CONSENT DECREE IN LEAD FAUCET SUIT (704 words) 9TH CIRCUIT REINSTATES COUNTY WORKER'S CLAIMS AGAINST EXTERMINATORS (639 words) 9TH CIR. DETERMINES HEALTH ASSESSMENT TO CONSTITUTE REMOVAL OR RESPONSE (913 words) 3RD CIR.: NEIGHBORS, VISITORS TO WASTE SITE ARE NOT KNOWN CREDITORS (899 words) PLAINTIFF IN ILL HEALTH SEEKS EXPEDITED APPEAL OF DEFENSE VERDICT (695 words) OHIO JUDGE GRANTS J.N.O.V. TO PLAINTIFFS AFTER JURY RETURNS DEFENCE VERDICT (519 words) PARENTS OF PRO GOLFER HEATHER FARR SUE MOTOROLA FOR WRONGFUL DEATH (498 words) OCCIDENTAL PAYS $129M TO CLOSE A CHAPTER ON LOVE CANAL (536 words) CA APP. CT. REVERSES CARRIER WIN ON WRONGFUL ENTRY (538 words) Trespass and Nuisance (397 words) CopyrightTOXIC CHEMICALS LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996SUIT ALLEGES AEC RANSECRET RADIATION TESTSON OREGON PRISON INMATES     A class action filed in the U.S. District Court for theDistrict of Oregon Dec. 5 alleges that 67 Oregon state prisoninmates were the subjects of risky and painful governmentexperiments in the 1960s to study the effects of ionizingradiation on the human body.  Bibeau v. Pacific NorthwestResearch Foundation Inc. et al., No. 95-06410-HO (D OR).     The inmates consented to the experiments, which involved x-ray irradiation of their sex organs, but the defendants conspiredto conceal from them the true nature of the research and therisks involved, the complaint charges.     Harold Bibeau, an inmate at Oregon State Penitentiary inSalem, OR, from 1963 to 1969, and his wife Melanie Ann, filed thecomplaint on behalf of three classes of alleged victims: the 67inmates who were subjected to the experiments, their familymembers and any children who were conceived after the subjectswere irradiated.     Named as defendants are two laboratories, the PacificNorthwest Research Foundation Inc. (PNRF) and Battelle PacificNorthwest Laboratories; two medical doctors who were employed bythe Oregon Department of Corrections, Dr. Daniel E. Dilaconi andDr. Fernando Leon; a PNRF employee, Mavis Rowley, and fourofficials of the Atomic Energy Commission (AEC), the forerunnerto the federal Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC), whichallegedly funded and oversaw the experiments.     According to the complaint, the prison experiments (calledthe Heller experiments after chief researcher Dr. Carl Heller,now deceased) were undertaken after a 1962 accident at theHanford Nuclear Reservation in Richland, WA, exposed workers tosignificant amounts of ionizing radiation.     The AEC wanted to study the short- and long-term effects ofionizing radiation on spermatogenesis among the workers and alsoto investigate the effects of long-term exposure on pilots of athen-proposed nuclear-powered airplane (which was neverdeveloped), the complaint charges.     The Heller experiments involved irradiating the inmates'testes with eight to 600 rads of radiation over 10 years from1963 to 1973.  Periodically, the researchers gathered blood,urine and semen from the inmates and also performed biopsies andvasectomies on them.     The defendants knew that the experiments subjected theinmates to prolonged pain, increased their risks of developingcancer and other serious illnesses, and caused radiation sicknessand burns and chromosomal damage that may affect the health ofchildren conceived after the testing.  They conspired to concealthose risks from the test subjects, the complaint charges.     Bibeau claims he and the other inmates were thus deprived ofthe opportunity to give their informed consent and that theprison environment and the large monetary compensation theinmates were given relative to their regular prison compensationwere inherently coercive.     He alleges violations of civil and constitutional rights,intentional infliction of physical harm and emotional distress,strict liability, personal injury, absence of informed consent,loss of consortium, negligence, gross negligence, breach offiduciary duty, conspiracy, fraudulent concealment and failure toprovide ongoing medical monitoring.  The complaint also states aclaim pursuant to Bivens (Bivens v. Six Unknown Named Agents ofthe Federal Bureau of Narcotics, 403 U.S. 388 [1971]) because italleges that government officials (the AEC defendants) andprivate parties illegally conspired to cause injuries to theplaintiffs.     Bibeau is seeking compensatory damages of $50 million andpunitive damages of $200 million, medical monitoring of theinmates and any children conceived after the experiments,interest and attorneys' fees and costs.     The plaintiffs are represented by Daniel Berger, StanleySiegel, Bernadette M. Rappold and Eric L. Cramer of Berger andMontague, Philadelphia; E. Cooper Brown and H.W. Cummins ofTacoma Park, MD; Martin H. Freeman of Bethesda, MD; and RaymondJ. Heslin and Leonard M. Marks of New York City.  They are alsorepresented by Jerry S. Cohen and Anthony Z. Roisman of Cohen,Milstein, Hausfeld & Toll, Washington, DC; and by Roy S. Haber,Eugene, OR.Back to Headline List CopyrightTOXIC CHEMICALS LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996DEATH BENEFIT AWARDEDFOR ETS EXPOSUREAT VA HOSPITAL     A federal Department of Labor claims examiner in Clevelandon Dec. 8 awarded death benefits to the husband of a VeteransAdministration nurse, who claimed that his wife died of lungcancer from exposure to cigarette smoke while caring for mentallyill veterans.  In re Mildred Wiley, No. A9-365951 (U.S. Dept. ofLabor, Office of Workers' Comp. Programs).     The decision is believed to be the first award of benefitsfor a workplace injury attributed to environmental tobacco smoke(ETS).     The claim was brought by Philip E. Wiley of Marion, IN, whoclaimed that his wife, Mildred, died as the result of exposure toETS during the course of her employment at the VA Medical Centerin Marion, where she worked for 18 years.  Mildred Wiley died atthe age of 56, one month after being diagnosed with lung cancerin 1991.     Wiley contended that his wife's only exposure to cigarettesmoke was during her work at the hospital.     Wiley's claim was denied twice, once in 1992 and again in1993, on grounds that the causal relationship between MildredWiley's cancer and her ETS workplace exposure had not beenestablished.     The claim was resubmitted in December 1994 by Wiley'sattorneys, Joseph Young and William N. Riley of Young & Riley inIndianapolis, and was accompanied by a report from Dr. David M.Burns, a University of San Diego medical professor who hastestified in several tobacco cases.     According to the compensation order issued by Cynthia F.Bujakowski, Labor Department reconsideration claims examiner,Burns said that based on a review of the entire record, "MildredWiley's adenocarcinoma of the lung, and the carcinogenic processitself, was significantly aggravated and accelerated by herexposure to ETS at her worksite."     Burns also noted that neither Mildred Wiley, her husband,family or friends smoked cigarettes and that she avoided ETS inpublic and social situations.  Also, Burns said, Mildred Wileyregularly worked in an environment where ETS was commonly presentat levels where the tobacco smoke was easily visible orperceptible.     Burns said that "tobacco smoke is the only proven human lungcarcinogen that [Mildred Wiley] was exposed to at a substantiallevel."     The VA contested the claim, arguing that Mildred Wiley hadnever complained about cigarette smoke and that she had lived inseveral other cities where she could have been exposed to othercarcinogens before beginning work at the hospital in 1973.     Bujakowski noted in the compensation opinion that, inresponse to the earlier claims, the hospital did not dispute theextent of Wiley's exposure to cigarette smoke.  And, Bujakowskisaid, the hospital's own expert witness conceded that he couldnot rule out ETS as the cause of Mildred Wiley's cancer.     Riley, Wiley's attorney, said that Wiley will receive a$1,000 death and funeral benefit and will be entitled to paymentsof approximately $21,500, one-half his wife's annual salary, eachyear for the rest of his life.     In May 1993, Wiley filed a product liability suit againstthe major cigarette manufacturers in Delaware County, IN, statecourt (Dunn et al. v. RJR Nabisco Holdings Corp. et al.,No. 18D019305CT06 [IN, Delaware Cty.]).  The tobacco industrymoved to transfer the case to Grant County; that motion wasdenied.  The Indiana Court of Appeals reversed, holding that thecase should be transferred from Delaware County to Grant Countybecause Mildred Wiley resided in Grant County at the time of herdeath.  The plaintiffs appealed to the Indiana Supreme Court.     On Dec. 5, the Indiana Supreme Court reversed the Court ofAppeals and affirmed the trial court decision that the propervenue for the trial was the Delaware County, IN, court.     The VA, which is responsible for making the payments toWiley, could seek recovery by filing a claim against any judgmentWiley may win in his lawsuit, or by filing claims against thecompanies directly.Back to Headline List CopyrightTOXIC CHEMICALS LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996NC CT.: OFFICIAL NOTICEOF CONTAMINATION STARTSCLAIM CLOCK RUNNING     An official government notice of well water contaminationstarts the statute of limitations running, even if a plaintiffnotices earlier that the water smells and tastes bad, the NorthCarolina Court of Appeals ruled Dec. 5.  Crawford v. Boyette etal., No. COA95-37 (NC Ct. App.).     The panel reinstated a nuisance, trespass and strictliability suit against the owner and operator of a gas station bya residential neighbor.     From 1986 to 1991, John Crawford rented a house near a gasstation owned by Gary Boyette and operated by Cary Oil Co.  WhenCrawford moved in, he attributed the noticeable funny smell andtaste of his well water to the known presence of lime in thevicinity.     In 1987, he contacted the county health department, whichrecommended chlorination but did not test for petroleum products.It was not until April 6, 1989, that Crawford was notified by thestate of specific chemical compounds found in his water,including benzene and paradichlorobenzene.  In June 1989, hereceived the state's official health risk evaluation warning ofthe risks of gasoline contamination.     A nuisance and trespass complaint was filed in Wake CountySuperior Court on April 2, 1992, within three years of theApril 6, 1989, notice.  Judge George R. Greene granted summaryjudgment in favor of the defense, holding the suit barred by thethree-year limitations period.     The Court of Appeals reversed and remanded in an opinion byJudge Ralph A. Walker, saying the limitations period did notstart to run until Crawford received official notification thatchemicals from petroleum products were found in his water.Although Crawford noticed a peculiar smell and taste, heattributed those problems to lime and took reasonable steps todetermine whether his well was contaminated by contacting thecounty health department, it said.     In addition, it said Crawford received no warnings aboutpetroleum contamination until the state sent its detailedevaluation in June 1989.     Kenneth N. Barnes argued for Crawford.  Defense counsel wereRobert R. Smith of Smith & Holmes and Phillip C. Ransdell ofRansdell, Ransdell & Cline.Back to Headline List CopyrightTOXIC CHEMICALS LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996ED VA JUDGE DENIES MOTIONTO REMAND LEAD POISONINGLITIGATION TO STATE COURT     A lead poisoning personal injury suit that names a federallyfunded public housing authority as one of the defendants willremain in federal court, according to a Nov. 20 ruling by afederal judge in Norfolk, VA, denying the plaintiffs' motion toremand to state court.  Hunter et al. v. Estate of Baecher etal., No. 2:95CV878 (ED VA).     A complaint was filed in state court against the estate ofJohn Joseph Baecher, who owned the property leased to theplaintiffs.  It was amended to add as a defendant the NorfolkRedevelopment and Housing Authority (NRHA), which administers thefederal section8 subsidized housing program.  As amended, thecomplaint seeks $5 million in damages under section1983 andfederal housing statutes, breach of contract, negligence, breachof warranty and violations of the state Residential Landlord andTenant Act and Virginia Consumer Protection Act.     After it was added to the suit, the NRHA petitioned toremove the case to the Eastern District of Virginia on the basisof the federal court's original jurisdiction over the civilrights and federal housing statute claims.  The plaintiffs movedto remand to state court, and arguments were heard on the motionon Nov. 17.     U.S. District Judge J. Calvitt Clarke Jr. denied the remandmotion, rejecting arguments that state claims predominate andthat construction of the two Virginia statutes in the context oflead paint poisoning present novel and complex issues that statecourts should resolve.     Although case law in Virginia is sparse on how thelandlord-tenant statute handles lead paint poisoning disputes,that statute is modeled on a uniform statute with abundant caselaw, the judge said.  In addition, he said the state law claimsare no more technically or intellectually involved than thefederal claims.     Beyond that, Judge Clarke found the interests of judicialeconomy and fairness to the litigants warrant supplementaljurisdiction over the state law claims.  The federal and stateclaims all center around the issue of what duties exist regardingthe presence of lead paint in a rental residence; the parties andoperative facts also are the same.  Nor does the statute underwhich the case was removed to federal court authorize a remand ofthe federal questions, he said.     "In this case, Plaintiffs have consolidated their claimsagainst the two defendants and have invoked federal law in theprocess.  In bringing one suit, Plaintiffs and Defendants couldexpect to be part of only one proceeding.  By bringing federalclaims, Plaintiffs could expect that proceeding would take placein federal court.  Defendants, by removing the case, showed theirpreference for federal court," Judge Clarke said.     The plaintiffs were represented by Richard James Serpe,Harold Seward Lawlor and Richard Steven Glasser of Glasser &Glasser in Norfolk; and by Oscar Lawrence Gilbert of Rabinowitz,Rafal, Swartz, Taliaferro & Gilbert in Norfolk.     Defense counsel were Marshall Topping Bohannon Jr. ofBohannon, Bohannon & Hancock in Norfolk; John D. Radd of Huff,Poole & Mahoney in Virginia Beach; and Melanie Fix, James LongChapman IV and Francis N. Crenshaw of Crenshaw, Ware & Martin inNorfolk.Back to Headline List CopyrightTOXIC CHEMICALS LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996CA JUDGE DENIES MOTIONTO VACATE CONSENT DECREEIN LEAD FAUCET SUIT     Finding that he made no error in issuing a consent judgmentapproving a settlement between the state and seven water faucetmanufacturers to eliminate the lead in their products, SanFrancisco County Superior Court Judge Carlos Bea on Nov. 28denied a motion by defendant Price Pfister to vacate thejudgment.  People ex rel. Lungren v. American Standard et al.,No. 948017 (CA Super. Ct., San Francisco Cty.).     Judge Bea also granted the state's request for sanctions inthe amount of $950.  He ruled that Pfister's motion was notentirely frivolous, but that it showed bad faith by introducing aconfidential settlement letter from the state that it had agreedto keep out of the proceedings.     Pfister was one of 16 defendants in a suit brought by thestate and several environmental groups alleging that the faucetmakers were in violation of the Safe Drinking Water and ToxicEnforcement Act, also known as Proposition 65, a state lawenacted in 1986 that prohibits the discharge of toxic chemicalsinto sources of drinking water.     The settlement agreement with seven of the major faucetmanufacturers was approved in October in Superior Court over theobjections of Pfister and Chicago Faucet Co.  It calls for thefaucet makers to eliminate lead from their faucets by 1999 and toaffix warning labels on faucets that do not meet California'sstandard limiting the amount of lead in drinking water to0.5 micrograms of lead per day.  The seven companies " AmericanStandard, Moen, Masco, Eljer, Elkay, Whirlpool and UniversalRundle " have agreed to apply the same standards nationwide.     The settlement came about after the state lost its caseagainst the faucet manufacturers in Superior Court and lost anappeal in the California Court of Appeal.  The defendantssuccessfully argued that household drinking water is not a"source of drinking water" within the meaning of Proposition 65.However, in two consolidated cases in Alameda County againstthree water pump manufacturers, the Superior Court ruled just theopposite, i.e., that Proposition 65 does apply to tap water, thusprompting the settlement.  The three water pump manufacturersalso joined in the settlement.     In the meantime, the California Supreme Court has agreed tohear an appeal of the appellate court ruling in the San Franciscocase solely on the issue of whether Proposition 65 includesplumbing fixtures.     In its motion to vacate, Pfister argued that the court erredin presuming that the attorney general properly carried out hisduty to enforce Proposition 65 and that the court accepted animproper standard for testing the lead content in faucets thatdoes not accurately detect whether the daily lead exposureexceeds the legal limit of .5 micrograms per day.     Judge Bea ruled that Pfister misconstrued the attorneygeneral's actions and the consent judgment.     "No 'standard' has been adopted by the Attorney General orthe Court.  The testing protocol at issue is merely a means forimplementing and enforcing the .5 micrograms of lead per dayexposure standard called for in the regulations," he said.     The state had requested $2,500 in sanctions against Pfisterfor bringing a frivolous motion to vacate, but Judge Bea foundthat the motion was not wholly frivolous because the state'sRules of Civil Procedure do permit parties to contend that acourt's decision is based on legal error.  He did find, however,that Pfister showed bad faith in filing the confidentialsettlement letter under seal as part of its motion and in usingthe letter as the basis of a declaration from an expert witnessthat the testing protocol is not accurate.     Pfister had agreed not to use the letter in any form in thelitigation and it should have adhered to that agreement, he said."'An honest man's word is his bond,'" Judge Bea said quoting fromDon Quixote.  "In this court, at least, the words of Don Miguelde Cervantes are not only found true but enforced."  He ruledthat the state is entitled to recoup $950, its expenditurescaused by Pfister's use of the letter.     Pfister was represented by James L. Meeder, San Francisco.The state was represented by Deputy Attorney General Edward G.Weil.Back to Headline List CopyrightTOXIC CHEMICALS LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 2, 19969TH CIRCUIT REINSTATESCOUNTY WORKER'S CLAIMSAGAINST EXTERMINATORS     The Ninth Circuit U.S. Court of Appeals on Oct. 26reinstated the claims of a former Santa Clara County, CA, planneragainst two exterminating companies that she alleges made hersick when they applied pesticides to the building where sheworked.  Jensen v. County of Santa Clara et al., Nos. 94-16063and 94-16824 (9th Cir.).     The appellate court, however, ruled that her claims againstthe county and some of its employees are barred by California'sworkers compensation and government immunity statutes.     Cheriel Jensen was an associate planner for Santa ClaraCounty from 1977 to 1993.  On June 14, 1993, she filed suit inSanta Clara Superior Court against the county, 14 countyemployees and officials, two pest control companies " Instar PestConsultants Inc. and Applied Pest Management Inc. (APM) " and anAPM official, Gregory Clark.  Instar provided pest controlservices to the county from 1983 to 1990, and APM provided pestcontrol services from 1990 to 1993.     Jensen's suit alleged that the two companies applied apesticide called Safrotin, which made her chronically ill.Acting pro se, she alleged 22 federal and state law causes ofaction including negligence, failure to warn, denial of civilrights, violation of the Americans with Disabilities Act,fraudulent concealment and breach of contract.     The suit was removed to U.S. District Court for the NorthernDistrict of California where Judge James Ware dismissed 13 of thecounty defendants and 17 of Jensen's causes of action.  He alsodismissed with leave to amend five of Jensen's claims against theremaining county defendants, and Jensen filed a first amendedcomplaint in February 1994.     In April 1994, Judge Ware granted summary judgment toInstar, finding that Jensen's personal injury claims against thecompany were time-barred by California's one-year statute oflimitations.  He later denied Jensen's motion to remand the suitto state court, dismissed her remaining claims against the countydefendant and dismissing her second amended complaint against APMand Clark.     Jensen appealed all of those judgments, and the NinthCircuit affirmed all but the personal injury claims againstInstar and her second amended complaint against APM.     According to the unpublished opinion, the circuit courtfound that the district court correctly dismissed the claimsagainst the county defendants because they are barred by theexclusivity provisions of the California Workers' CompensationAct.     The lower court also correctly dismissed the claims againstthe county employees and officials because they are immune fromliability for actions taken within the scope of their employmentunder the California Government Code section820.9, the appellatepanel said.     In addition, Judge Ware ruled correctly that Jensen couldnot file a claim under the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA)because it is not retroactive.  She stopped working 25 daysbefore the ADA went into effect, the circuit court said.     On the personal injury claims against Instar, the NinthCircuit reversed and remanded Judge Ware's dismissal of thoseclaims because they were filed on time from the date shediscovered the alleged cause of her injuries.  Although Jensenhad suffered symptoms from 1977, she believed that her illnesswas caused by the state's Malathion medfly spraying.  It was notuntil June 12, 1992, that she discovered that her injuries mayhave been caused by the county's pest control actions, and shefiled her first complaint on June 14, 1993, which is within theone-year statute of limitations period, the appellate court said.     The Ninth Circuit also reinstated Jensen's second amendedcomplaint against APM, which the district court had dismissedbecause of her failure to comply with its court order to removefour claims.  The appellate panel said that Jensen did try tocomply with the order and that the district court's sanction wastoo harsh and constituted an abuse of its discretion.Back to Headline List CopyrightTOXIC CHEMICALS LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 2, 19969TH CIR. DETERMINES HEALTHASSESSMENT TO CONSTITUTEREMOVAL OR RESPONSE     The Ninth Circuit U.S. Court of Appeals on Dec. 7 affirmed aWashington federal court's dismissal of a citizens' group's bidto compel the Agency for Toxic Research and Disease Registry(ATSDR) to initiate a health assessment program in the region ofthe Hanford Nuclear Reservation.  Hanford Downwinders Coalitionet al. v. Dowdle et al., No. 94-35100 (9th Cir.).     The panel agreed that no federal court jurisdiction existedover the claim and concluded that the ATSDR's ongoing healthassessment activity in the region constituted a removal orremedial action for the purposes of CERCLA's Timing of Reviewprovision.     The litigation stems from ongoing cleanup efforts at theHanford facility in Richland, WA, which for some 30 yearsproduced plutonium for the Department of Defense.  The facilitygenerated releases of radioactive iodine and other hazardoussubstances into the atmosphere, soil and water of the region.     In 1988, the EPA proposed adding the Hanford site to theNational Priorities List (NPL).  The following year, the EPA,Department of Energy and Washington Department of Ecologyoutlined their response.  The ATSDR was assigned specificresponsibilities under the response plan to prepare preliminaryhealth assessments, and was given the discretion to expand themto full health assessments if warranted.     The Hanford site has remained the subject of continuedresearch by the ATSDR.  In 1993, the ATSDR declared the site tobe among the Superfund sites posing the greatest threat to publichealth, and has applied the results of the Centers for DiseaseControl's 1994 study to its criteria for determining whethermedical monitoring would be appropriate.     Plaintiffs Hanford Downwinders Coalition Inc. (HDC) broughtthe instant litigation in July 1993, alleging that the ATSDR hasa mandatory duty under CERCLA section9604(i)(9) to commence ahealth surveillance program in the region, including medicaltesting and monitoring for individuals exposed to radioactiveiodine.  The Eastern District of Washington granted the defense'sdismissal motion, concluding that the ATSDR's health-relatedactivities at Hanford constituted ongoing removal or responseactivity, and that the plaintiffs' claim was therefore animpermissible challenge.     Affirming, the Ninth Circuit first rejected the plaintiffs'contentions that the language of the statute supported theirconstruction of the statute.  The HDC asserted that when Congressinstructed the ATSDR to "effectuate and implement [CERCLA's]health-related authorities" in section9604(i)(1) of the statute,it meant to distinguish these health-related authorities from"response authorities" as defined under section9604.  "There isno indication that Congress' characterization of ATSDRauthorities as 'health related' was intended to render thesection9604 'response authorities' section superfluous as toATSDR actions," the panel rejoined.     The panel found that the language of section9604(i)(1)"should be read narrowly as a means to distinguish betweendifferent types of response authorities, rather than interpretedbroadly as an effort to differentiate ATSDR health assessment andsurveillance activity from response actions protected by theTiming of Review provision."     Cautioning that not all section9604 "response authorities"are to be considered removal or remedial actions per se, theNinth Circuit engaged in an analysis of whether the ATSDR'sconduct could be shown to be removal or remedial activity.  "TheATSDR health assessment and surveillance activities challenged bythe HDC," the panel wrote, "are a necessary part of thegovernment's efforts to safeguard the public health at NPLsites....  [The ATDSR] is an integral part of Congress' effort toprotect the health of those exposed to hazardous releases fromfacilities listed on the NPL."     The court reconciled the instant case with its holdings inDurfey v. E.I. DuPont (1995) (See Toxic Chemicals LR, July 18,1995, P. 21,563) and Price v. U.S. Navy (1994) which declaredthat independent private actions for medical monitoring were notremoval or remedial actions.  "The reasoning in Durfey and Pricedoes not apply to health assessment and surveillance actionsengaged in by a governmental agency pursuant to explicit CERCLAprovisions," wrote the panel.     The plaintiffs pointed to the structure of CERCLA, notingthat section9607(a)(4)(A), which provides for the government torecover "all costs of removal or remedial action," is separatefrom section9607(a)(4)(D), which provides for the recovery of"the costs of any health assessment" made by the ATSDR.  Thepanel rejoined that section9607(a)(4)(D) was in fact part of the1986 SARA amendments, and "decline[d] to read the failure ofCongress to accomplish the seamless integration of ATSDRprovisions with the other authorities found under subsection9607(a)(4)(A) as compelling proof of Congress' intent todistinguish ATSDR activities from removal and remedial actions."     The plaintiffs also pointed to the separate treatment ofresponse costs and ATSDR costs in CERCLA sections 9611(a) and9611(c).  Noting the fact that the legislative history was silentas to why the distinction was made, the panel stated itsobligation "to choose the interpretation that is most consistentwith the remainder of the Act."     Having established that the ATSDR's conduct constitutedremoval or remedial action, the Ninth Circuit disposed of HDC'sassertions that the requirements of the Timing of Reviewprovision were otherwise unsatisfied.  The panel looked to its1995 holdings in MESS v. Perry (see Hazardous Waste LR, March 1,1995, P. 28,144) and Razore v. Tulalip Tribes (see HazardousWaste LR, Oct. 4, 1995, P. 28,238) in concluding that the HDC'ssuit was a "challenge" to the ongoing removal or remediation.     Tom H. Foulds, Seattle, represents the appellants.     Elizabeth Ann Peterson of the U.S. Department of Justice,Environment and Natural Resources Division, Washington, DC,represents the appellees.Back to Headline List CopyrightTOXIC CHEMICALS LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 2, 19963RD CIR.: NEIGHBORS,VISITORS TO WASTE SITEARE NOT KNOWN CREDITORS     Neighbors of a dump site contaminated by low-level radiationwere not known creditors and, therefore, the corporate owner ofthe sites had no obligation to provide them with actual noticewhen it went into bankruptcy, the Third Circuit U.S. Court ofAppeals ruled Dec. 18.  Chemetron Corp. v. Jones et al., No. 94-3371 (3rd Cir.).     From 1965 to 1975, Chemetron Corp. owned and operated amanufacturing facility that made an antimony oxide catalystutilizing depleted plutonium, as well as a nearby landfill whereit dumped waste products from that manufacturing process inCuyahoga Heights, OH.  Chemetron sold the sites in 1975, but wasinvolved in cleanup efforts between 1980 and 1988 after it wasdiscovered that the sites were contaminated with radioactivewaste.     In 1988, Chemetron filed for Chapter 11 reorganization inU.S. Bankruptcy Court for the Western District of Pennsylvania.The court issued a claims bar date order fixing the last day forcreditors to file claims as May 31, 1988.  Chemetron sent therequired actual notice to all of its known creditors and alsovoluntarily placed advertisements in the New York Times and WallStreet Journal in an effort to reach any unknown creditors.     In 1992, 15 individuals filed suit against Chemetron and itssuccessors in interest in the Cuyahoga County Court of CommonPleas claiming to have been injured from exposure to radioactiveand toxic chemicals at the dump site.  Eventually the list ofplaintiffs grew to 21.  Two of the plaintiffs had lived in housesnear the site and the rest were periodic visitors to the houses.     Chemetron moved to dismiss the suit, arguing that any suchclaim had been discharged in the bankruptcy proceedings thatended in 1990.  The plaintiffs then petitioned the bankruptcycourt to be allowed to file late claims.  In August 1993, thebankruptcy court granted the petition, finding that theplaintiffs were known creditors that had been entitled to actualnotice of the proceedings and the claims bar date.  Thebankruptcy court then reserved ruling on the issue of whether theplaintiffs' claims were dischargeable.     Chemetron appealed the bankruptcy court ruling to the U.S.District Court for the Western District of Pennsylvania, whichreversed the bankruptcy court's grant of the motion to file lateclaims.  The district court held that the plaintiffs were notknown creditors and that the notice published in the two nationalnewspapers was sufficient to alert them to the bankruptcyproceedings.  The district court also ruled, without explanation,that the plaintiffs' claims were dischargeable and weredischarged as a result of the bankruptcy action.     The plaintiffs appealed to the Third Circuit, which affirmedthe district court finding that the plaintiffs are unknowncreditors.  In Tulsa Professional Collection Service Inc. v.Roper, 485 U.S. 478, 490 (1988), the U.S. Supreme Courtcharacterized a known creditor as one whose identity is eitherknown or "reasonably ascertainable by the debtor," Circuit JudgeJane R. Roth wrote.  Generally, debtors are expected to identifyknown creditors through a careful search of their own books andrecords and further efforts are not required, she explained.     In this case, she said, the bankruptcy court replaced the"reasonably ascertainable" standard with a "reasonablyforeseeable" standard.  Under that test, the bankruptcy courtsaid Chemetron knew or should have known that it was reasonablyforeseeable that it would suffer claims from individuals livingnear the sites, making them known creditors.     This "reasonably foreseeable" standard is an incorrect ruleof law that imposes an impossible burden on debtors, the ThirdCircuit found.  None of the claimants currently lives near thesite and some have moved as far away as Texas.  "We are hardpressed to conceive of any way the debtor could identify, locate,and provide actual notice to these claimants," Judge Roth said.     Having affirmed the district court's ruling that theplaintiffs were unknown claimants in the bankruptcy action andthat the newspaper notices therefore were sufficient to informthem of the proceedings, the circuit court found that thedistrict court erred in failing to consider whether theplaintiffs' failure to file their claims in a timely manner wasdue to "excusable neglect."  The appellate panel remanded thatissue to the district court with instructions to consider thetotality of the circumstances and the potential prejudicialimpact on Chemetron.               It also vacated the district court's ruling that theplaintiffs' claims were dischargeable and discharged by thebankruptcy action and remanded that issue to the bankruptcycourt.  Because the bankruptcy court had postponed ruling on theissue of discharge, it was not an appealable order and thereforewas not properly before the district court, the Third Circuitsaid.     Circuit Judge H. Lee Sarokin concurred in the judgment butsaid that the Third Circuit went too far in discarding the"reasonably ascertainable" test entirely.  "These tests are notmutually exclusive, or even at odds.  They address separateissues," Judge Sarokin wrote.  One has to do with whether adebtor knew or should have known a claim would be brought whilethe other has to do with the debtor's ability to identify apotential claimant, he said.     The Jones plaintiffs were represented by William Mitchelland Deborah J. Papushak of Armstrong, Mitchell & Damiani,Cleveland.  Chemetron was represented Dennis G. Terez of Squire,Sanders & Dempsey, Cleveland, and George L. Cass of Buchanan,Ingersoll, Pittsburgh.Back to Headline List CopyrightTOXIC CHEMICALS LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996PLAINTIFF IN ILL HEALTHSEEKS EXPEDITED APPEALOF DEFENSE VERDICT     The plaintiff in a personal injury suit against the ownersand operators of the St. Onofre Nuclear Generating Station(SONGS) will petition the Ninth Circuit U.S. Court of Appealsthis week for an expedited appeal of a jury verdict in favor ofthe defense after losing a bid for a retrial on Dec. 5, accordingto his attorney, Don Howarth.   James v. Southern CaliforniaEdison Co., No. 94-1085 (SD CA).     Howarth filed a notice of appeal on Dec. 22.  He said thathis client, Glen James, 63, who is suffering from chronicmyelogenous leukemia, is in rapidly deteriorating health and thathe wants to expedite the appeal on James' behalf "while it maystill do him some good."  James, an engineer, worked at SONGS inthe mid-1980s.     Howarth moved for a new trial after the eight-person juryreturned a verdict in favor of defendants Southern CaliforniaEdison and Combustion Engineering Inc. on Oct. 12.  He arguedthat the jury was improperly influenced by the O.J. Simpson trialand by juror misconduct.     Howarth argued that the verdict was against the weight ofthe evidence, that it was the product of improper passion andprejudice and that the jury improperly considered extraneous,prejudicial information.               According to the motion, one of the jurors, GenevieveFitzwater, told the others that she had received radiationtherapy for thyroid cancer and that "it had saved my life."  Inaddition, after the jurors were allowed to watch the verdict inthe O.J. Simpson case, Fitzwater also allegedly told the othersthat they must apply the same "reasonable doubt" standard used inthe Simpson murder case to the evidence in this case.     James also alleged that a second juror told a post-verdictgathering that he had made his mind up for the defense early inthe trial before all of the evidence had been presented and thathe had never wavered in his belief.     Southern District of California Judge Napoleon Jones Jr.rejected all of those arguments, finding that under the FederalRules of Evidence, most of juror Gregory Hafen's declarationsupporting the allegations of juror misconduct is inadmissible.     According to Rule 606(b), a juror may not testify toanything that may have influenced his decision duringdeliberations except on the question of whether extraneousprejudicial information was improperly brought to the jury'sattention.     Under that rule, only Fitzwater's statements about herradiation treatment and applying the reasonable doubt standardmay be admissible if they can be shown to be extraneousinformation and prejudicial by a preponderance of the evidence,Judge Jones said.     He ruled, however, that Fitzwater's alleged statements abouther radiation treatment are not prejudicial extraneousinformation but "are best classified as personal experienceapplied to the evidence in the case...."     Citing to Hard v. Burlington Northern Railroad Co., 870 F.2d1461 (9th Cir. 1989), Judge Jones said, "The type of after-acquired information that potentially taints a jury verdictshould be carefully distinguished from the general knowledge,opinions, feelings and bias that every juror carries into thejury room."     In Hard, he said, the Ninth Circuit found that it isacceptable for a juror to use his own personal experience tointerpret the evidence in a case.  In addition, even ifFitzwater's statements did constitute impermissible extraneousinformation, the plaintiff failed to show prejudice by apreponderance of the evidence.     On the reasonable doubt issue, Judge Jones found that suchallegations are not admissible because they constitute testimonyon the mental processes of the jury.  He found no Ninth Circuitprecedence on the issue, but he cited two Fifth Circuit U.S.Court of Appeals cases that hold that once a verdict is rendered,the court may not inquire into the jury's deliberative process todetermine if the jury properly followed the court's instructions(United States v. D'Angelo, 598 F.2d 1002 [1979] and Robles v.Exxon Corp., 862 F.2d 1201 [1989]).     In addition to Howarth, the Jameses are represented bySuzelle M. Smith of Howarth & Smith in Los Angeles.  SouthernCalifornia Edison is represented by Jack Reding of Crosby,Heafey, Roach & May in Oakland, CA.Back to Headline List CopyrightTOXIC CHEMICALS LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996OHIO JUDGE GRANTS J.N.O.V.TO PLAINTIFFS AFTER JURYRETURNS DEFENCE VERDICT     The defendants in a sick building syndrome suit inCincinnati filed a notice of appeal Dec. 29, challenging thetrial court's grant of judgment notwithstanding the verdict tofour plaintiffs on the issue of negligence after a jury returneda unanimous verdict in favor of the building's owners.  Beck v.A & D Limited Partnership et al., No. A-91-06574 (OH C.P. Ct.,Hamilton Cty.).     While Common Pleas Judge John W. O'Keefe found that theevidence overwhelmingly supported a finding of negligence, hedenied the plaintiffs' motion for j.n.o.v. with regard topunitive damages and also denied their motion for a new trial.His decision was entered into judgment on Dec. 6.     (The memorandum specifying grounds for the decision isavailable from Andrews Document Access Service.)     Judge O'Keefe granted j.n.o.v. to plaintiffs Sue Marshall,Linda Bachman, Karen M. Ringland and Joseph Schwetschenau.  Hedenied a motion for j.n.o.v. as to the loss of consortium claimsof Schwetschenau's wife, Dolores, finding that the jury's verdicton that claim was acceptable.     The four plaintiffs were sample plaintiffs for some 700class members who claim that the A & D Building where they workin Cincinnati caused headaches, fatigue, drowsiness, sore throat,sinus problems, nausea, dizziness, eye irritation, chest pains,disorientation, anguish and justifiable apprehension.     Judge O'Keefe said that the jury should have answered in theaffirmative both Interrogatory 1 (Were the defendants negligent?)and Interrogatory 2 (Do you find by a preponderance of theevidence that any defendant breached any lease agreement?).     "The evidence overwhelmingly demonstrated that A & D wasunsafe and unsanitary, and the defendants thus were negligent,and reasonable minds could come to only one conclusion as tosafety and sanitation," he said.               He cited the testimony of four expert witnesses thatconditions in the building caused human health problems, as wellas two exhibits from the Cincinnati Health Department thatverified the poor indoor air quality as evidence of causation.     Given his grant of j.n.o.v. on negligence, Judge O'Keefedenied the plaintiffs' motion for a new trial because, he said,there is no ground for a new trial unless the j.n.o.v. isoverturned on appeal.  By denying j.n.o.v. on the issue ofpunitive damages, Judge O'Keefe said that the jury verdictdenying punitive damages would stand for the entire class ofclaimants.     On the issue of actual damages, Judge O'Keefe ordered abench hearing for Jan. 8 to determine the amount of actualdamages.  That hearing has since been postponed pending aresolution of the appealability of the judge's j.n.o.v. order.In a footnote, Judge O'Keefe said that "probably there is nofinal appealable order until damages are determined and made partof the Court's ultimate judgment,"  but the notice of appealspecifically challenges the j.n.o.v.     The plaintiffs are represented by Louise M. Roselle andColleen M. Hegge of Waite, Schneider, Bayless & Chesley and byWilliam Eric Minamyer of Kepley, MacConnell & Eyrich.  Thedefendants are represented by W. John Sellins and A. DennisMiller of Droeder & Miller.  All three firms are located inCincinnati.Back to Headline List CopyrightTOXIC CHEMICALS LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996PARENTS OF PRO GOLFERHEATHER FARR SUE MOTOROLAFOR WRONGFUL DEATH     The parents of professional golfer Heather Farr filed suitagainst Motorola Inc. in the U.S. District Court for the Districtof Arizona Nov. 17, alleging that groundwater pollution fromthree Phoenix-area Motorola plants caused the breast cancer thatkilled Farr in 1993 at the age of 28.  Farr v. Motorola Inc.,No. 95-2530 PHX-ROS (D AZ).     The complaint alleges that Motorola has been dumpingtrichloroethylene (TCE) and 19 other toxic and hazardouschemicals into the air and ground since the 1950s and that aplume of the chemicals seeped into the groundwater that Farr andhundreds of other people used for drinking water.  It says thatFarr grew up in the vicinity of the plants.  Two of the plantshave been designated as federal Superfund sites, and the thirdhas been declared a polluted site under Arizona's state anti-pollution statute.     Farr was an All-American at Arizona State University beforeturning pro and becoming the youngest golfer to qualify for theLPGA tour in 1986.  She died in November 1993 after undergoing amastectomy, chemotherapy, radiation therapy and a bone-marrowtransplant.     The complaint filed by her parents, Sharon and Gerald D.Farr, allege wrongful death, negligence, trespass, infliction ofemotional distress, fraudulent concealment/failure to warn andstrict liability.     According to the complaint, Motorola negligently disposed oflarge quantities of toxic chemicals in and around the plantsresulting in bodily harm to Farr.  The company had specialknowledge of the types, amounts, dates and methods of disposal ofthe chemicals going back the 1950s, but it failed to warn personsliving near the plants of the potential harm from the dumping andit made express and implied false representations to conceal thedangers of the chemicals from the public.     "Motorola's acts of knowingly and intentionally disposing oftoxic and hazardous substances and wastes into the environmentwithout proper treatment constitute extreme and outrageousconduct, which Motorola knew or should have known would causesevere emotional distress to persons such as the deceased oracted in reckless disregard of whether such emotional distresswould result," the complaint said.     The Farrs are seeking compensatory and punitive damages,attorneys' fees and costs.  The plaintiffs agreed to grantMotorola an extension to file a motion or answer until Jan. 16     Lead attorney for the plaintiffs is John M. O'Quinn ofHouston.  They are also represented by Robert H. Hinton of Hinton& Cox, Houston; Dennis C. Reich of Reich & Binstock, Houston;Stephanie Shapiro and Elaine Watson of Shapiro & Watson, Houston;John A. Buttrick and Charles S. Price of Brown & Bain, Phoenix;and Carl D. Shaw in O'Quinn's Phoenix office.  O'Quinn and Brown& Bain are also involved in 800 cases brought against Motorola byneighbors of the three plants.     Motorola is represented by Garrett B. Johnson in Kirkland &Ellis's Chicago office; John A. Zackrison in Kirkland & Ellis'sLos Angeles office; and Floyd P. Bienstock of Steptoe & Johnson,Phoenix.Back to Headline List CopyrightTOXIC CHEMICALS LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996OCCIDENTAL PAYS $129MTO CLOSE A CHAPTERON LOVE CANAL     Occidental Chemical Corp. has agreed to pay the U.S.government $129 million in cleanup costs and interest to settle a16-year-old suit resulting from decades of pollution at LoveCanal, the incident that spurred Congress to enact the SuperfundLaw of 1980.  United States et al. v. Hooker Chemical Corp. etal., No. 79-CV-990C (WD NY).     Under the proposed consent decree, announced Dec. 21,Occidental Chemical Corp. (Oxychem) will pay $102 million to theEnvironmental Protection Agency and $28 million to the FederalEmergency Management Agency (FEMA).  FEMA handled the initialcleanup and relocation of Love Canal residents.     From 1942 to 1953, Oxychem's corporate predecessor, HookerChemical, dumped an estimated 22,000 tons of toxic chemicals andhazardous wastes at Love Canal from its Niagara Fallsmanufacturing plant.  The site was eventually covered over anddeeded to the City of Niagara Falls.  Homes and a school werelater built on and near it.  Chemicals began seeping into thehouses in the 1970s, sickening residents.  One resident, LoisGibbs, led a crusade to expose Hooker's actions and to clean upthe site.     In 1979, the federal government and New York state broughtsuit against Hooker.  The federal government initially soughtcompensation of more than $200 million in cleanup costs underCERCLA, and the state sought $250 million in punitive damages.Oxychem was held liable in the liability phase of the trial, butthe state's claims for punitive damages were denied.     In June 1994, Oxychem agreed to pay the state $98 million tosettle the remaining state claims.  The U.S. Army has also agreedto pay the government $8 million for its share of the costs forcleaning up hazardous waste that it dumped at the site duringWorld War II.     The consent decree, which is expected to receive finalapproval in 30 days, eliminates the need for a second trial ondamages.  Under its terms, Oxychem will pay the $129 million infour installments over three years, beginning three months afterthe court grants final approval.     While the proposed settlement closes out the federal andstate cleanup claims, it does not end the litigation over LoveCanal.  The City of Niagara Falls is seeking $4 million in costsand interest, and 900 former residents have personal injurylawsuits still pending.  In the wake of the federal and statesettlements, Niagara Falls expects that it will soon reach asettlement with the company to end its suit as well.     In announcing the settlement, U.S. Attorney General JanetReno called it "the transformation of an environmental disastercalled Love Canal into a success story.  It stands for theprinciple that when people make a mess, they should clean it up."     A spokesman for Occidental Chemical said that the companyhas never denied liability, but that the settlement represents acompromise among the parties on the amount of compensation,rather than fines or penalties.  The agreement, he said, avoidshaving to go through a protracted trial on damages.     Occidental Chemical is represented by Steven K. Yablonski ofPiper & Marbury, Washington, DC.  The federal government isrepresented by Steven Novick and Steven R. Baer of the U.S.Justice Department, Washington, DC.Back to Headline List CopyrightTOXIC CHEMICALS LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996CA APP. CT. REVERSESCARRIER WIN ONWRONGFUL ENTRY     The California Court of Appeal, Second District, on Dec. 5overturned a Los Angeles judge's grant of summary adjudication toInsurance Co. of North America (INA) on the environmentalcoverage demands of Martin Marietta Corp.  Martin Marietta Corp.et al v. Insurance Co. of North America, No. B084709 (CACt. App., 2nd Dist.).     The panel found that the policyholder had raised the issueof potential of coverage for its environmental claims under the"wrongful entry" provisions of INA's policies.     Martin Marietta (now Lockheed Martin) named its carriers tothe present action to determine their obligations concerning theinsured's liabilities incurred at multiple Superfund sites.  Thepolicyholder made claims against INA with respect to theStringfellow site and six others across the country.     INA issued automobile and personal injury coverage to MartinMarietta from 1968 to 1972; the insured averred that the"wrongful entry or eviction, or other invasion of the right ofprivate occupancy" language provision of the personal injuryprovision created the potential of coverage for its environmentalliabilities.  The Los Angeles County Superior Court concludedthat the coverage "for certain damages because of personal injurycannot reasonably be construed as including government pollutionclean-up claims."     In its review, the state appellate panel noted INA'scontention that the "wrongful entry" language "provides coverageonly for 'classic landlord/tenant-type disputes.'  Under INA'sinterpretation, 'wrongful entry or eviction' refers only toforcible eviction claims brought by one with a possessoryinterest in the land, and 'other invasion of the right of privateoccupancy' extends that coverage to claims brought by occupants,rather than owners."     The court next looked to state precedent that interpretedthe challenged language outside of the environmental context.The panel found these cases to establish that "under Californialaw, the language 'wrongful entry or eviction, or other invasionof the right of private occupancy' is limited to tort claimsrelating to the invasion of an interest in real property....[C]ontrary to INA's argument here, personal injury coverage isnot determined by the nature of the damages sought in the actionagainst the insured, but by the nature of the claims made againstthe insured in that action."     The court then looked to the February 1994 ruling of theCalifornia Court of Appeal, Fourth District, in Titan Corp. v.Aetna Casualty, which had refused to find environmental coverageunder the personal injury provision.  "[U]nlike Martin Marietta'sINA policy, the insurance policy under review in Titan Corp.contained a pollution exclusion which 'unambiguously declared'that the policy would not pay for either bodily injury orproperty damage caused by pollution," wrote the panel.     The Titan court alternatively reasoned that it is not"objectively reasonable for an insured to expect personal injuryto mean property damage, or to expect contamination ofgroundwater to harm either a private right or an occupancyright."  The panel here found that this reasoning "seems todepart from California law."     After reviewing the federal and out-of-state precedent onthe issue cited by both sides, the panel found them to "lack aconsensus of approach and of result.  Many concern insurancepolicies which are in important ways different than the one weare called on to interpret."Back to Headline List CopyrightTOXIC CHEMICALS LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996Trespass and Nuisance     In looking to the language of the policy at hand, the courtstated that it "cannot accept INA's contention that the coverageclause at issue is limited to 'classic landlord/tenant'claims....  [I]t seems manifest that 'wrongful entry,' in thecontext of torts relating to the invasion of an interest in realproperty, includes trespass and may include nuisance, and that areasonable insured would so understand the coverage."     INA averred that neither trespass nor nuisance wasspecifically enumerated in the torts listed under the policy; thepanel rejoined that "the language of the policy clearlyencompasses those causes of action, and there is no requirement,in the policy or in the law, that each covered cause of action be'specifically enumerated.'"     The panel cited to an 1885 ruling of the California SupremeCourt that stated that "every wrongful entry upon lands in theoccupation or possession of the owner constitutes a trespass."The court also noted that it is established in California "thattrespass and nuisance claims may include wrongful entry orinvasion by pollutants....  To agree with INA that 'wrongfulentry' does not include trespass and nuisance claims would fly inthe face of this long-standing law."               The panel rejected the insurer's contention that a wrongfulentry claim requires proof of forcible entry with intent toouster; it was further unmoved by the contention that theunderlying claimant (the government) cannot claim a right of"occupancy" in the contaminated groundwater.     "INA has not established that the government is seeking toenforce only a public or residual interest in groundwater," wrotethe court.  "Instead, the undisputed facts indicate that thegovernment claims include allegations that pollutants emanatingfrom Martin Marietta have contaminated the water wells andgroundwater on land owned by individuals, businesses, and,perhaps, governmental entities."     The court lastly determined that INA had not met its burdenof showing that it was entitled to summary judgment.  Theunderlying claims, wrote the panel, "are based in part ontrespass and nuisance....  [T]he actions [include] allegations ofwrongful entry and of invasions of the right of private occupancyin real property."     Kirk A. Pasich, Martin D. Katz and Linda D. Kornfeld ofTroop Meisinger Steuber & Pasich, Los Angeles, represent thepolicyholder.     W. Mark Wood, Martin S. Checov and H. Douglas Galt ofO'Melveny & Myers, Los Angeles, represent the insurer.Back to Headline List WT02-B35-10IA095-001021-B004-281http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/ch12.html 205.156.212.5 19970121223914 text/html 39119HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Tuesday, 21-Jan-97 22:36:33 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:41:58 GMTContent-length: 38934Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ch12.html Sample Issue Copyright TOXIC MATERIALS NEWS via NewsNet JANUARY 3, 1990 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES SLANTS & TRENDS (320 words) NRC REPORTS DOE NUCLEAR SITE WORKERS AT RISK FROM CHEMICALS AND RADIATION (405 words) KENTUCKY'S DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION (DEP) has drafted a (108 words) SCIENTISTS CHAMPION PERMEABLE ZEOLITE AS NEW DETECTOR OF TOXIC MATERIALS (352 words) FISHER SEES IMPORTANT ROLE FOR INTERNATIONAL CHEMICAL TESTING (225 words) EPA TO ASSESS PCB CONTAMINATION IN HUDSON RIVER, AGENCY SAYS (258 words) CALENDAR: (86 words) STUDY FINDS LINGERING POLLUTION IN MIDWEST FARM-STATE STREAMS (533 words) BOOK DETAILS ISSUES OF DISASTROUS AIR TOXICS RELEASES (240 words) COURT ORDERS TRIPLE DAMAGES FOR CLEANUP OF PCB WASTES (142 words) CONFERENCE: Feb. 15-16, "Hazardous Waste Site Remediation," Los Angeles. (34 words) STATE COURT THROWS OUT N.Y. RULE ON POSTED PESTICIDE WARNINGS (404 words) THE UNITED STATES indicted 101 corporations and individuals for (141 words) NEWS IN BRIEF * New Jersey's Department of Environmental Protection fined a (164 words) * Occidental Chemical Corp. and Chemical Land Holdings Inc., both (142 words) * The Washington Department of Labor and Industry has increased the (111 words) * Texas Water Commission staff have proposed fining a Houston (83 words) * IBM Corp. last month won the 1990 Gold Medal for International (58 words) * Cleveland State University has received $107,555 to expand its (81 words) * The Council of State Governments (CSG) has developed "model state (144 words) * The Indian Supreme Court, sitting in New Delhi, upheld a law Dec. (127 words) * Zinc Corp. of America agreed to pay a $614,000 fine to settle (214 words) * A software package contains all of OSHA's regulations found in (58 words) UPCOMING MEETINGS (126 words) CopyrightTOXIC MATERIALS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 3, 1990SLANTS & TRENDSFISHER'S VIEWS ON TITLE III:  The pressue on industrial companies resultingfrom annual reports of routine toxic releases under the Emergency Planningand Community Right-to-Know Act (EPCRA) will continue to build, saidEnvironmental Protection Agency Assistant Administrator Linda Fisher.'MORE AND MORE PEOPLE are paying more attention" to EPCRA because allcompanies want their emission numbers to improve year by year, she saidDec. 15.  "Information in the public's hands is a powerful tool, and ithas allowed, in a sense, industry to fix itself, which is probably a moreeffective way than others."THE LAW HAS BEEN 'VERY EFFECTIVE,' Fisher told TMN.  "When you have thehead of Monsanto or Du Pont or even small companies saying, 'I am making aconcerted effort to change behavior in my plant so we don't emit as much ofa toxic chemical,' that to me is a very postive thing."  Du Pont Inc.Chairman E.S. Woolard stated Dec. 12 that the company would try to cuttoxic air emissions by 60 percent by 1993 (TMN, Dec. 20, 1989).Monsanto Co. Chairman Richard J.  Mahoney said June 30, 1988, that thecompany would cut toxic emissions world-wide by 90 percent by December1992.CHEMICAL MANUFACTURERS ASSOCIATION members are being urged to take part inthe April 22 anniversary celebrations of Earth Day.  CMA is providingmembers with ideas for getting their facilities involved in communityactivities.  Allied Signal's Fluorine Products Division, Morristown, N.J.,said it will purchase and donate a siren system to the county, CMA noted ina release.  The system will be operated through the county emergencyservices agency to warn residents of hazardous materials spills, fires andnatural disasters.SOLKATRONIC CHEMICALS INC., Morrisville, Pa., donated a weather station tocommunities surrounding its facility, held a seminar for local officialson chemical dispersion modeling and donated equipment and funds to theBucks County Hazardous Incident Response Team.Back to Headline List CopyrightTOXIC MATERIALS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 3, 1990NRC REPORTS DOE NUCLEAR SITE WORKERSAT RISK FROM CHEMICALS AND RADIATION     Workers at virtually every facility in the Department of Energy's(DOE) 17-site nuclear weapons complex are at risk due to contamination ofthe plants by radioactive and other hazardous materials, says a reportreleased Dec. 20 by the National Research Council (NRC).     However, chemical hazards at DOE's weapons plants probably pose thegreatest threat to workers' health, notes "The Nuclear Weapons Complex:Management for Health, Safety and the Environment."  While substantialprogress has been made in controlling exposure to ionizing radiation, thereappears to be a less than adequate emphasis at DOE's plants on hazardsassociated with exposures to chemicals routinely used in industrialoperations, NRC says.  The substances of greatest concern includeberyllium, asbestos, cutting oils, organic solvents and plating solutions.     "Occupational medical programs within the complex should increase theemphasis placed on protection of workers from chemicals suspected to behazardous at the acute, subacute or chronic level of exposure," NRCrecommends.  The council suggests "removal of the worker from the hazard,as in the case of pregnant workers," as one type of "control" for handlingtoxic materials.  So-called "fetal protection policies" have come underfire in federal courts as discriminatory (TMN, Nov. 1, 1989).     The collection of health-related data concerning employees in thenuclear weapons complex is inadequate with regard to both the kinds of datacollected and how they are stored, NRC says.  To correct the situation, thereport urges DOE to improve monitoring and surveillance programs forexposure to hazardous substances through the use of standardized protocolsfor data collection and analysis.  "In particular, data collected withinthe complex should be comprehensive, accessible and comparable," the reportadvises.     NRC also cites as inadequate the fire control programs and the effortsto control inhalation of radioactive dust by workers.  At least twofacilities have plutonium in their exhaust ducts, it notes.     Blame for some of the problems lies with DOE's "complex managementstructure with ambiguous lines of responsibility and authority," the NRCsays.  The report suggests that safety and other related decisions shouldbe made "at the lowest possible management levels."  DOE has accumulated agreat deal of information on the effects of exposure to radiation and thisshould be made available for study, NRC adds.  DOE officials have promisedaction on this issue.  The report is available for $15 from the NationalAcademy Press, 2101 Con?stitution Ave., N.W., Washington, D.C. 20418; phone202/334-2138 or 800/624-6242.Back to Headline List CopyrightTOXIC MATERIALS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 3, 1990KENTUCKY'S DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION (DEP) has drafted aKENTUCKY'S DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION (DEP) has drafted acomprehensive plan to strengthen environmental regulations.  The proposalsfor toxic materials include:  installing air monitoring net?works inselected areas; requiring waste reduction audits; proposing legislation tohave industry partially fund research on toxic effects; setting up a riskassessment department in DEP; and monitoring ground water near hazardouswaste sites, land farms and under-ground storage tanks.  The department,which intends to seek funding this year to implement its plan, also madeenforcement and hazardous waste reduction proposals.  For copies of thefull plan at no charge, write:  Kentucky DEP Deputy Commissioner RussellBarnett, 18 Reilly Rd., Frankfort, KY 40601.Back to Headline List CopyrightTOXIC MATERIALS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 3, 1990SCIENTISTS CHAMPION PERMEABLE ZEOLITEAS NEW DETECTOR OF TOXIC MATERIALS     Recent technological breakthroughs in chemical analysis may lead to anew era of inexpensive, high-speed monitoring of ground water, waste sitesand work places for toxic substances.  Researchers from the University ofNew Mexico and the Sandia National Laboratories of Albuquerque, N.M., aredeveloping new chemical sensors using zeolite, a porous mineral that canact as a "molecular sieve."     Using polymers, the zeolite crystals can be arranged so that they actas highly selective chemical screens, said Thomas Bein, assistant chemistryprofes?sor at the University of New Mexico and a member of the researchteam.  These "screens" will allow only a single type of molecule to beabsorbed.  "The concept is very, very general and can be applied to almostall chemicals," he said.     Acoustic wave sensors located underneath a thin coating of thezeolites may enable detection of substances up to the parts-per-billionlevel.  This information then would be transmitted to a central controlstation without removing the sensor, Bein added.     This method of chemical monitoring has several advantages, Beinexplained.  Perhaps most importantly, it may allow for continuous and"almost instantaneous" monitoring that could provide early warnings ofpollution.  It also may eliminate the need for human involvement incollecting toxic samples.     The new technology has not yet been tested in the environment.  Butthe research team will be working on experimental testing devices aimed atmonitoring halogenated hydrocarbons leaking from waste dumps, Bein said.The research group hopes to test a number of different zeolites and developa data bank about the different sensors.  The project is sponsored by anEnergy Department program that encourages cooperation between New Mexicoacademic institutions and the two national laboratories in the state.  TheNational Science Foundation provided funding for the sensor project, whichstarted about 30 months ago, Bein added.     The research group's findings were presented Dec. 18 in a paper,"Molecular Sieve Sensors for Selective Operation at the Nanogram Level," atthe 1989 International Chemical Congress of Pacific Basin Societies inHonolulu.  For more information, contact Bein at 505/277-4935 or theAmerican Chemical Society at 202/872-4600.Back to Headline List CopyrightTOXIC MATERIALS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 3, 1990FISHER SEES IMPORTANT ROLE FORINTERNATIONAL CHEMICAL TESTING     A recent international agreement to test 150 industrial chemicals wonpraise as an "interesting and important development in chemical testing andcon-trol" from Linda Fisher, the Environmental Protection Agency'sassistant administrator for pesticides and toxic substances.     She cited this pact, under which member nations of the Paris-basedOrganization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) agreed todetermine the chemicals' adverse effects by 1994, as one of her threepriorities for administering the Toxic Substances Control Act.  (Fordetails on the OECD agreement, see TMN, Nov. 22, 1989).  The othersare pollution prevention, which is being pushed across-the-board byAdministrator William Reilly, and developing a strategic plan for theOffice of Toxic Substances.     "My [overall] priority is to take advantage of those three activitiesto target, perhaps, some new approaches to TSCA -- to build on what's goingon in the international community, to take a look at how we can use TSCA tobring about pollution prevention or better management of chemicals, and touse the strategic plans," she told TMN in a Dec. 15 interview.     EPA also is "looking at an initiative under [TSCA] Section 8(e) toidentify ... in industries' minds more clearly their responsibility underthat section to report to us adverse effect findings in their [chemical]studies," Fisher said, although she provided no timetable for a possibleproposal.Back to Headline List CopyrightTOXIC MATERIALS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 3, 1990EPA TO ASSESS PCB CONTAMINATIONIN HUDSON RIVER, AGENCY SAYS     Environmental Protection Agency officials in New York City havereleased plans to re-evaluate the pollution on the bottom of the HudsonRiver by polychlorinated biphenyl wastes from two General Electric Corp.plants.  The agency's Region 2 said there would be a "reassessment ofwhether further cleanup activities should now appropriately be taken underthe Superfund program."     The New York State Department of Environmental Conservation has beenusing a demonstration program involving the dredging of the PCB sedimentsfrom the river and capping them in an aboveground landfill with a $20million federal grant under the Clean Water Act.     "EPA has decided to reassess the 1984 decision in light of additionaldata developed by New York state with respect to the movement andpersistence of the PCBs in the sediments, and in recognition of recentadvances in PCB-destruction technologies such as incineration," the agencysaid.  "EPA's reassessment will be carried out independently of the DEC[capping] plan."     But $17 million of the grant will be redirected to support New York'swastewater treatment programs due to delays in building a landfill for theriver sediment.  "The [state] project has not moved forward as plannedbecause of difficulties in siting the landfill," said EPA.     PCB wastes were released into the river in 1973 by two GE facilitiesin Fort Edward, N.Y.  In 1984, EPA signed a Superfund "record of decision"that postponed the removal of PCB-contaminated sediment from the riverbottom.  A cleanup plan calls for PCBs on the river bank to be capped inplace temporarily.Back to Headline List CopyrightTOXIC MATERIALS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 3, 1990CALENDAR:     *  Feb. 20-23, "Environmental Regulation Implementation Workshops,"Philadelphia.  A series of concurrent workshops on air, water, RCRA andSuperfund compliance.  The fee is $395 for the first workshop and $295 foreach additional workshop.  Sponsor:  Executive Enterprises, 800/831-8333.     *  Feb. 20-25, "Eighth Annual Utah Conference on Industrial Hygieneand Safety," Salt Lake City.  A forum for the review of current technologyin occupational safety and health for professionals.  Short courses are$95, conference pre-registration varies.  Sponsor:  Rocky Mountain Centerfor Occupational and Environmental Health, 801/581-5710.Back to Headline List CopyrightTOXIC MATERIALS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 3, 1990STUDY FINDS LINGERING POLLUTIONIN MIDWEST FARM-STATE STREAMS     Toxic herbicides were found in more than half of 155 Midwesternstreams tested early last spring, the time of year when contaminationlevels should be lowest, a U.S. Geological Survey (USGS) study showed.     Although fields had not been treated since the previous growing year,55 percent of the streams tested in 10 farm states still had measurablelevels of herbicides such as atrazine and alachlor, both widely used oncorn and soybeans to control weeds.  A second round of sampling conductedin May and June -- after fresh applications of herbicides -- found 90percent of the streams had detect-able contamination and dozens of samplesexceeded federal health advisory standards for such residues.     Donald Goolsby, lead study author and USGS's water quality specialistfor the central United States, said his sampling team expected to find somecontamination, but not as mush as they did.  "The surprise was the largeand widespread concentrations," he explained.  "These herbicides have beendetected before in streams in agricultural states, but we do not know ofany reports of the wide-spread occurrences found in our study."     Agricultural chemicals should be at their lowest concentrations in theenvironment in the spring, Goolsby said, speculating that the springtimecontamination may be the result of streams tapping ground waterreservoirs, where herbicide residues can persist for six months or longer.Another explanation, he observed last week, might be related to the generaldrought conditions in the Midwest over the past few years.     "It's possible there has not been sufficient rainfall to flush them[herbicides] from the fields," he said.  The stream contamination "couldbe coming from the previous year's application."     The study tested streams in Iowa, Illinois, Indiana, Kansas,Minnesota, Missouri, Nebraska, Ohio, South Dakota and Wisconsin.  Thosestates were chosen because they account for 60 percent of all pesticide usein the country and produce 75 percent of the nation's corn and 60 percentof its soybeans.     The second round of stream testing, conducted after springtime fieldspraying, found dozens of samples had concentrations of herbicide residuesabove federal health advisory levels.  Of the 127 samples, 71 exceeded theEnvironmental Protection Agency's health advisory level for atrazine and 44were higher than EPA's proposed drinking water standard for alachlor.  EPAhas classified alachlor as a probable human carcinogen and atrazine as apossible human carcinogen (Canada has banned alachlor).  The geologicalsurvey's study was not designed to test drinking water, Goolsby noted,although some of the sampling sites were up-stream of public water intakes.     In addition to its unprecedented scope, the study was innovativebecause it used a new enzyme-based immunoassay method for detectingherbicide residues in water, Goolsby said.  The new method is much fasterand cheaper than the traditional gas chromotography detection technique,and, if verified as accurate, could have a major impact on environmentalscience, he said.  The immunoassay method has been used primarily inmedical research.  The USGS study team currently is analyzing a thirdround of water samples collected in the late fall, when water flowgenerally is lowest and streams are being fed largely by ground water.Results from this round of testing are due this month.Back to Headline List CopyrightTOXIC MATERIALS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 3, 1990BOOK DETAILS ISSUES OFDISASTROUS AIR TOXICS RELEASES     Noyes Data Corp. of Park Ridge, New Jersey, has published a manualcalled Accidental Releases of Air Toxics that compiles "the technicalinformation that is necessary for developing approaches to preventing andcontrolling accidental releases."  The 649-page volume offers a briefhistory of toxic chemical re?leases, an overview of the accidental releaseproblem, methods commonly used in hazard identification and evaluation, anda summary of the general principles of hazard control.     The book, written by six analysts from the Radian Corp. of Austin,Texas, also identifies primary industrial chemicals of concern anddiscusses fundamental causes of toxic releases.     A major section of the manual addresses "prevention technologies,"with chapters on process design considerations, physical plant designconsiderations, and protection technologies such as flares, scrubbers, andenclosures.  A section on "mitigation measures" features reports onemergency planning and training, facility layout, detection systems, vapordispersion modeling, meteorological instrumentation, and secondarycontainment.     "Costs of identification, evaluation, inspection, and controltechnologies can be used to roughly estimate costs of various programs foraccidental release prevention and control by either regulatory agencies orcompanies," the authors state in a chapter entitled "Cost Implications forPolicy Planning." The book presents data and methodologies "to providecompanies with a rough measure of cost impacts of various process controloptions."     Accidental Releases of Air Toxics is available from NoyesPublications, Mill Road at Grand Ave., Park Ridge, N.J. 07656.  The cost is$86.Back to Headline List CopyrightTOXIC MATERIALS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 3, 1990COURT ORDERS TRIPLE DAMAGESFOR CLEANUP OF PCB WASTES     A North Carolina man and his son have been ordered by a federal judgeto pay the federal government three times its costs of cleaning uppolychlorinated biphenyl wastes at a Fayetteville site.     The Environmental Protection Agency spent $268,000 from Superfund toremove PCB wastes from a former transformer reclamation site owned by DeweyStrother of Fayetteville.  A federal district court has ordered Strotherand his son Kenneth to pay $804,000 under Section 107 of the ComprehensiveEnvironmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act.     In addition, the Strothers must pay a fine of $78,000, or three timesthe $26,000 civil penalty assessed against them in 1984 for violating theToxic Substances Control Act.  The two men also must reimburse thegovernment three times all future cleanup costs at the site and three timesthe government's legal costs, the Justice Department said.Back to Headline List CopyrightTOXIC MATERIALS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 3, 1990CONFERENCE:  Feb. 15-16, "Hazardous Waste Site Remediation," Los Angeles.CONFERENCE:  Feb. 15-16, "Hazardous Waste Site Remediation," Los Angeles.Technical and management strategies for hazardous waste sites.  The fee is$895.  Sponsor:  Government Institutes Inc., 966 Hungerford Drive, #24,Rockville, Md., 20850; telephone 301/251-9250.Back to Headline List CopyrightTOXIC MATERIALS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 3, 1990STATE COURT THROWS OUT N.Y. RULEON POSTED PESTICIDE WARNINGS     A controversial New York regulation that would require farms, hotels,offices, residential buildings and restaurants to post notices before andafter pesticide use was rejected Dec. 21 by the Appellate Division of theNew York State Supreme Court.  Several groups representing the affectedindustries sued the state over the proposed rule.     The rule could not go into effect because the state Department ofEnvironmental Conservation had not not fully assessed the environmentalimpact of the regulation, as required by law, the court said.  The courtalso ruled that the DEC did not file the regulations on time.  Under thedecision, the department may have to repeat the public hearing process forthe regulation.     State officials have not yet decided whether to appeal the decision toNew York's highest court, said R.W. Groneman, a DEC spokesman.  DEC did notprepare an environmental impact statement (EIS) for the rule because stateofficials felt it would "have little or no adverse effect on theenvironment."     Agriculture groups, however, said the posting of signs might impedefarmers from using integrated pest management (IPM), which relies on thequick and judicious use of chemicals.  Since the final version of the ruleswould require only four hours' notice, instead of the 24-hour noticeoriginally proposed, DEC does not feel the law would impeded IPM, Gronemansaid.     But the court agreed with the farm groups.  "While it is true that DECmay have considered the IPM program in promulgating the regulations, theevidence in the record decisively demonstrates that the regulations wouldhave a major adverse impact on the IPM program, that DEC knew of thisevidence and that, therefore, an EIS was required to explore the entireissue thoroughly," Justice Norman Harvey wrote in his opinion for the court(his emphasis).     DEC continues to support the concept behind the regulations, whichwould require commercial establishments and farms to post notices informingthe public a few hours before pesticides are used and keep the noticesposted up to a full day after they are applied, Groneman said.  "The publichas a right to know about these dangerous chemicals that are, quitefrankly, used to kill things," he said, adding that this information canmean "life or death" to allergic individuals.  Hotel and restaurant groupshad argued the signs would discourage business, but the state maintains thepublic would quickly become acclimated to the notices, Groneman added.Back to Headline List CopyrightTOXIC MATERIALS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 3, 1990THE UNITED STATES indicted 101 corporations and individuals forTHE UNITED STATES indicted 101 corporations and individuals forenvironmental crimes in 1989, the Justice Department said last week.  Thisis a slight decline in the number of indictments obtained in the previoustwo years, however.  There were 127 indictments in 1987 and 124 in 1988,the department said.  Government prosecutors negotiated guilty pleas or wonconvictions in 107 cases.  The convictions and pleas resulted in individualdefendants being sentenced to a total of 37 years in prison.  The courtsassessed fines totaling $13 million.  The government has obtainedconvictions or guilty pleas against 127 corporations and 305 individualssince 1983.  The individuals have been sentenced to a total of 270 years inprison, the department said.  It assessed criminal fines of more than $26million since 1983, the first full year of operations for the JusticeDepartment's environmental crimes section.Back to Headline List CopyrightTOXIC MATERIALS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 3, 1990     *  New Jersey's Department of Environmental Protection fined a     *  New Jersey's Department of Environmental Protection fined aMiddletown company $4.1 million allegedly for violating its dischargepermit hun?dreds of times.  Engineered Precision Casting Co. (EPC)discharged improperly treated wastewater into a creek 210 times, exceedingits permit limits for iron, lead, cyanide, chromium and acute toxicity,charged state environmental Commissioner Christopher Daggett.  Thecompany's 1985 permit required it to build a waste-water treat?mentfacility, but the firm failed "to construct a ... plant capable of meetingpermit limits or to direct its discharge" to the local sewerage plant, saidEric Evenson, the department's acting director of water resources.  Thedepartment had referred the allegations to the state's attorney general,whose interest led EPC to start releasing the most toxic portion of itswaste stream into a mobile storage tank for disposal at a permittedfacility.  But the temporary measure was not enough to head off thefine -- the second largest ever im?posed by the department.  EPC may requestan administrative hearing.Back to Headline List CopyrightTOXIC MATERIALS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 3, 1990     *  Occidental Chemical Corp. and Chemical Land Holdings Inc., both     *  Occidental Chemical Corp. and Chemical Land Holdings Inc., bothDallas-based firms, have agreed to spend at least $10 mil?lion for acleanup of dioxin contamination in Newark, N.J.  The state's Depart?ment ofEnvironmental Protection and the U.S. Environmental Protection Ag?encyregard them as responsible parties for the dioxin and other pollutantsre?leased during pesticide production at the site.  Diamond Alkali, whicheventually merged with Occidental, produced pesticides, including theherbicide Agent Orange, at the "Ironbound" site from 1951 to 1969.Chemical Land Holdings now owns the property.  The settlement, filed inNewark's federal dis?trict court, requires the firms to fund containmentmeasures to keep the dioxin from polluting the Passaic River.  Once thegovernment approves a method for cleaning up dioxin (neither the state northe federal government yet has done so), the firms will have to pay forfull remediation.Back to Headline List CopyrightTOXIC MATERIALS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 3, 1990     *  The Washington Department of Labor and Industry has increased the     *  The Washington Department of Labor and Industry has increased thetraining time the state will require for hazardous waste workers.  Therules, effective June 1, will require of workers at least 80 hours ofoff-site instruction and three days of field training under direction of atrained supervisor.  Federal law re?quires 40 hours of off-site training,plus three days of field experience.  "Fly-by-night contractors who employworkers without proper training are a reason so many Superfund sitesexist," said Harold Avery, director of the North?west Laborers and EmployersTraining Association.  The group lobbied for a tougher training standard.The department's order also sets up "site work" zones barring untrainedworkers.Back to Headline List CopyrightTOXIC MATERIALS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 3, 1990     *  Texas Water Commission staff have proposed fining a Houston     *  Texas Water Commission staff have proposed fining a Houstonspecialty chemical producer, ArChem, $119,600 for alleged violations ofstate and federal hazardous waste regulations.  TWC staff allege thecompany:  failed to determine whether wastes stored at its plant werehazardous; stored wastes longer than 90 days; and illegally dischargedwastes from the plant.  The proposed fine, the largest ever for aHouston-area firm, must be approved by Texas' water commissioners.  Theproposed penalty also would require ArChem to test for soil contamination.Back to Headline List CopyrightTOXIC MATERIALS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 3, 1990     *  IBM Corp. last month won the 1990 Gold Medal for International     *  IBM Corp. last month won the 1990 Gold Medal for InternationalCorporate Environmental Achievement from the World Environment Center,Washington, D.C.  Among corporations with substantial internationaloperations, the gold medal is awarded annually for outstanding, sustainedand well-implemented environmental policy with worldwide emphasis.  IBM isscheduled to receive the award at a May 18 dinner in Washington.Back to Headline List CopyrightTOXIC MATERIALS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 3, 1990     *  Cleveland State University has received $107,555 to expand its     *  Cleveland State University has received $107,555 to expand itshazardous materials training program for industrial personnel, firefightersand other emergency responders.  The money is the first installment offunds collected under the Public Utilities Commission of Ohio'sregistration fee schedule for hazardous materials transporters.  The OhioHazardous Materials Transportation Act, enacted in 1988, requirestransporters to register shipments of toxic materials.  Half of the fundsgenerated are earmarked for CSU's training program.  For more information,contact the university's program, 216/687-2144.Back to Headline List CopyrightTOXIC MATERIALS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 3, 1990     *  The Council of State Governments (CSG) has developed "model state     *  The Council of State Governments (CSG) has developed "model statelegislation" for reducing the generation of hazardous wastes.  Componentsof the legislation include:  establishing treatment and disposal fees andgra?duated taxes on hazardous waste; exempting recycled waste products fromsales taxes; mandating audits of waste and waste-reduction; requiringproof of waste audits from in-state and out-of-state industries beforeallowing their wastes to be treated or disposed; and providing help with,but not prescribing, waste reduction technologies.  To develop the modellegislation, CSG formed a task force of state legislators, legislativestaff and environmental regulators.  Sources for CSG's proposal include:existing and proposed state bills; National Governors Associ-ationworkshops; the Office of Technology Assessment; and the Conference onAlternative State and Local Policies.  Copies of the legislation areavailable from:  CSG, Center for the Environment and Natural Resources,P.O. Box 11910, Lexing?ton, KY 40578.Back to Headline List CopyrightTOXIC MATERIALS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 3, 1990     *  The Indian Supreme Court, sitting in New Delhi, upheld a law Dec.     *  The Indian Supreme Court, sitting in New Delhi, upheld a law Dec.22 that made the government the sole claimant for victims of the 1984Bhopal gas leak, a ruling that confirms an out-of-court settlement betweenIndia and Union Carbide Corp.  Lawyers representing gas victims hadchallenged the validity of the settlement, arguing that it denied claimantstheir constitutional right to sue the Connecticut-based multinationalcompany for the disaster.  The Indian government and the company settledFeb. 14, with Union Carbide paying $470 million in exchange for an end toall civil and criminal proceedings (TMN, Feb. 15, 1989).  The focusnow shifts from litigation to distribution of the settlement money.  Some500,000 people have filed claims, although many of these are believed to befalse.Back to Headline List CopyrightTOXIC MATERIALS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 3, 1990     *  Zinc Corp. of America agreed to pay a $614,000 fine to settle     *  Zinc Corp. of America agreed to pay a $614,000 fine to settleallegations by the Occupational Safety and Health Administration that thecompany's Palmerton, Pa., metal extracting operations violated OSHA's leadstandard and other safety and health requirements.  Under the agreementreached last month, the company and the United Steelworkers of Americajointly will conduct a training program on lead hazards for all managementand hourly employees, OSHA said.  The  union will select a physician toreview the medical records of employees who may have been exposed to lead.The company also must consult and cooperate with the union in revising thePalmerton plant's respirator program, work practices and engineeringcontrols to address issues raised in the citations.  The agreement includesthese allegedly "willful" violations:  over-exposures to lead; improperrespirator selections; lack of engineering controls for lead; defectivelead medical monitoring and removal programs; and failure to provideprotective clothing.  The company must correct cited violations by June 30.OSHA defines a willful violation "as one in which an employer either knewthat a condition constituted a violation or was aware that a hazardouscondition existed and made no reasonable effort to correct it."  OSHAoriginally proposed fining Zinc Corp.  $1.9 million last March for 295alleged willful violations of the lead standard.Back to Headline List CopyrightTOXIC MATERIALS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 3, 1990     *  A software package contains all of OSHA's regulations found in     *  A software package contains all of OSHA's regulations found inparts 1900 to 1910 of Title 29 of the Code of Federal Regulations, saidOSHA-Soft Inc.  FastRegs/OSHA can be used in place of the 1,100-pageprinted version of the regulations.  For more information, contactOSHA-Soft Inc., Route 122-Amherst Station, P.O. Box 668, Amherst, N.H.03031-0668; phone, 603/672-7230.Back to Headline List CopyrightTOXIC MATERIALS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 3, 1990UPCOMING MEETINGS     * Feb. 14, "RCRA Corrective Action," Los Angeles.  The course will berepeated March 29 in Arlington, Va.  The fee is $495.  Sponsor:Government Institutes Inc. (GI), Rockville, Md., 301/251-9250.     * Feb. 14-16, "Environmental Laws and Regulations Compliance Course,"Orlando, Fla.  An analysis of major environmental statutes.  The fee is$895.  Sponsor:  GI, 301/251-9250.     * Feb. 15-20, "American Association for the Advancement of ScienceAnnual Meeting," New Orleans.  Lectures, short courses and special sessionson a variety of environmental issues.  The registration fee varies withprofessional status and days attending.  Sponsor:  AAAS, Washington, D.C.,202/326-6440.     * Feb. 15-17, "Environmental Law," Washington, D.C.  Co-sponsored bythe Environmental Law Institute and the Smithsonian Institution.  The feeis $450.  Contact:  American Bar Association, 800/253-6397 or 215/243-1630.Back to Headline List WT02-B35-11IA086-000616-B010-181http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/ey87.html 205.156.212.5 19970121235418 text/html 63117HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Tuesday, 21-Jan-97 23:51:38 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:40:44 GMTContent-length: 62932Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ey87.html Sample Issue Copyright EUW'S DEMAND-SIDE REPORT via NewsNet January 4, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES N.J. EXPANDS PSE&G STANDARD OFFER PLAN TO 150 MW FOR 1996-97, AT AVOIDED COST (670 words) CALIF. RESTRUCTURING PROPOSAL CALLS ON LAWMAKERS TO ENACT DSM SURCHARGE (725 words) MANY STATES REJECT EPACT STANDARDS ON DSM, IRP AND EFFICIENCY IN SUPPLY (386 words) PS COLORADO OFFERS GAS DRYER REBATES (96 words) PEPCO PROVIDES $250,000 TO NON-PROFITS (83 words) UTILITY RESTRUCTURING N.Y. ALJ BACKS SYSTEM BENEFITS CHARGE TO FUND DSM AS COMPETITION OPENS UP (678 words) UTILITIES MUST SHIFT INDUSTRIAL DSM TO CUSTOMER SERVICE, REPORT ADVISES (505 words) NRDC PUSHING ENERGY EFFICIENCY PLAN IN LONG ISLAND LIGHTING RESTRUCTURING (602 words) CONSULTANTS SEE NEED FOR UTILITIES TO RETHINK TRADITIONAL BUSINESS (817 words) RATE ISSUES COINCIDENT PEAK RATES HELP N.C. MUNI LOWER ITS WHOLESALE POWER COSTS (690 words) PROGRAMS SDG&E RETROFITS LIGHTS AT 175 SCHOOLS; SAVINGS ESTIMATED AT $1.8-MILLION/YEAR (407 words) LOAD RESEARCH PROJECT SEEN MAXIMIZING DSM EFFORT FOR N.C. MUNICIPAL AGENCY (493 words) PORTLAND GENERAL TO LIMIT LIGHTING REBATES; SETS `SITE-BASED' INCENTIVES (631 words) PACIFICORP OFFERS FREE EFFICIENCY MEASURES FOR ORE. APARTMENT OWNERS (224 words) ENERGY SERVICE COMPANIES SESCO PETITIONS REGULATORS ON PG&E'S PLAN FOR OVER-COLLECTED DSM FUNDS (522 words) NIPSCO NEGOTIATING WITH UNNAMED PARTNER TO DEVELOP RESIDENTIAL ENERGY SERVICES (304 words) COST RECOVERY 1994 SHAREHOLDER INCENTIVES APPROVED FOR SOCAL ED, PG&E, SDG&E AND SOCAL GAS (718 words) CopyrightEUW'S DEMAND-SIDE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 4, 1996   N.J. EXPANDS PSE&G STANDARD OFFER PLAN TO 150 MW FOR 1996-97, AT AVOIDEDCOSTThe New Jersey Board of Public Utilities has voted to continue PublicService Electric & Gas' ``standard offer'' program, and has expanded theoffering for 1996-97 (Docket No. EE95090415).   Under the plan, PSE&G makes blocks of capacity available for energysavings and pays its avoided cost to demand-side management projects. Theprogram began in 1993, when the utility opened a 150-MW block through 1995,and in its recent order, the BPU expanded that to 185 MW for projectssubmitted by Jan. 2, 1996. For its 1996 DSM plan, PSE&G had proposedopening a new one-year, 75-MW block (DSR, 12 Oct '95, 1), but the BPUexpanded that to 150 MW for 1996-97.   The new 150-MW offer will be broken into three 50-MW blocks, which willprovide declining payments, since additional capacity will reduce the valueof savings to the company, and thereby, its avoided cost. That figure nowstands at $5.45/kW/month for capacity and about 2.6 cents/kWh for energy.However, the first 50-MW block of the new standard offer will set prices27% lower, while the second block will be priced 33% below Standard OfferNo. 1 and the third block will be set 38% below it.   Although Standard Offer No. 2 is set at 150 MW, the BPU made allowancefor a fourth block with no defined MW size, at prices that would be 44%lower than Standard Offer No. 1. In addition, there will be a 15-MWresidential ``carve-out,'' with at least half of that reserved forlow-income residences. For those projects, prices will be set 14% higherthan Standard Offer No. 1 for the first half of the contract period, and33% lower for the second half.   Further, PSE&G will accept up to 10 MW of fuel-switching projects, butonly at government-owned facilities. It will also accept up to 1 MW ofprojects that displace electric air conditioning in summer with chillerspowered by waste heat from cogeneration plants. These must involve existingcogeneration facilities that exceed 50% efficiency, and they must notresult in incremental fuel use or emissions.   If New Jersey opens up retail competition, PSE&G will continue to makestandard offer payments to projects whose hosts choose an electric supplierother than the utility. However, that pledge would only apply if PSE&G isstill allowed to recover its standard offer payments through some type ofsystem benefits charge. DSM advocates in many states are lobbying for suchcharges on distribution services, to maintain efficiency programs in theface of retail access.   In the standard offer program, projects are accepted on a first-come,first-served basis, though they must be qualified by PSE&G for technicalmerit and savings potential. They may be installed by users themselves, orby energy service companies. One ESCO that is active in the program isPSE&G's own subsidiary, Public Service Conservation Resources Corp.(PSCRC), which works with customers on standard offer projects and providesfinancing.   In pushing for the continuation of its standard offer program, PSE&Gargued that the market-based approach fits well in the rapidly deregulatingindustry. It told the BPU that ``given the right information, price signalsand product and service options, consumers are in the best position to makedecisions about how they should use and conserve energy.''   It added that the ``decentralized decision-making of a market economy''would stimulate innovation and reduce costs.   There is no set budget for the standard offer program, since it willdepend on how much savings PSE&G purchases. However, the BPU approved a$33-million, two-year budget for the utility to continue some ``core''programs, such as rebates for lighting and air conditioning retrofits.   PSE&G's plan was applauded by DSM advocates, including the Mid-AtlanticEnergy Project and N.J. Public Interest Research Group, who also praisedthe utility's willingness to work with them. ``PSE&G's DSM plan, and theprocess by which it was developed, should serve as a model for otherutilities in New Jersey and around the country,'' stated Daniel Rosenblum,director of the Mid-Atlantic Energy Project.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightEUW'S DEMAND-SIDE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 4, 1996   CALIF. RESTRUCTURING PROPOSAL CALLS ON LAWMAKERS TO ENACT DSM SURCHARGE   The California Public Utilities Commission called on the CaliforniaLegislature to enact a nonbypassable ``public goods'' surcharge on retailelectricity sales to fund energy efficiency and research and developmentprograms in a competitive electric industry.   The PUC made the recommendation in its final restructuring order issuedDecember 20. The commission also recommended that the Legislature adopt aseparate universal surcharge to fund low-income weatherization programscurrently funded through utility demand-side management budgets.   The commission gave the Legislature, Governor, stakeholders, and thepublic 100 days to comment on its decision while the PUC establishes a``road map'' for implementing restructuring in California. ``Given theLegislature's role in creating these programs, we do not view itappropriate to alter them significantly without Legislative guidance,'' thePUC stated.   The PUC plans to adopt a funding level, establish an independentadministrator for the DSM and R&D funds, and work out other details duringthe implementation phase of restructuring. However, the PUC suggested thatthe public goods surcharge should be equal to three percent of totalrevenues from electricity sales in California.   The PUC noted that while support for a nonbypassable surcharge to fundenergy efficiency and conservation programs remained strong, stakeholdersdisagreed on the types of programs that should be funded and theappropriate funding levels.   The PUC specified that funding for energy efficiency programs shouldfocus on activities not provided by the competitive market that are in thebroad public interest and designed to transform the energy efficiencymarket. The commission conceded that delineating between competitive andother DSM activities will be difficult.   ``We do not intend for the surcharge to collect funds to pursue energyefficiency activities that the competitive market will provide on itsown,'' the PUC said. However, the commission observed that ``many programswith a market transformation, information, or education focus are notlikely to be provided by the competitive market.''   While acknowledging that there are various definitions of markettransformation activities, the commission concluded that it was appropriateto use public funding to ensure that consumers have information aboutmanaging their energy use. Residential and small business customersgenerally have a greater need for these public programs than largecustomers, which have greater resources available to manage their energyuse, the PUC noted. Moreover, financial incentives to develop the marketfor energy efficient products and services, such as the Super-EfficientRefrigerator Program and manufacturer rebates for fluorescent light-bulbsand high-efficiency motors should continue, the PUC suggested. ``We expectthat public funding would be needed only for specified and limited periodsof time, to cause the market to be transformed,'' the PUC said.   The PUC adopted a two-track approach to continuing DSM funding in acompetitive industry. In the short-term the commission plans to utilize theutilities' expertise in administering DSM programs. However, after a shorttransition period, the PUC plans to establish an independent, nonprofitorganization to collect the surcharge and allocate the funds competitivelyto ensure equal opportunity for non-utility energy service companies.   The PUC anticipates that by January 1, 1997 DSM costs will no longer beembedded in electric rates but will be collected as part of the publicgoods surcharge on retail electricity sales. Initially, the surchargeshould be a line item on utility bills corresponding to each utility'sauthorized DSM funding in their service area. In time the PUC intends forthe same surcharge to be applied consistently throughout the state.   The commission plans to hold workshops to provide guidance onestablishing the DSM programs that will be funded through the surcharge,the details of the independent administrator and transition period, and howutility expertise can be utilized.   ``This guidance should be considered a starting point and not final,''the PUC said. ``If the workshops flesh out the two tracks in more detailand identify areas where public funding should be expanded or limited, wewill consider modifying our decision.''   The PUC noted that the California Energy Commission is alsodeliberating--through its Energy Services Working Group--how best topromote energy efficiency in a competitive electric industry. The CECworking group has recommended a surcharge to fund DSM and energy efficiencyR&D beginning January 1, 1996 while supporting more market-driven fundingapproaches. The working group recommended that the PUC continue to overseeutility DSM expenditures until 1998 while market structure details areworked out.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightEUW'S DEMAND-SIDE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 4, 1996   MANY STATES REJECT EPACT STANDARDS ON DSM, IRP AND EFFICIENCY IN SUPPLY   Many states have rejected the efficiency guidelines set down in the 1992Energy Policy Act (EPACT), saying they conflict with existing stateregulations, according to a recent survey.   St. Louis consulting firm Brubaker & Associates Inc. (BAI) polled statecommissions and found that almost twice as many states rejected the EPACTstandards as adopted them. However, most commissions took no action,explaining that they were already in compliance with the standards beforeEPACT was passed by Congress in 1992.   In Section 111 of the act, Congress stated three efficiency standards(7,8 and 9): integrated resource planning (IRP) should be employed by eachutility, and plans should be updated regularly, providing for publicparticipation; investments in conservation and demand-side managementshould be at least as profitable as supply-side resources, givingconsideration to reduced sales, and should be monitored and evaluated;energy efficiency investments in power generation and supply should beencouraged by providing incentives for better maintenance and investmentsin efficient generation, transmission and distribution.   EPACT called for states to consider these guidelines and determinewhether adopting them would be consistent with state law. States were alsotold to determine whether adopting the standards would advance conservationand maintain equitable rates to electricity consumers. The act set adeadline of Oct. 24, 1995 for these investigations.   In its survey, Brubaker found that 12 states rejected the IRP standard,seven adopted it and most others said they were already in compliance (somehad not yet ruled). Similarly, 12 states rejected the criterion forinvestments in DSM, while 7 states adopted it and others either said theywere already in compliance or had not yet addressed the issue. Onefficiency in generation, 12 states rejected while only five adopted.   States that rejected all three standards are: Alabama, Alaska, Arkansas,Delaware, Iowa, Louisiana, Maryland, Minnesota, Montana, New Mexico, NorthDakota, Virginia and West Virginia. Those that adopted all three standardsare: Florida, Idaho, Oklahoma and Wyoming. However, several others adoptedthe IRP and DSM standards, while rejecting or reaching no decision the lastone, including Colorado, Connecticut and Indiana. Those states that saidthey were already in compliance with all standards are: Georgia, Hawaii,Illinois, Kentucky, Maine, Massachusetts, Michigan, Missouri, Nevada, NewHampshire, New York, Ohio, Oregon, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, SouthCarolina and Vermont.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightEUW'S DEMAND-SIDE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 4, 1996   PS COLORADO OFFERS GAS DRYER REBATES   Public Service Colorado has inaugurated a natural gas dryer rebateprogram that provides $70 to first-time buyers or those replacing anelectric clothes dryer.   The two-month program expiring Dec. 31, 1995 is part of the company'sdemand-side management efforts to help customers use energy wisely.   ``Customers can dry almost three loads of laundry in a natural gas dryerfor what it costs to dry one load in an electric dryer,'' said KathyWorthington, marketing program leader at PS Colorado. The offer isavailable only to residential customers of the company.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightEUW'S DEMAND-SIDE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 4, 1996   PEPCO PROVIDES $250,000 TO NON-PROFITS   Potomac Electric Power spent $250,000 in 1995 to help subsidize theweatherization of homes belonging to low-income and senior customers. Overthe past 12 years, the utility has helped weatherize more than 20,000homes, working in conjunction with charitable groups.   Under its Community Conservation Program, the company awarded contractsworth $250,000 in 1995 to non-profit, community-based organizations to dothe work. Matching funds from private organizations brought the totalbudget up to about $1-million for the year.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightEUW'S DEMAND-SIDE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 4, 1996   N.Y. ALJ BACKS SYSTEM BENEFITS CHARGE TO FUND DSM AS COMPETITION OPENS UP   An administrative law judge at the New York Public Service Commissionhas recommended imposing a mechanism to fund demand-side management as thestate opens up competition. She also emphasized wholesale, rather than theretail competition that DSM advocates fear would encourage cheap, dirtypower.   ALJ Judith Lee issued her proposed decision in the PSC's CompetitiveOpportunities case (No. 94-E-0952). In it, she stated that ``Retailcompetition has the potential to benefit all customers by providing greaterchoice among their electricity providers, as well as increased pricing andreliability options. But retail access brings with it significant risks andrequires considerable caution, and should be provided only if it is in thebest interests of all consumers.''   With that note of caution, she urged the PSC to establish wholesalecompetition first, ``with an eye toward adding retail access as rapidly aspossible once a market is established and reliability is ensured.''However, she offered no time frame for the transition, and retail wheelingadvocates--such as large industrials--bitterly condemned the decision,saying it gives utilities veto power over moves toward retail access.   In earlier comments in the case, DSM advocates joined the utilities inendorsing a wholesale pool, rather than retail access (DSR, 9 Nov '95, 7).They argued that deregulation ``must protect the long-term economic andenvironmental health of the state, and not focus entirely on short-termprice considerations.'' With a wholesale pool, they said, regulators wouldhave more control over resource choices, and could insist that distributionutilities acquire a certain amount of DSM and renewables. They could alsoimpose a ``system benefits charge'' on retail rates to fund DSM andrenewables.   But even if retail competition were allowed, distribution utilitieswould still deliver power from outside producers, and regulators couldimpose the system benefits charge or ``wires charge'' on those deliveries,the efficiency groups said. In her proposed decision, Judge Lee opened thedoor for the option: ``Any restructuring model should include a mechanismfor recovering costs required to be spent on environmental and other publicpolicy considerations.''   The ALJ ruling was praised by David Wooley, executive director of PaceEnergy Project, at the Pace University Center for Environmental LegalStudies in White Plains, N.Y. He said Judge Lee was ``appropriatelycautionary'' about the transition to retail competition. Further, ``She hasclearly endorsed a system benefits charge, and that was one of our mainobjectives,'' he told Demand-Side Report.   Wooley foresees a system benefits charge of 1.5-2 mills/kWh, which hesaid would have a minimal rate impact. The funds could be administered by anon-profit entity, a ``quasi-governmental'' entity whose board wouldcontain representatives of all customer sectors. Wooley does not rule oututilities overseeing DSM efforts, but he fears any link between thedistribution company and its generation affiliate, which might oppose DSM.``It's not impossible to erect barriers, but we're concerned because thegenerating company would see DSM as competition, just it would see othergenerators as competition,'' he said.   Wooley is skeptical of the argument--often advance by retail competitionadvocates--that in an open market, energy service companies wouldproliferate to replace utility DSM programs. ``It's not at all clear thatESCOs would arise to take over the conservation efforts,'' he said.``Especially during a transition period, you need mechanisms to jump-startthe market.''   Eventually, the system benefits charge could shrink, Wooley said, but headded, ``There will always be a place for this to bring new technologies tothe market.'' He said the 1.5-2 mills/kWh surcharge is a ``reasonable''proposal that could benefit everyone if it is administered well.   On that note, Wooley dismissed the notion put forth by large users thatthey are non-participants in most of the programs. ``Anyone who buyscommercial lighting has benefited from DSM efforts,'' he said. ``The markethas advanced, and what is standard now is very different from what wasstandard a few years ago.'' To continue that market transformation, DSMfunds could go to equipment manufacturers, as well as users, to subsidizeefficiency upgrades in their product lines, he said.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightEUW'S DEMAND-SIDE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 4, 1996   UTILITIES MUST SHIFT INDUSTRIAL DSM TO CUSTOMER SERVICE, REPORT ADVISES   Although utilities are under pressure to cut costs in the competitivemarket, they must view industrial demand-side management as a means ofretaining these customers in that same tough environment, according to arecent report.   However, DSM must be shifted from a ``resource procurement'' strategy toa customer-service approach, says IRT Environment Inc.. The Basalt, Colo.,information and consulting firm surveyed manufacturers and utilities andfound that they are far apart on what industrial DSM should include.   The problem is urgent, IRT says, because industrials are utilities'``least captive'' customers, with options for fuel switching, cogeneration,and shifting loads to other regions. Most of them are unhappy paying forDSM in the first place, and say they do not even get much for these ratehikes. Many large manufacturers have been pursuing energy conservation foryears, IRT notes, and they condemn rate-based DSM as a subsidy forothers--including competing industrial firms that have not taken the sameinitiative. ``Utilities have been regarded by many industrial customers asvestiges of a socialist system, monopolies used to deliver not onlyelectricity but public policy,'' IRT says.   Part of the problem is that utility DSM programs are often rigid,providing audits and rebates for motors and lighting, but not improvingprocesses, the report notes. This type of work is much more difficultbecause processes can differ greatly from industry to industry, and evenfrom company to company within an industry. Process improvements demand thekind of customized services that utilities must provide in the morecompetitive market, according to the report. These should transcend energyefficiency, and also focus on productivity improvements and pollutioncontrol, IRT advises. However, utilities are still likely to encounterhostility. In interviewing industrials, IRT found that some doubt utilitiesare capable of providing effective energy services, since they have noentrepreneurial skills. They think utilities should just get out of the wayand stop hiking rates for programs that are unwanted. At best, utilitiescan promote efficiency through information, cost-based rates and financing,some firms said.   To overcome industrial skepticism, some utilities are contracting withexisting energy service companies or even acquiring existing ESCOs. Theymay offer energy services outside of rate base through unregulatedsubsidiaries. Others are using consultants with expertise in particularindustries to help their customers.   Another approach is taken by Niagara Mohawk Power in New York, whichallows industrials to opt out of DSM rebate programs and avoid the rateimpact. However, the utility will link these customers with private ESCOs,and will help them line up financing for efficiency projects. Meanwhile,Detroit Edison has made efficiency part of the long-term supply contractsit has signed with the ``Big 3'' automakers. The utility will provide 38on-site energy managers, and has already seen $1-million in savings atseveral facilities in a limited test of the program.   The report, ``Industrial Efficiency Programs: Building StrategicPartnerships,'' is available for $100 from The Results Center, IRTEnvironment Inc., P.O. Box 2239, Basalt, Colo. 81621; (970) 927-3155.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightEUW'S DEMAND-SIDE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 4, 1996   NRDC PUSHING ENERGY EFFICIENCY PLAN IN LONG ISLAND LIGHTING RESTRUCTURING   The Natural Resources Defense Council and other groups are lobbying theLong Island Power Authority (LIPA) to emphasize energy efficiency in itsrestructuring of Long Island Lighting.   Concerned by the utility's high rates--averaging 15.3 cents/kWh--andtheir impact on the economy, New York Gov. George Pataki has called for thedismantling of the utility. He recently proposed a plan that calls for LIPAto take over LILCO's distribution system, auction off its generatingplants, and shop around for the cheapest power in the wholesale market.   However, NRDC, the Long Island Citizens Advisory Panel (CAP) and otherDSM proponents stress that the governor's plan only predicts 12% ratereductions, which will not nearly bring rates in line with regional ornational averages. The only way to help businesses and residences is to cuttheir bills by aggressively pursuing DSM, they argue (DSR, 7 Dec, 3).   Presenting the breakup plan, neither Gov. Pataki nor LIPA chairman JamesGill mentioned energy efficiency. However, Ashok Gupta, senior energyeconomist for New York-based NRDC, told Demand-Side Report that he hasgotten a good reception at LIPA and has further meetings planned for earlyin the new year.   In an outline of its Long Island Energy Efficiency Initiative, NRDCnotes that the State Energy Plan estimates the savings potential on LongIsland at $400-million per year, but ``without technical and financialassistance, these economic investments appear difficult, risky andexpensive,'' it warns. Some subsidies are needed because ``High transactioncosts, scarcity and cost of capital, lack of expertise, split incentivesand other related hurdles stand in the way of private-sector investment inenergy efficiency.''   To overcome those hurdles, NRDC has proposed a fund that would financedthrough through a 0.2 cents/kWh rate surcharge. That would raise$32-million per year over five years, or $160-million, which could beadministered by LIPA and the New York Power Authority (NYPA). However, allenergy services and products would be delivered by private energy servicecompanies.   Incentives would serve as a marketing tool for ESCOs, and these would bemade available on a first-come, first-served basis, so that ``energyservice companies will in essence race to enroll new projects, generating aquick market upsurge,'' NRDC predicts. LIPA, or whatever entity takes overLILCO's distribution system, would let ESCOs collect payments fromconsumers through their monthly electric bills.   Part of the efficiency fund could be used to guarantee loans by privatelenders, to make capital more accessible and hold down interest rates,according to the plan. The financial institutions could collect these loansthrough electric bills, and payments could be timed so that users pay themoff through energy savings.   In addition, LIPA could provide ``energy savings advances.'' Under thisscheme, when consumers sign contracts with ESCOs, they would be giveninterest-free advances of 10% of their total investment, to be repaidthrough future bills.   The initiative would also provide coupons to cut the cost of purchases,such as efficient lighting, refrigerators and other appliances. ``Thoughpurchases of such equipment often pay for themselves out of saved energycosts, their higher up-front cost often deters consumers,'' NRDC notes.Some coupons could be given to landlords, to encourage efficient purchases,since renters usually have no say in their appliances, even though they paythe bills. Other funds could be used to support design assistance forarchitects and builders, and to accelerate the introduction of newtechnologies.   Overall, NRDC sees the initiative providing an additional 10% reductionin energy bills, as well as stimulating private-sector investment worth$1-billion, helping businesses become more competitive and creating jobs inenergy services and construction.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightEUW'S DEMAND-SIDE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 4, 1996   CONSULTANTS SEE NEED FOR UTILITIES TO RETHINK TRADITIONAL BUSINESS   ``Electric utilities are dead,'' according to Mitch Diamond, vicepresident, energy group, at Booz, Allen & Hamilton Inc., the New YorkCity-based consulting firm.   In their stead are a number of distinct businesses that traditionalinvestor-owned utilities can choose to participate in or not as theindustry restructures, Diamond said. Whereas utilities now verticallyintegrate generation, transmission, distribution and customer service,these and other business functions will evolve into separate businessenterprises, in the form of power production companies, regional networkoperators, bulk power traders, distribution system operators and retailpower marketers.   Diamond made his remarks at the ``Competitive Analysis and Benchmarkingfor Power Companies'' conference last month, sponsored by the Boston-basedCenter for Business Intelligence in Washington D.C. The conference broughttogether a number of consultants and utility executives to talk about theintegration of competitive intelligence techniques into the utilityindustry as restructuring and deregulation progresses.   Diamond said utilities should concentrate on organizing themselves to dobetter in the future what they have already done in the past. To accomplishthis, a lot of analysis and hard thinking will be required, he said. Hesuggested that executives decide which parts of the business they are bestat and concentrate on them, leaving the parts that they are weakest at toother companies.   He cautioned against a strategy pursued by several major utilities inthe industry: going overseas to build power plants in developing countries.``Your business is not to go build plants in Argentina,'' he said, ``but tobe better in the business you're now in, here in the states.''   To back up his claim, he presented data suggesting that the bestperformers in different industries consistently outperform by wide marginsthe average performance within those industries. In effect, he said,pursuing international development opportunities may provide short-termwindfalls, but to the possible detriment of the work necessary to excel athome.   And to excel in the native market, he said, utilities must become morecustomer-sensitive and willing to tailor their services to individualcustomers' needs. In his company's analysis, he said it was discoveredthat, across a variety of industries, customers switch providers as much,if not more so, because of poor service as because of price differences. Hesaid the way to ensure the least amount of customer flight is to treatcustomers as individuals, learn their individual needs and respond to them.That way, when a new supplier woos them, the bond of loyalty andrecognition will be harder to break.   Also speaking at the conference was Sanford Cohen, an analyst at MerrillLynch, who presented a regional analysis of how 50 utilities stand in termsof their industrial power prices.   In the mid-Atlantic region, Merrill Lynch found that Allegheny Power,with ``among the lowest price and cost structures in the nation,'' wasstrongest, with Baltimore Gas & Electric, Pennsylvania Power and & Light,DQE and PECO Energy also strong. The analyst forecast that PECO Energy,Public Service Enterprise Group and DQE would soon bring their current highprices ``in-line with regional averages.'' Most at risk because ofcompetition in the region were General Public Utilities and Public ServiceElectric & Gas.   The Midwest, Merrill Lynch said, is ``another area that is primed forcompetition.'' It noted Ohio Edison, Detroit Edison and DQE as expectedgood performers. Most at risk is CMS Energy.   In the Northeast, the analyst firm found no utilities in goodcompetitive positions. ``By national standards,'' it said, ``all of theutilities in the Northeast have high prices. These price levels are notgoing unnoticed by customers in the region. More than any other region, theproblems of the Northeast are homogeneous and it is in each utility'sinterest to stall retail wheeling as long as possible.'' It pickedNortheast Utilities as the utility with the greatest chance to improve itsposition.   In the Southeast, Merrill Lynch picked Carolina Power & Light as mostlikely to improve, although it is currently ``the weakest of regionalcompetitors. Improvements in nuclear performance coupled with largereductions in O&M budgets over the next several years should help improvethe company's cost structure. Prices will also decline dramatically due tothe expiration of riders for nuclear investment recovery, as well asexpected discounting for industrial customers.'' It picked Southern Companyand Duke Power as presently best equipped to handle competition.   In the region including Arkansas, Oklahoma and Texas, the analyst foundthat Entergy is showing the greatest improvement. It said its analysis inthis region was otherwise incomplete.   And in the West, the analyst found that California utilities are highlyat risk because of power-purchase contracts and commitments to costlynuclear facilities, a situation not likely to improve, despite ``heroicefforts...to reduce price levels,'' because of the huge interconnected gridin the West availing customers of cheaper supplies from Canada and Mexicoand elsewhere in the region.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightEUW'S DEMAND-SIDE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 4, 1996   COINCIDENT PEAK RATES HELP N.C. MUNI LOWER ITS WHOLESALE POWER COSTS   The municipal utility in Greenville, N.C., said thatcoincident-peak-based rates it charges all large industrial, commercial andinstitutional customers has helped the muni realize significant savings inits wholesale power costs, which are based in large part on Greenville'speak demand each month.   The Greenville Utilities Commission, as the muni is known, also said ithopes to trim peak-period demand even more with a residential time-of-userate available beginning this month to 200 partipants in a pilot test.   Roger Jones, general manager of the Greenville muni, said all municustomers that demand 750 kW or more now pay one of three coincident peak(CP) rates: An ``A'' rate for those whose energy use must be relativelyconstant; a ``B'' rate for those with more flexibility; and a ``C'' ratefor those willing and able to make significant reductions in their energyuse during coincident peaks.   Under each rate, the customer pays a basic monthly charge of $440, plusa relatively high per/kW rate for its demand during the 60 minutes eachmonth when the North Carolina Eastern Municipal Power Agency (NCEMPA)--themuni's wholesale supplier--experiences its highest systemwide demand.   The customer also pays a much smaller per/kW charge for differencebetween that coincident-peak level and its highest demand for all thatmonth, plus energy charges.   For instance, under the ``C'' rate, a 3-MW customer that reduces itscoincident-peak demand to 1 MW pays a $440 basic charge, plus demandcharges of $21.34/kW on the 1-MW coincident-peak demand and $2.86/kW on the2 MW above that level. The customer also pays an energy charge of 3.323cents/kWh.   Jones said that the muni's 750-kW and higher customers together accountfor about one-quarter of Greenville's total energy use, and that the CPrates have encouraged them to reduce their peak-period demand by 15 to 20%from what it typically would have been without the CP rates.   He noted that reduction translates directly into savings in thewholesale power costs paid by Greenville to NCEMPA, which buys most of itspower from Carolina Power & Light.   The magnitude of reductions in coincident-peak demand varied widely fromcustomer to customer, the muni manager said. Some are able only to trimtheir demand slightly, while others have been ``very aggressive'' and haveslashed peak-period demand by more than 50%.   One large industrial customer that typically demands about 8 MW reducesits demand to between 1 and 1.5 MW during coincident peaks, Jones noted,saving both the customer and the muni thousands of dollars in monthly powercosts.   The residential time-of-use rate program Greenville is now pilot-testingalso is aimed at reducing peak-period demand and wholesale power costs.   Jones said the pilot requires that participants sign up for the muni's``Beat-the-Peak'' load-management program, under which load-controlswitches are placed on customers' heat pumps, electric furnaces, centralair conditioners and electric water heaters, and those devices are remotelyswitched off during peak periods.   The TOU program sets on-peak and off-peak energy-use hours for threedifferent times of the year. On-peak hours are 6 a.m. to 10 a.m. during themonths of January, February, March, November and December; 1 p.m. to 7 p.m.in May, June, July, August and September; and 6 a.m. to 10 a.m. and 1 p.m.to 7 p.m. in April and October.   Participants pay a basic customer charge of $13.09/month, plus 6.449cents/kWh for off-peak energy and 17.402 cents/kWh for on-peak energy. Thestandard residential rate, in comparison, features a basic customer chargeof $8.09/month, plus energy charges of 9.473 cents for all kWh used fromJuly through October, and 8.257 cents for all kWh used the rest of theyear.   Jones said he expects the residential TOU pilot to make at least aslight contribution to lowering Greenville's peak-period demand, andanticipates that after a year-long test and perhaps some adjustments, aresidential TOU rate is likely to be offered on a much wider scale in1997.   He added, however, that unlike the CP rate for large energy users, themuni ``for the foreseeable future'' is likely to give residential customersa choice between standard and a TOU rates.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightEUW'S DEMAND-SIDE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 4, 1996   SDG&E RETROFITS LIGHTS AT 175 SCHOOLS; SAVINGS ESTIMATED AT$1.8-MILLION/YEAR   San Diego Gas & Electric has completed an $11-million lighting retrofitproject at 175 schools in the San Diego Unified School District andofficials expect an annual savings of $1.8-million in energy bills.   The utility said the project, largest of its type on the SDG&E system,is expected to conserve 16.2 million kWh each year. Under SDG&E'sdemand-side management incentive program, shareholders will receive about$2-million more in earnings, the company said.   The installations in each school included energy-efficient fluorescentlamps, ballasts and fixtures in offices and classrooms. Also, occupancysensors in classrooms ensure lights are automatically turned off when notin use. Exit signs also are saving energy with light-emitting diode kits.   Gregg Lawless, SDG&E marketing account executive who served as teamleader for the lighting retrofit, said employees working on the projectused faster and better approaches.   ``We broke some rules,'' Lawless said. ``The project's one-year timeline may seem long at first, but not when you recall that there are 175schools. That's two days per school for the retrofits of all classrooms andoffices--to get done without disrupting classes.'' Lawless said, ``Wemoved fast, took risks and emphasized a high level of teamwork, bothinternally and with our contractors and the school district.''   As an example, he said, SDG&E's procurement agents ``moved us throughthe selection of contractors and bidding very quickly. It can be acumbersome process, but they did it in less than 60 days.'' Another keyfactor in the project success, Lawless said, was excellent communication,especially by SDG&E's team of energy consultants led by Kraig Akers.   Lawless said, ``Akers and his team completed the audits for all 175schools, they calculated the estimated energy savings and they determinedour incentives for the customer.'' On this project, he said, each energyaudit involved a representative of SDG&E, the school district and theschool district's energy consultant.   ``The complexity of this approach,'' Lawless said, ``increased the needfor good communication. Throughout the project, we've made a point to keepeveryone up to date at all times, on all matters. It helps us to stayfocused.''   Mike Lorch, principal of Kearny High School, said, ``There's a dramaticchange in the quality of light in classrooms and it's had a very positiveimpact on morale at our school. Some teachers were so fired up, they wentout and bought supplies and painted classrooms on their own time.''Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightEUW'S DEMAND-SIDE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 4, 1996   LOAD RESEARCH PROJECT SEEN MAXIMIZING DSM EFFORT FOR N.C. MUNICIPAL AGENCY   North Carolina Municipal Power Agency No. 1, which arranges power for 19municipal utilities in western North Carolina, said a far-reachingload-research project it is undertaking should help the agency maximize theeffectiveness of its extensive demand-side management effort.   Mark Otersen, NCMPA-1's supervisor of demand-side operations, said the$250,000 project will involve the installation by this spring of new,modified metering equipment at the agency's largest wholesale powerdelivery points, as well as equipment to monitor the loads of ``well over50'' of its munis' largest retail customers.   The delivery-point meters--combined with telecommunications and computerequipment to transmit and compile the meter data--will enable NCMPA-1 tomeasure the demand of its muni members on a real-time, minute-by-minutebasis, he said. The customer-load monitors, in turn, will let the agencygather information on customer demand and chart customer load``shapes''--or patterns of demand.   That data, Otersen said, should help NCMPA-1 design a menu ofinnovative, DSM-related rates for industries with common load shapes, andhelp its member munis convince large energy users of the benefits of usingsuch rates.   He noted that relatively few of the large retail customers served bymunis in western North Carolina currently participate in load-managementprograms that provide incentives to those who agree to let their utilitycurtail or interrupt power during peak periods, or who agree to runpeak-shaving standby generators.   With the customer-load data and newly developed rates in hand, Otersensaid, NCMPA-1 and its members ``will be able to say to a large customer,`Here is where you are now, and here is how much you might save if youcould shift this much demand.' ''   Also the new delivery-point meters and customer monitors could be usedto give NCMPA-1 precise data on the impact individual elements of itsoverall DSM effort have on demand. For instance, he said, a muni mightimplement only its load control program for standby generation, or forresidential water heaters, and be able to measure the MW difference betweendemand just before controls were implemented and just after.   In the future, with that information in hand, Otersen added, it might bepossible for NCMPA-1 and its munis to determine on some days that they onlyneed to implement a portion of their overall DSM effort--perhaps onlyresidential air-conditioner load controls--to meet their load-reductiongoals.   Otersen and Woody Adams, the agency's power-supply manager, noted thatoptimizing NCMPA-1's DSM effort really is only a side benefit of the$250,000 load-research project, which is being undertaken primarily toenable the agency know with considerable accuracy how much surplus energyit has available each hour for possible sale to others on the wholesalemarket.   That knowledge will become increasingly important through the late1990s, when the agency expects to have increasing amounts of surplus energyavailable as Duke Power buys back less and less of NCMPA-1's 850-MWentitlement to Duke's 2,200-MW Catawba nuclear power station in Clover,S.C.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightEUW'S DEMAND-SIDE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 4, 1996   PORTLAND GENERAL TO LIMIT LIGHTING REBATES; SETS `SITE-BASED' INCENTIVES   Portland General Electric has proposed an ``Earth Smart'' program toprovide incentives for energy-efficient commercial design; the utility willlimit its lighting rebates; and it plans to initiate ``site-based''incentives that provide different incentives based on the sized of acustomer's facility.   The changes to its non-residential program are not as dramatic asexpected, given that PGE has said its demand-side management target woulddrop significantly in 1996, according to Lynn Plamondon, an Oregon PublicUtility Commission staff member. The company said earlier it wouldmake the transition from a target of 20 MW to a ``threshold goal'' of 6 MW,which means the threshold is only a bare minimum (DSR, 28 Sept '95, 8).   Plamondon noted that PGE's least-cost plan, which includes the proposalto lower DSM goals, has not yet been ``acknowledged'' by the Oregon PUC.   ``The company's goals will be controversial. Their target is up to 6 MW.I am not sure we will go for that. I have seen the higher targets push themto do more. If they have target of 5 or 6 MW, I am not sure they will bepushed to do that.''   In it proposed changes to its nonresidential programs, PGE wants tobegin the Earth Smart commercial program. ``The goal of the program is toencourage construction of commercial buildings with the highest level ofcost-effective energy efficiency and environmental sensitivity,'' says acommission memo.   Earth Smart is expected to save 1.2 average megawatts annually at atotal resource cost of 2.2 cents/kWh and a utility program cost of 1.4cents/kWh. The cost-effectiveness limit is 3.1 cents/kWh, according to thememo.   It will be offered at two levels: one, the ``gold'' option applies tobuildings that produce energy savings at least 30% above the Oregon EnergyCode. The ``green'' option applies to buildings yielding savings at least20% above the code.   Customized financial incentives for architectural design assistance, anintegrated package of energy efficient building and equipment measures andbuilding commissioning will be included, according to the staff memo.Customer incentives plus other program costs are limited to either 50% ofthe project's incremental costs or 2 cents/kWh, whichever is lower.   In addition, PGE wants to revise its lighting program rebates to reflectchanges in equipment costs, practices, equipment availability and newenergy efficiency lighting measures. Lighting rebates will only go tocommercial buildings and industrial facilities of less than 20,000 squarefeet. Customized incentives for lighting and other energy efficiencymeasures will be available to owners of facilities larger than 20,000square feet based on the economics of the project, according to the staffmemo.   PGE also wants to implement different incentives based on the size ofthe facility. ``The purpose of the program is to allow PGE more flexibilityin delivering energy efficiency to different target markets,'' said thestaff memo.   Owners of buildings that are 20,000 square feet or smaller will continueto receive incentives of up to 25% of the incremental cost for measures notavailable under other demand-side management options.   But PGE proposes to increase the minimum simple payback period from 1 to1.5 years for measures that qualify for incentives.   Incentives for facilities larger than 20,000 square feet will becustomized based on the economics of the project, but will not exceed 2cents/kWh saved. ``The focus of this incentive option is on the energyefficiency of the overall facility for proposed new construction orretrofit projects,'' said the staff memo.   The site-based incentives program is expected to save up to 1.4 averageMW annually. The total resource cost will be 2.9 cents/kWh and the utilityprogram cost will be 1.1 cents/kWh.   The proposals are expected to be approved by the commission and go intoeffect Jan. 1, 1996.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightEUW'S DEMAND-SIDE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 4, 1996   PACIFICORP OFFERS FREE EFFICIENCY MEASURES FOR ORE. APARTMENT OWNERS   PacifiCorp has offered to provide $2.5-million in free energy-savingmeasures to 10,000 apartment owners in Oregon as part of the EnvironmentalTechnology Leadership Challenge, a national program that will be launchedin Portland, Ore., where the utility is based.   Under the program, businesses, government organizations and non-profitgroups issue challenges designed to improve environmental quality.   The project is sponsored by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Foundation andfunded by a number of businesses, said Curt Nichols, senior energy programmanager for the Portland Energy Office.   The first 10,000 apartment owners who sign up will receive the freeenergy-saving measures, said a spokeswoman for PacifiCorp.   That is expected to save 2.5 MW in 1996. It is a follow-up of an earlierprogram that provided free energy-saving measures to owners of multi-familyunits, she said.   In addition, PacifiCorp is working with the Portland Trail Blazersbasketball team to challenge facility managers to install state-of-the-artenergy technologies, said Nichols.   And Philips Lighting in Portland asked public and private companiesusing florescent lamps to switch to ``Econowatt'' florescent tubes that usemercury technology.   The lamp is said to be the first mercury florescent lamp with lowenough mercury levels to allow for non-toxic disposal.   Similar programs will be launched in Chicago, Orlando, Fla., ChulaVista, Calif. and Baltimore in a few weeks.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightEUW'S DEMAND-SIDE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 4, 1996   SESCO PETITIONS REGULATORS ON PG&E'S PLAN FOR OVER-COLLECTED DSM FUNDS   SESCO Inc., the Lake Forest, N.J.-based energy service company, hasfiled a protest with the California Public Utilities Commission overPacific Gas & Electric's proposal for distributing $23.4-million plusinterest of over-collected demand-side management funds from 1993 and1994.   PG&E has filed an ``advice letter'' (Document 1555-E) with the CPUC,noting that it underspent its 1993 and 1994 electric DSM budgets by a totalof $106.9-million. The commission has already required that $83.5-millionbe returned to ratepayers (Decision 94-12-047). The number was an estimateand the CPUC directed the utility to notify it of any significant changesin its 1994 year end balances. PG&E said it has closed out its accounts forthose years and has an additional $23.4-million in over-collected funds,for a total of $106.9-million.   The utility now proposes to retain the final $23.4-million and reserveit for eventual payment to contractors participating in its ``integrated''bidding solicitation. The pilot integrated resource bid effort is beingconducted by PG&E at the request of the CPUC to test how well supply-sideand demand-side resources can compete for the same block of capacity (DSR13 April '95, 2; 19 Jan, 3).   The utility maintains that if the integrated bidding contract paymentsexceed the amount retained, any future unspent DSM funds would be reservedto cover the spending. PG&E is currently engaged in contract negotiationswith 13 winning DSM bidders, representing 37 MW, at a cost of$28.9-million, to be paid over the seven to 10 years of any completedcontracts.   In its advice letter, PG&E said it had unsuccessfully asked the CPUC tosuspend integrated bidding because it was ``very concerned'' about enteringinto long term, pay-for-performance DSM contracts at a time when theCalifornia electric utility industry is restructuring. The utility saidthat any agreement to pay for energy savings over a multi-year period couldresult in an increase in stranded costs for PG&E.   SESCO says that, while it supports the need to develop a way to dealwith the issue of long term DSM commitments under restructuring, ``wedefinitely believe this advice letter is not the appropriate vehicle.'' Itnotes that the utility should ``leave restructuring issues to therestructuring docket,'' which the CPUC is considering.   SESCO also believes that PG&E's proposal does increase rates. It alsosays if a transfer of funds proceeds, the utility should provide for aresidential set aside.   The unspent funds should be allotted at the same ratio as originallyintended, says SESCO. Residential customers provide about 35% of PG&E'srevenues, so should receive a similar portion of the unspent budget amountscredited, says the firm. SESCO contends that the advice letter andprocedure will ``result in continuing damage to the interests ofresidential customers.''   SESCO says the 1993 and 1994 programs and budgets were approved by theCPUC to meet needs of all ratepayers. It notes, ``instead of the transferof funding to an untested and unreviewed set of programs that largelyexclude residential customers, we propose that funding go to supportexisting programs that have received full regulatory review and do notdiscriminate against PG&E's residential customers.''Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightEUW'S DEMAND-SIDE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 4, 1996   NIPSCO NEGOTIATING WITH UNNAMED PARTNER TO DEVELOP RESIDENTIAL ENERGYSERVICES   Northern Indiana Public Service is negotiating with an unidentifiedcompany to develop and provide a variety of energy efficiency programs forresidential customers within its service territory.   ``We want to give people the tools to help them manage their energy,''said a NIPSCO spokeswoman. The Hammond-based utility has been criticized bysome consumer advocates for its less-than-enthusiastic support fordemand-side management.   ``There's a reason for that,'' the spokeswoman told Demand-Side Report. ``Traditional demand-side management programs, as we see them, have notbeen effective.'' Consequently, if the current negotiations produce apartnering agreement, ``we're calling it energy efficiency, not demand-sidemanagement.''   Whatever it is called, NIPSCO is looking to launch a pilot program inits service territory later this year that would help residential customerslearn more about their energy usage in exchange for information about thatusage. The program would involve ``taking data you would get off a meterand helping residential customers identify what their energy usage is,''the spokeswoman said.   The utility hopes to develop a ``pre-paid metering'' service it canmarket to customers as well as a host of other programs, includingresidential energy management. The spokeswoman declined to identify itsprospective partner except to say the company is not another utility orutility vendor. ``We're talking about partnering with hardware and softwarecompanies,'' she said.   NIPSCO recently signed a five-year agreement to provide meter-readingservices to the city of Elkhart, Ind., following the completion of asuccessful pilot program. Though not a DSM program, the program is anexample of how much emphasis NIPSCO is placing on meter reading, somethingthe utility believes it does very well.   NIPSCO also is negotiating with other investor-owned electric utilities,rural electric membership corporations, municipal electric systems andwater utilities to provide them with meter reading services also.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightEUW'S DEMAND-SIDE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 4, 1996   1994 SHAREHOLDER INCENTIVES APPROVED FOR SOCAL ED, PG&E, SDG&E AND SOCALGAS   The California Public Utilities Commission December 20 approvedshareholder incentives for 1994 demand-side management programs of SouthernCalifornia Edison, Pacific Gas & Electric, San Diego Gas & Electric andSouthern California Gas. The 1995 annual earnings assessment proceedingconstitutes the first application of the PUC's new ex post protocols toutility DSM earnings claims. Beginning with this proceeding, the PUCimplemented a more stringent framework for evaluating savings from utilityDSM prgrams, linking new comprehensive measurements to utility earningsfrom DSM shareholder incentives.   In accordance with the new rules, utility total earnings' claims will bebased on the prior program year's achievements, with per-unit savingsmeasured over a 7 to 10 year period after implementation of the programs.Utilities may recover those claims in four equal installments in rates inthe first, second, fifth, and tenth years of the proceeding.   The PUC authorized Edison to recover $7.2-million of total shareholderearnings from its 1994 DSM programs in four equal installments over a10-year measurement period, with recovery of 25% or $1.8-million in 1996.Edison estimated that its 1994 DSM programs would yield $129-million of netbenefits before earnings for $99.2 million of related programexpenditures.   Similarly, the PUC awarded PG&E $19,317,000 for its 1994 DSM shareholderincentive earnings to be recovered in four installments over a 10-yearmeasurement period. The PUC authorized PG&E to recover $4,344,038 in 1996for its electric programs and $485,213 for its gas programs. PG&Eforecasted $202.6-million of net benefits before earnings for$158.2-million worth of DSM program expenditures in 1994.   The PUC awarded SDG&E $8,966,100 for its 1994 DSM shareholder incentiveearnings. As with the other utilities, the PUC authorized San Diego torecover the total amount in four installments over a 10-year measurementperiod, with recovery in 1996 of $2,189,930 for its electric programs and$183,228 for its gas programs. SDG&E forecast $64-million in net benefitsbefore earnings for $30.2 million of DSM program expenditures in 1994. ThePUC likewise authorized SoCalGas to recover $2,898,000 for its 1994 DSMshareholder incentive earnings in four installments over a 10-yearmeasurement period, with recovery of $714,582 in 1996. SoCal Gas projectedthat its 1994 DSM programs would yield $14.8-million of net benefits for$42.8-million of program expenditures. The PUC also approved SoCal Gas'request to recover $7,254,000 in 1996 revenue requirements due to changesin federal and state corporate income tax liabilities as a result of 1993federal tax reform legislation.   The PUC directed the utilities when feasible to consider non-pricefactors along with price factors in their resource procurement. To theextent that non-price factors developed for supply-side resources in stateresource plans affect DSM programs utilities should include them incost-effective analyses. Non-price factors should be included in the RateImpact Measure test. The PUC also directed electric utilities to publishinformation on transmission and distribution costs for the purpose ofquantifying avoided costs.   Moreover, the utilities will be required to confer with the PUC'sDivision of Ratepayer Advocates and other interested stakeholders todetermine the appropriate avoided costs in their annual forecasts.   The PUC directed the utilities to utilize the avoided cost calculationin their annual forecasts to determine benefits and related earnings foreach DSM program.   In other action, as part of PG&E's general rate case the PUC authorizedPG&E to spend $129.42-million for DSM programs in 1996, including$99-million for energy efficiency programs, one-third less than the$150-million PG&E spent on conservation programs in 1994. PG&E spent anaverage $155 million-a-year for conservation programs between 1990 and1994, and an average $123-million-a-year between 1980 and 1994. The PUCordered PG&E to spend $5-million for programs designed to transform themarket for energy efficient residential appliances, industrial motors, andcommercial air conditioning. PG&E had opposed spending money on markettransformation programs, arguing that the benefits were difficult tomeasure and noting that the PUC has not yet developed appropriate policy ormeasurement protocols.   The PUC denied the utility's plan to spend $6.5-million in expenses plus$12-million in capital costs to install 40,000 time-of-use meters to enablecustomers to take advantage of off-peak rates. The PUC determined that themeters would likely be rendered obsolete by technological advancesfollowing electric restructuring because they lacked the ability to providereal-time information and cannot be read remotely.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List WT02-B35-12IA086-000616-B010-211http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/ey60.html 205.156.212.5 19970121235446 text/html 69955HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Tuesday, 21-Jan-97 23:52:45 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:40:51 GMTContent-length: 69770Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ey60.html Sample Issue Copyright ENHANCED ENERGY RECOVERY NEWS via NewsNet JANUARY 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES ENVIRONMENT Biomarkers Trace Oil Spill Sources (333 words) Skylab's Reversible Transformation (671 words) Persian Gulf: Where's the Oil? (395 words) GAS FLOODING Non-Cryogenic N2 Production Units (621 words) WAG Project Success in Salt Creek Field (418 words) GOVERNMENT DOE Program Aids Smaller Producers (442 words) TRRC Amends Its Inactive Well Rule (304 words) Differing Views on Compliance (739 words) CHEMICAL EOR Improved Gels for Oil Field Brines (781 words) Heavy Oil PDVSA Is Now a Mature Corporation (658 words) Suncor Scales Up in Australia (645 words) Industry News ChevronMoves Toward Its Goals (752 words) Chevron, Maraven Form Major Alliance (407 words) Occidental Expands Ecuador Operations (155 words) Parker Opens Vietnam Market (147 words) Pennzoil in China Joint Venture (184 words) Briefly Noted: (359 words) NEW TECHNOLOGY Making Well Info More Accessible (486 words) NON-VERTICAL DRILLING Short Radius-Curved Borehole Apparatus (357 words) refining Energy BioSystems Better Biocatalyst (285 words) Exxon Upgrades Steam Cracker Tars (189 words) THERMAL Solvent, Steam Soak Promising (194 words) CALENDAR (134 words) CopyrightENHANCED ENERGY RECOVERY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Biomarkers TraceOil Spill SourcesBiomarker compounds have long been used to identify petroleumdeposits, fingerprint the sources of oil spills, and monitor theoil weathering process. However, in highly degraded oil, many oilcomponents such as the n-alkanes, branched alkanes, and PAHs can belost and unavailable as biomarkers.Working with the Minerals Management Service (Washington, DC; Tel:202/208-3983), Zhendi Wang and Merv Fingas of the EmergenciesScience Div. (Environmental Technology Centre, Environment Canada,3439 River Road, Ottawa, Ontario, K1A 0H3, Canada) have developeda method of using biomarker compounds such as triterpanes andsteranes, compounds which are highly resistant to weathering. Theanalytical methods were designed to identify, characterize andquantify oil samples having various forms, natures andconcentrations.The researchers noted that using biomarkers to track the source ofspilled oil and to monitor weathered oil has several advantages ascompared to other approaches, including the following:    Each oil type has a different compound distribution    Triterpanes and steranes are highly resistant to degradation    Triterpanes and steranes are accurately measured using gaschromatography-mass spectrometry    Biomarker compounds are often more abundant in highlyweathered oils    Ratios of certain biomarkers can more accurately indicate theextent of biodegradation than the traditional methodsThe study showed that sources of oil spills could be tracked bycomparing the distribution patterns of biomarker compounds and therelative ratios of selected paired hopanes in spilled oil sampleswith reference oils. The researchers found that the relative ratiosof C29-hopane to C30-hopane were more resistant to degradation thanother ratioed pairs of hopanes.C29-Hopane and C30-hopane were often the most abundant hopanes,allowing the most accurate measurements. Comparing the ratios ofC29-hopane to C30-hopane in weathered and unweathered oil samplesresulted in a more accurate value for the degree of biodegradationthan traditional aliphatic-isoprenoid hydrocarbon ratios.  For moreinformation, see "Using Biomarker Compounds to Track the Source ofSpilled Oil and to Monitor the Oil Weathering process," in LC GC[13, No. 12, 1995].Back to Headline List CopyrightENHANCED ENERGY RECOVERY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Skylab's ReversibleTransformationGuy I. Z. Kalocsai of Skylab International Ltd. (Valletta, Malta)has developed a method for reversibly transforming organiccompounds into a phase more suitable for subsequent handling butfrom which the original organic compounds can be readily recovered.The invention is particularly suited for the recovery and re-use ofliquid hydrocarbons, either naturally occurring or synthetic,and/or their derivatives, and it is expected to be especiallyuseful in the recovery of hydrocarbons from an oil spill and for avariety of other applications.Traditional methods of attempting to clean up oil spills include(1) the use of oil-skimming boats and containment booms; (2)bombarding the floating oil with chemical dispersants; and (3)bioremediation, whereby oil-consuming bacteria are dumped on theoil. However, none of these current methods are consideredsatisfactory as significant quantities of the oil spilled cannotseemingly be recovered or dispersed by any of these methods andpollution of the environment can continue for many yearsafterwards.Kalocsai found that if a hydrocarbon(s) is contacted with one ormore particular reagents, an absorbent can be produced whichabsorbs substantially all of the hydrocarbon(s). The elasticity ofthe product which is formed can readily be controlled from elastic,through viscous liquid to plastic or brittle solid in an efficientand rapid manner. The original hydrocarbon can be readily recoveredfrom this product.By using this method (U.S. Patent 5,468,261), a spilled hydrocarbonis modified to produce an elastic compound which can be readilyretrieved from a body of water by towing, pushing or skimming theelastic material from the surface of the water or by using spikedrollers connected between two vessels which, on rotation, can rollup the elastic material.The method can be used to treat only the perimeter of an oil spillto produce a containment barrier for the remaining, untreatedhydrocarbon,  eliminating the need for artificial booms andbarriers. A system using this method can be carried on vessels orhoused on site to prevent serious oil or similar spillage or leaksand to be used in the neutralizing and clean-up or salvage ofhydrocarbon leaks or spills.The hydrocarbon may be a solid, liquid or a gas dissolved ortrapped in a suitable medium. The hydrocarbon may be soluble orinsoluble in water, with best results obtained for hydrocarbonswhich are insoluble in water. Preferred hydrocarbons includeethers; petroleum based liquids including kerosene, petroleum,crude oil; aromatic compounds, for example, toluene; ketones suchas methyl iso-butyl ketone; natural and refined animal, mineral andvegetable oils, for example, sunflower oil. Preferably, the firstreagent to be used should be an organic or inorganic acid, salt orbase which is insoluble in water but soluble in the hydrocarbon orits derivative.Preferably, the organic acid is a fatty acid (stearic, oleic,palmitic and levulinic acids, etc.). The preferred choice for thesecond reagent depends on the end product required. An alkali(ammonia, sodium hydroxide, sodium carbonate or bicarbonate ororganic alkaline reagents) should be used for a granular product.A solution of an elastomer or a latex should be used for a semi-elastic product, and for a more elastic product a solution of anelastomer or a latex is followed by the addition of an aqueousacetate solution should be used. Any organic or metal acetate canbe used, such as ammonium acetate and zinc acetate.This method for the reversible transformation of hydrocarbons canalso be applied for a wide range of purposes which includemanufacturing solid or viscous liquid compounds for plasticsproduction, storing and/or transporting volatile, unstable,environmentally sensitive or toxic hydrocarbons, effectivelyabsorbing liquid hydrocarbon compounds, and sealing leaking ordamaged containers of liquid hydrocarbon compounds.It might also convert volatile liquid hydrocarbons to lessvolatile, more manageable compounds or be used to quell oil wellfires by converting the oil to a candle-like consistency whichburns at a much lower temperature than the untreated oil and whichis thus much easier to extinguish.Back to Headline List CopyrightENHANCED ENERGY RECOVERY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Persian Gulf:Where's the Oil?During the war with Iran, millions of gallons of oil spilled onland and at sea. Following the war, scientists surveyed the PersianGulf to track the impact of the massive oil spill. Researchers havefound that both land and sea are recovering through the help ofnaturally occurring microbes.Oil pollution along some shores has rapidly disappeared whilesimultaneously microbial mats, thick layers of microbes, weregrowing on top of the oil. To understand how the microbial matswere absorbing and breaking down the oil, the Dept. of Defense isfunding a study of the microbial mats at Northwestern University(Evanston, IL)."All we know at this point is that sunlight seems to enhance theactivity of the mats in breaking down the oil," reports David A.Stahl, associate professor of civil engineering (McCormick Schoolof Engineering and Applied Science, Northwestern Univ., Evanston,IL; Tel: 708/-491-4997). "It may be that the microbes that usephotosynthesis are doing the job, or it may be that theirbyproducts are being used by another microbe in the mat community,making it possible for them to do the job," he said.Stahl receives new microbial mats every few months, which he testsusing the latest molecular biology methods. Stahl says thatprobably far less than 1% of the microbial world has beenidentified, making his research largely that of finding andcharacterizing new forms of microbial life.Samir Radwan of the University of Kuwait (Safat, Kuwait) reportsthat wild flowers are growing in the oil soaked desert. While theshoots of the plant have an oil stained ring at its base, the rootsare oil free and healthy. Radwan believes that the roots"recruited" oil degrading microbes naturally found in the soil.Radwan and his team cultured bacteria and fungi found in the oilsand and found many well known oil degrading microbes consisting ofArthrobacter bacteria. Just 1 cm away from the roots was acompletely different community of oil degrading bacteria and fungi.Laboratory experiments replicated what was observed in the desert.Radwan believes that rich nutrients such as sugars, availableoxygen, amino acids and vitamins attract petroleum-degradingmicrobes.The researchers recommend that suitable plants be denselycultivated in polluted desert areas for bioremediation. Thisapproach may also be applicable in polluted areas in other parts ofthe world.Back to Headline List CopyrightENHANCED ENERGY RECOVERY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Non-Cryogenic N2Production UnitsGeneron Systems Inc. (400 W. Sam Houston Pkwy. South, Houston, TX77042; Tel: 713/978-3100, Fax: 713/978-3185) provides on sitenitrogen generation for the oil and gas industry. Over 200 oil andgas wells have been drilled over the last two years using Generon'sGenisisTM nitrogen production units (NPUs). These units work withexisting oil field air compression equipment and can provide from500-3,000 standard cubic feet per minute of gaseous nitrogen inpurities from 90-99.5% oxygen free."Generon also sells smaller NPU systems and we have had severalrequests for these systems in Texas to evaluate their use fornitrogen flooding for enhanced oil recovery," John Koenst, productmanager for Generon, told EERN.The Generon membrane module contains polymer hollow fiber membraneswhich separate gas components of the compressed air stream. Eachmembrane fiber is about the size of a human hair with a round borethrough the center. Dry, clean, compressed air passes through thefiber bundle. It is the varying rates of permeation of nitrogen andoxygen molecules that form the basis of Generon membrane separationtechnology. "Fast" gases like oxygen, carbon dioxide, and watervapor diffuse through the membrane walls more quickly thannitrogen, which is concentrated inside the fibers and delivered asthe product gas. The nitrogen product exits the end of each moduleand is collected at the outlet manifold for delivery.Nitrogen from a GENISYS NPU, used with traditional air drillingequipment, can provide lower drilling costs, reduce the use ofdrill mud and mud chemicals, and lessen the surface damage andenvironmental impact often associated with other drilling methods.Similar to air drilling operations, GENISYS systems deliver anextremely low density drilling "fluid" that can significantlyreduce drilling time because of improved rates of penetration. Theinert, non-reactive nature of gaseous nitrogen is such that it willnot support combustion. Because of this, any risk of down holefires, explosions and associated tool damage are virtuallyeliminated when using GENISYS NPUs. GENISYS systems are selfcontained, incorporating the Generon nitrogen producing, hollowfiber membrane modules and systems.A benefit of GENISYS Nitrogen Production Units (NPUs) is that theywill reduce the risk of burnoffs commonly encountered when drillingwith plain compressed air. As little as 5% probability of a burnoffis high enough to justify the use of a GENISYS NPU. The cost of aGENISYS NPU in a typical West Texas area drilling location addsabout $0.88 per drilled foot. This is in contrast to the $2.00 perfoot added for extra water, chemicals, bit wear and the unknowncost of a burnoff due to mud rings.Coiled tubing operations with nitrogen from Generon's GENISYSproduct line may reduce well costs and maximize recovery, all atonce. Oil and gas well completions and workovers with coiled tubingare a proven method of reducing total well costs and maximizingrecovery from the reservoir. High pressure GENISYS nitrogen isintroduced continuously to the tubing instead of more costly,delivered liquid nitrogen.Experience with GENISYS NPUs has shown that using nitrogen in placeof misted, compressed air is a safer and more economical method ofdrilling. Drilling with mist is slower than drilling with nitrogenand 30% more compressed air is required for the "misting up." Thisincreased capacity results in the need for additional or larger aircompressors to do the job, adding costs to the drilling operation.Using nitrogen from Genisys will result in as much as a 50% costsavings on most wells.At the close of 1995, Dow Chemical announced that it would sell itsGeneron subsidiary to MG Industries Inc.  MG, part of the HoechstGroup of companies, is a mid-sized industrial gas firm.Back to Headline List CopyrightENHANCED ENERGY RECOVERY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996WAG Project Successin Salt Creek FieldAt the recently held Permian Basin CO2 Conference (December 4-5,1995) in Midland TX, Abel Salazar of Mobil Oil discussed the casehistory of the Salt Creek water-alternating-gas (WAG) project andshared the key lessons learned from the project.  "The Salt CreekField phase 1 area has been a very successful WAG using CO2," saidSalazar. "The WAG project began two years and one month ago andmore than 50% of the current oil production of 27,000 bbls/day areattributed to CO2 injection."The Salt Creek Field covers 12,000 acres and is located in KentCo., TX, approximately 90 NE of Midland, TX. The field contains 178active producers, 57 WAG or CO2 injectors and 78 water injectors.When the project started, 18,500 bbls/day were produced. Less thanone month later, the field began to respond and one year later theproduction peaked at 30,000 bbls/day. A total of 7.2 billion bblsof oil have been produced over the two years of CO2 flooding aspart of the WAG treatment."Without CO2 injection, many of these wells would have beenuneconomical," said Salazar. "The biggest challenge at Salt CreekField is managing the producing gas oil ratio, and WAG is thecheapest and quickest method to do this." He said that Mobil wasvery happy with the WAG results and that Mobil will expand into thephase 2 area as of March 1996 and will continue expansion into thephase 3 area through the year 2001."Salt Creek Field is very dynamic and needs continuoussurveillance," Salazar explained. "The key to the success of theCO2 injection is management. A detailed pattern analysis isnecessary, as are team work and having good communication withfield personnel."Salazar offered some specific guidelines based on Mobil'sexperience with the field. He counseled to use maximum availablecarbon dioxide supply rate as long as possible from pipeline andgas plant capacities and vary WAG ratios on a pattern by patternbasis. WAG/breakthrough problems can be identified by watching cashflow per producing well and not allowing the cash flow to gonegative. Apply same waterflood workover procedures during carbondioxide flood. Exception is for high GOR wells which requireincreased mud costs. Supplement fuel may be necessary to insureproper carbon dioxide flare operation.Another guide is that all surface systems should be planned forflexibility.Remember that the vendor/engineering contractor community knowsvery little about metering carbon dioxide streams at either high orlow pressures.Back to Headline List CopyrightENHANCED ENERGY RECOVERY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996DOE Program AidsSmaller ProducersIndependent producers today account for nearly 40% of the nation'sdomestic oil supply, but virtually none of these companies have thetechnical capability or resources to try untried or unfamiliartechnological approaches that potentially could improve theireconomic viability. As a result, with oil prices remainingrelatively low, many of these companies are on the verge ofabandoning much of the nation's remaining oil resource. To helpmeet this need, the Dept. of Energy (DOE) (1000 Independence Ave.SW, Washington, DC 20585; Tel: 202/586-5000) is assisting severalof the nation's smallest independent oil producers in applyinginnovative technologies that could help maintain the viability ofan increasingly important segment of the U.S. petroleum industry.DOE, working through its National Institute for Petroleum andEnergy Research (NIPER, 220 N. Virginia, Bartlesville, OK 74003;Tel: 918/336-2400, Fax: 918/337-4339) is providing nearly $400,000in technical assistance contracts to eight independent producers.The producers and their project partners provide more than $500,000in private sector cost-sharing and in-kind contributions. Byproviding a small amount of federal cost-sharing, $50,000 or lessper project, the DOE is encouraging the producers to experimentwith the higher-risk approaches that could mean the differencebetween maintaining production from an oil field or shutting it in.The program is directed at companies with less than 50 employees orcontractors who have no affiliation with a major oil company.The eight companies, and others added to the program in the future,will be the focus of an extensive technology transfer effort to beconducted by the DOE and BDM-Oklahoma, the operator of NIPER.Through workshops, technical reports, and the use of expanding DOEand industry electronic networks to the petroleum industry,techniques and results from the trial projects will be disseminatedto other small producers.This effort differs from the larger Reservoir Class FieldDemonstration Program that DOE initiated in 1992.  The ReservoirClass program, now underway in 14 States, involves full-scale fieldtests that, in most cases, are demonstrating multiple techniquesfor maintaining production from fields threatened by near-termabandonment.  The smaller effort is pinpointing specific productionproblems and attempting to demonstrate lower-cost remedies, oftenfocusing on an individual well or group of wells.The DOE technical assistance program remains open for independentproducers to submit proposals.  Since BDM-Oklahoma announced thestart of the small producer program last March, independent oilfield operators have submitted 37 proposals.  Those not selectedremain eligible for further consideration, and additional proposalsare being accepted.  DOE has just over $240,000 in remaining fundsset aside for this effort, and additional project selections areexpected approximately every three months through next May. :Back to Headline List CopyrightENHANCED ENERGY RECOVERY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996TRRC Amends ItsInactive Well RuleTexas Railroad Commissioners (TRRC, Box 12967 Austin, TX 78711-2967; Tel: 512/463-7288) have approved a rule change designed tohelp more inactive oil and gas wells qualify for a state severancetax exemption approved by the legislature. Chairman Carole KeetonRylander and Commissioners Barry Williamson and Charles R. Matthewsexpanded provisions of the current program which encouragesoperators to bring wells that have been inactive for at least threeyears back on production, thereby qualifying them for up to a 10-year exemption from state severance tax on the oil or gas theyproduce.Under the rule change, the Texas Railroad Commission (TRRC) will beable to certify an eligible well as a "three year inactive well"without it having to be brought back into production at the time ofcertification. This will give the operator of a certified well theleeway of bringing it back on tax-exempt production anytime duringthe 10 years following the certification date. The new procedurerequires the operator of a certified well to file a test reportshowing productive capability with the Commission before applyingto the state comptroller for the tax incentive."Texas is a true leader in the area of tax incentive developmentand implementation," Commissioner Williamson said. "This particularrule change will extend the life of thousands of Texas wells,creating jobs and tax revenue and developing natural resources thatwould otherwise be lost to the state."The Three Year Inactive Well Incentive program has been anunqualified success. Since its beginning in 1993, almost 5,500 oiland gas wells, capable of producing 16.4 million barrels of oil and153.8 billion cubic feet of gas a year, have been certified. TheCommission estimates the value of that production at $584 millionand the positive impact on the Texas economy at $1.7 billion.Back to Headline List CopyrightENHANCED ENERGY RECOVERY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Differing Viewson CompliancePetroleum producers and refiners are vitally interested in thequality of water that they can legally discharge and equallyinterested in the quality of water available for their use.  An oldsaying is "Don't inject any water into your well that you wouldn'tdrink." Injected minerals and microbes can have disastrous effects.The EPA's goal of maintaining and protecting surface water qualityhas led the EPA to set some very low limits for a variety ofpollutants. The demanding EPA requirements for testing andreporting have prompted some contrasting reactions.While Anna Rule (Hampton Roads Sanitation District, Virginia Beach,VA; Tel: 804/874-1287) exposes the impracticalities andinadequacies of compliance testing, Darrell R. Wilder(Environmental Services Lab, Eastman Chemical Co., Kingsport, TN37662-5054) sees compliance testing and waste minimization asopportunities for self-directed efforts to eliminate sources ofpollution and reduce the burden of testing.Writing in Water Environment & Technology [7-11, 31-34, 1995] Rulepoints out that the minimum concentration at which a chemical'spresence can be determined by a specific method is an exceedinglyminute but imprecise quantity which has nevertheless become aregulatory goal and performance standard. A method detection limit(MDL) is the minimum concentration of a substance which can beidentified, measured, and reported with 99% confidence that itsconcentration is greater than zero. The EPA bases MDL on thestandard deviation of a set of replicate determinations.The EPA has set water quality criteria for some substances at orbelow MDLs without considering the limits of analytical technology.Compliance with permit limits set below MDLs or at zero isproblematic because measurement errors, variability, anduncertainty. Measurements at ultradilute levels are consequentlyanything but absolutely true and exact determinations.Rule indicates the flaws in deriving a confidence interval from aset of determinations and suggests that prediction intervals ortolerance intervals are more appropriate for estimating the rangeof future multiple measurements and the probability that a givenpercentage of them attain a given MDL. Rule points out that itintroduces a bias to treat results at or below an MDL as zero ornondetectable while accepting higher values as true and accurate."All measurements, at any level, include defined and unavoidableimprecision. Analytical and sample variance, or relative standarddeviation of measurements (RSD) is not constant throughout theconcentration range but gradually increases as the results approachthe lower or upper end of the analytical range. . . . The practiceof eliminating low-level data by reporting 'less than' or 'zero' iscalled left-censoring and is regarded as an unnecessary loss ofvaluable information." While it is statistically valid to use low-end data, this approach often conflicts with setting regulatorylimits.Rule favors the calibration curve method as an alternative forestimating measurement detection limits. This method findstolerance intervals for assessing future performance and uses themto define uncertainty bands on the calibration curve. The analystmay then compute and define minimum concentrations that have anacceptable level of confidence with a predetermined RSD. Thecalibration curve method is the basis of a proposal presented toEPA by a Detection/Quantitation Workgroup representing theregulated community. Other concepts of MDL may be appropriate, butthe problem is the validity of low-end results. Carefully developedand documented protocols should allow a more effective validationand define more appropriate uses although at a higher cost.Working the higher end of compliance testing, Wilder acceptscompliance testing as a fact of life for environmental dischargesin the chemical industry. Now that the NPDES program has entered aphase of diminishing returns, the EPA is encouraging a "front end"approach to pollution control that encourages proactive wasteminimization and pollution prevention.Government initiatives and voluntary programs have createdfinancial incentives for chemical companies to go beyond routinecompliance by developing environmental strategies that reflectenvironmental responsibility. Writing in Analytical Chemistry [25-2, 77-89, 1995] Wilder presents a review of some new measurementtechnologies for preventing pollution and cutting waste.Wilder considers technologies for measurement of wasteloadconcentrations, flow measurements, monitoring specific wastecomponents, monitoring networks, process control of activatedsludge treatment systems, and measurement of air emissions. Wilderbelieves that internal and self-directed efforts by chemicalcompanies in all these areas give analysts scope for ingenuity andcreativity in identifying and eliminating sources of toxiccontaminants. Successful results could reduce the burden ofcompliance testing.Back to Headline List CopyrightENHANCED ENERGY RECOVERY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Improved Gels forOil Field BrinesGelled or crosslinked water-soluble polymers are used in enhancedoil recovery and other oil field operations to change formationpermeability, enhancing the effectiveness of water floodingoperations. Generally, polymers along with an appropriatecrosslinking system are injected in an aqueous solution into theformation and permeate into and gel in the regions of highest waterpermeability. By using a produced brine as the aqueous solutioncarrier for the polymers, operators can avoid the environmentalconcerns as well as cost for disposing of a produced brine. It alsosaves the cost associated with acquiring and pre-treating freshwater for use as the aqueous solution.Most produced brines are hard brines, defined as having a salinityof greater than 2% total dissolved solids, basically inorganicsalts. Chromium(III) carboxylates such as chromium acetate are theonly known crosslinkers which can be used to produce stable gels inproduced brines for near-wellbore treatment. Although achromium(III) salt is not as toxic as a chromium(VI) salt, it isstill not desirable in the environment. Its use may requireadditional costs to assure the integrity of the injection wells toavoid contamination of ground water sources.Ahmad Moradi-Araghi of Phillips Petroleum Co. (16 Phillips Bldg.,Bartlesville, OK 74004; Tel: 918/661-6600) has found a moreenvironmentally suitable gelling composition that can form stablegels in produced brines. It has the benefit that the gellingcomposition does not crosslink too fast (i.e., gel times longerthan 2 hours) so that individual components of the composition canbe injected simultaneously into the wells. The composition consistsof a produced brine; a water-soluble polymer (i.e.,polyacrylamide), a crosslinker (i.e., a complexed zirconiumcompound), and optionally a complexing ligand (i.e., lactic acid).The composition can be used for either in depth treatment of an oilfield or near-wellbore treatment such as water shutoff, gasshutoff, and zone abandonment.More specific information is included in U.S. Patent 5,478,802. Thepatent says that it is desirable to delay the rate of gelation sothat the components of the composition can be injected at the sametime without plugging up the injection or producing wells.  Aproduced brine having a salinity of from 4-25% generally producesbetter results.Suitable polymers are those which are capable of gelling in thepresence of polyvalent metal ion crosslinking agents. Polymerscapable of gelling in the presence of crosslinking agents within agelation pH range, include biopolysaccharides, cellulose ethers,and acrylamide-based polymers. The preferred biopolysaccharides arepolysaccharide B-1459 and xanthan gums which are biopolysaccharidesproduced by the action of Xanthomonas campestris bacteria.Preferred cellulose ethers include carboxymethylhydroxyethylcellulose (CMHEC) and carboxymethyl cellulose (CMC). Preferredpolymers which contain acrylamide as well as 0.5-5 mole % ofpendant carboxylate (acrylate) groups are the partially hydrolyzedpolyacrylamides possessing pendant carboxylate groups through whichcrosslinking can take place.The crosslinker is a metal compound selected from the groupconsisting of a complexed zirconium compound, a complexed titaniumcompound, and mixtures of these. These compounds are commerciallyavailable.A suitable complexing ligand to retard the rate of gelation may bechosen from the group consisting of lactic acid, neutralized lacticacid, citric acid, ammonium, potassium or sodium citrate, isocitricacid, ammonium, potassium or sodium isocitrate, malic acid,ammonium, potassium or sodium malate, tartaric acid, ammonium,potassium or sodium tartrate, triethanolamine, malonic acid,ammonium, potassium or sodium malonate, and mixtures of these. Dueto their ready availability and low cost, the presently preferredcomplexing ligands are triethanolamine, citric acid, lactic acid,tartaric acid and salts of these.The composition of the invention can be prepared by mixing theindividual components together employing conventionally well-knownmixing means. The order of adding individual components does notchange the characteristics of the composition.The concentration of crosslinker in the composition depends largelyon the concentration of polymer in the composition. Lowerconcentrations of polymer require lower concentrations ofcrosslinker. Further, it has been found that for a givenconcentration of polymer, increasing the concentration ofcrosslinker generally substantially increases the rate of gelation.The concentration of crosslinker in the injected slug variesgenerally over the broad range of 25-5,000 ppm, preferably over therange of 100-2,000 ppm based on Zr or Ti concentration.The concentration of the complexing ligand in the composition alsodepends on the concentrations of the water-soluble polymer in thecomposition and on the desired rate of gelation. Generally, thefaster the gelation rate, the lower concentration of the complexingligand is required. Generally, the concentration of the complexingligand varies broadly in the range of about 25-5,000 ppm,preferably in the range of about 50-3,000 ppm, and most preferablyin the range of 100-2,000 ppm.Back to Headline List CopyrightENHANCED ENERGY RECOVERY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996PDVSA Is Now aMature CorporationPetroleos de Venezuela S.A. (PDVSA, Apartado 169, Caracas 1010-A,Venezuela) recently celebrated its 20th anniversary. PDVSA hasmoved from its initial role of being "a simple coordinator" of 14subsidiaries to "a mature and powerful corporation, with clarity ofobjectives, and holding a first class national and internationalposition," said PDVSA president Luis Giusti. "Today, PDVSA is astrong and solvent corporation holding an excellent position on themain world markets, with a modern production and refininginfrastructure and a first class technical team."PDVSA has confirmed that the Orinoco Oil Belt contains reserves ofheavy and extra heavy crudes and bitumens estimated atapproximately 1.2 trillion barrels, of which some 270 billionbarrels are recoverable with the use of today's technology. Thosemassive reserves of hard to market heavy crudes and bitumens in theBelt have posed a major challenge for PDVSA. The corporation hasapproached development in two ways: negotiating strategicassociations with foreign oil companies to exploit and upgrade therecoverable resources and embarking on an ambitious projectconverting bitumen into Orimulsion, a unique boiler fuel used inplants that generate electricity.Maraven, one of the PDVSA Group has worked out two majordevelopment projects in partnership with several internationalcompanies. Along with Conoco Inc. (P.O. Box 1267, Ponca City, OK74602-1267; Tel: 405/767-3456), Maraven will produce approximately120,000 barrels per day of extra-heavy crude from the Belt.That crude will be upgraded in Venezuela to a lighter syntheticcrude using Conoco's delayed coking technology. A similarproduction and upgrading project involving Maraven, Total (Cedex47, 92069 Paris la Defense, Paris, France), Itochu (1-3 Kita-Kyutaromachi, Osaka OSK0541, Japan), and Marubeni Corp. (5-7Honmachi, 2-Chome, Osaka OSK0541, Japan) are also ready to goonstream.Letters of intent already have been signed for a third developmentproject in the belt that will bring Corpoven, a member of the PDVSAgroup, and ARCO International Oil and Gas Co. in a strategicassociation to produce some 200,000 barrels per day (bpd) of mediumgrade crudes, and a fourth project involving a partnership betweenLagoven, a member of the PDVSA Group, and Mobil Oil Corp. (3225Gallows Rd., Fairfax, VA 22037; Tel: 703/846-3000) to produce100,000 bpd from the eastern region of the Belt.The corporation hopes those four projects will generate a combinedoutput of between 400,000-500,000 bpd of synthetic crude by theturn of the century. Those joint venture deals follow a series ofoperating agreements between PDVSA subsidiaries and several privateforeign companies for the reactivation of marginal or inactive oilfields which now are producing an additional 58,00 bpd of crudes.PDVSA expects to exceed 430,000 bpd by the year 2000.PDVSA subsidiaries have made a series of operating agreements withprivate foreign companies for the reactivation of marginal orinactive oil fields which are now producing an additional 58,000barrels per day of crudes. That figure is expected to exceed430,000 bpd by the turn of the century.PDVSA has begun an ambitious plan to manufacture and exportOrimulsion. Orimulsion exports have grown from about 1.7 millionmetric tons in 1992 to approximately 2.43 million metric tons in1994. The plan projects Orimulsion exports at approximately 20million metric tons by the year 2000.  Bitumenes Orinoco, S.A.(BITOR), the subsidiary of PDVSA responsible for the manufacture,transport and marketing of Orimulsion, has already signed a supplycontract agreement with Canada's New Brunswick Power, which adaptedits Dalhousie power plant to burn Orimulsion fuel, and with FloridaPower & Light which will use Orimulsion in its Manatee, FL plant.BITOR is negotiating with electric facilities in Europe and Asia.BITOR has shipped significant test volumes of Orimulsion topotential clients in Portugal, Italy and Germany. A supply contracthas been signed with SK-Power of Denmark for the purchase of up to1.5 million metric tons a year of the product, for two years, whichbegan in 1995.Back to Headline List CopyrightENHANCED ENERGY RECOVERY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Suncor ScalesUp in AustraliaIn Australia, Suncor Inc. (P.O. Box 38, 112 4th Ave. SW, Calgary,Albert, Canada; Tel: 403/269-8100) will scale up and apply Taciukprocessor technology. Taciuk processor technology was originallydeveloped by the Alberta Oil Sands Technology Research Authority(AOSTRA), the functions of which are now part of the Alberta Dept.of Energy (5th Floor, 801 6th Ave. SW, Calgary, Alberta T2P 3W2,Canada; Tel: 403/297-3380). The Taciuk processor combines theextraction, upgrading and energy-generating processes oftraditional oil sands/shales projects and requires less capital andequipment."Suncor was the first in the world to pioneer the commercialdevelopment of the oil sands," said Suncor president and CEO RickGeorge. "We are uniquely positioned to apply our expertise in oilsands development in other parts of the world."Suncor has reached an agreement with two Australian companies,Southern Pacific Petroleum NL (Lufthansa House, 143 MacQuarie St.,Sidney, NSW 2000, Australia) and Central Pacific Minerals NL(McFarlane House, 127 George St., Brisbane, QLD 4000, Australia),to begin development work to demonstrate the commercial viabilityof producing oil from Australian oil shale using the Taciukprocess.Suncor will invest $7 million to conduct preliminary engineeringand complete commercial negotiations to build a shale oil plant inGladstone, a port city on the east coast in Queensland, Australia.The agreement covers the development of the Stuart oil shaledeposit which is estimated to contain the equivalent of threebillion barrels of shale oil.Development work is expected to take six to nine months tocomplete. After that the partners will decide whether to proceedwith the 4,500 barrel a day plant. The project is estimated to costabout $200 million, of which Suncor would contribute up to anadditional $65 million over the next two years. At that point,Suncor would earn a 50% interest in the project.If the project is successful, Suncor and its partners have plans todevelop a second and third stage, which could ultimately result inan 85,000 barrel a day commercial operation over a 10 year period.In addition, Suncor has the right to acquire an option for $3.5million to purchase a 22.4% interest in Southern Pacific Petroleumand Central Pacific Minerals. This option can be exercised any timeup to six months after the shale oil plant begins operations.George said the project fits strategically with Suncor's growthplans. "Our core businesses continue as the foundation of ourgrowth," said George. "To create additional shareholder value, weare pushing the boundaries of our existing businesses and lookingfor new yet related energy opportunities." Suncor plans todiversify in stages through a series of modest investments.Suncor has plans to spend more than $1 billion over five years toincrease production at its Oil Sands and Resources groups. Suncorplans to invest approximately $475 million on capital andexploration programs in 1996, up about 20% from 1995. Of the $475million, approximately $260 million will be directed to the oilsands, $160 million will go to the conventional oil and gasdivision and $55 million will be spent at Sunoco, Suncor's refiningand marketing group."The increased spending supports our plans to expand ourconventional exploration and production and oil sands operations,"said Rick George, Suncor president and CEO. The Oil Sands Groupcapital program includes projects to expand production, plan a newmine site, reduce sulfur dioxide emissions and make otherenvironmental and sustaining capital investments.At Resources Group, capital will be spent on increasing reservesand production through exploration, development and acquisitions.Suncor also plans to spend approximately $17 million on a projectto test a new technology at its Burnt Lake heavy oil property. Inits downstream operations, Suncor will increase spending toapproximately $55 million to improve environmental, energy andoperating efficiency at its refining and Sunoco retail operations.Back to Headline List CopyrightENHANCED ENERGY RECOVERY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996ChevronMovesToward Its GoalsChevron Corp. (P.O. Box 7753, San Francisco, CA 94120-7753; Tel:415/894-4440) chairman Ken Derr told a meeting of financialanalysts that Chevron has made great strides in the second half of1995 toward improving shareholder value and reducing the company'salready competitive cost structure. He noted that Chevron's stockhit an all-time high during December 1995 and that Chevron has hadits most productive year of oil discoveries in 15 years, based onthe projected reserves from a number of key wells.One promising area is a new discovery in the Congo, Moho Marine 1,which is one of Chevron's largest discoveries in West Africa. Thefield appears to be geologically similar to nearby N'Kossa. TheN'Kossa field is on track to begin production in mid-1996, withpeak production of 110,000 barrels per day (bpd) expected in late1997. Chevron's share is 30%.Several promising areas are in Northwest Australia, where Chevronand partners have made major discoveries and added new production.Last month, the Wanaea and Cossack fields began production and arescheduled to reach design capacity of 115,000 bpd in the firstquarter. Huge gas discoveries at Chrysaor and Perseus were alsoannounced in the past year."One of Chevron's enduring strengths is our ability to find oil andgas, and we are completing an exceptionally good year of newdiscoveries," Derr said. "In addition to this, we expect to replacemore than 110% of our worldwide proved reserves when final 1995figures are in."Also in the exploration and production area, Chevron announced inDecember 1995 a major alliance with Maraven of Venezuela to furtherdevelop the huge Boscan oil field and supply heavy crude oil toU.S. refineries (see article in foreign Industry News, this issue).Several company businesses in December 1995 have announcedrestructuring to reduce costs, improve efficiency and to meetstrategic intents, Derr noted, including:Chevron Chemical Co., which announced a restructuring alonggeographic lines, forming a new International Group as well as aU.S. chemicals division. The action supports the chemical company'sstrategic intent to improve competitive financial performance whiledeveloping attractive opportunities for growth, Derr said. Theformer Aromatics and Olefins divisions, both headquartered inHouston, will be combined to form one U.S. Chemicals Div., toremain in Houston.A new international group, eventually to be based in San Ramon, CA,will help Chevron focus specifically on growth markets in keyregions around the world.  Chevron Chemical's other major division,the Oronite Additives Div., based in San Ramon, already operatesinternationally and is unaffected by the reorganization.U.S. products marketing announced a consolidation of regionaloffices and support functions, reducing costs $8 million per yearand supporting greater customer focus. U.S. refining also has a newmanagement team charged with achieving incident free operationwhile reducing costs. The business activities of ChevronInternational Oil Co. are being reorganized, as announced earlythis month. As part of the change, the company's internationallubricants business will be consolidated with the U.S. businessinto a new Global Lubricants unit.Another major step was taken by Caltex, Chevron's 50-50 jointventure with Texaco, which is a major refiner/marketer in Asia.Caltex recently announced the $2 billion sale of its 50% interestin a refining company in Japan, where markets are mature, in orderto focus more on growth areas such as China and India. The actionsupports the strategy of growing Caltex in attractive markets,while achieving superior competitive financial performance.Beta Well to SellKazakstan InterestThe Board of Directors of Beta Well Service Inc. (Calgary, Alberta,Canada; Tel: 403/290-0660) has approved a conditional agreement inprinciple to sell its 50% interest in the Zhetybay-Questpartnership, two well servicing rigs and related equipment, all ofwhich are located in Kazakstan, to a large oil and gas company.  Itis proposed that the transaction's effective date and closing datewill be March 31,1996. If the sale is completed, the considerationwould be approximately $12 million in cash 91 days after closing,and deferred payments totaling $30 million contingent uponZhetybay-Quest's profitability.A company spokesman said that if the transaction can be completed,it would be a positive development for all interested parties."Beta would have the opportunity to realize a significant return onits Zhetybay-Quest investment.  The financial strength of theprospective new owner would assure its Kazak partner and thegovernment of Kazakstan that the Zhetybay field would be developedon a timely basis."Back to Headline List CopyrightENHANCED ENERGY RECOVERY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Chevron, MaravenForm Major AllianceChevron (6001 Bollinger Canyon Rd., San Ramon, CA 94583; Tel:510/842-1000) and Maraven S.A. (Apartado Postal 829, Caracas,Venezuela 1010-A;  Tel: 58/2 908 3096) have formed a multi-facetedalliance which will further the development of the Boscan oil fieldin Venezuela and provide for supplies of heavy crude oil to Chevronin the U.S.The alliance covers an initial period of 20 years with an optional10 year extension. Chevron will operate Venezuela's Boscan heavyoil field, and anticipates a $2 billion investment over a 20-30year period.  Maraven will become Chevron's joint-venture partnerin a West Coast asphalt business, and will also supply crude forChevron's refinery at Pascagoula, MS, and for the company's asphaltplants at Perth Amboy, NJ, Portland, OR, and Richmond Beach, WA.For the Boscan Field, Chevron and Maraven have structured anOperating Service Agreement to assure continued development of the50-year-old Boscan field, discovered by Chevron in 1946.  "We planto increase production from 80,000 barrels per day (bpd) to 115,000bpd during the next three years," said Richard Matzke, president ofChevron Overseas Petroleum Inc., who signed the agreement.Independent studies confirm the Boscan field contains 1.6 billionbarrels of proven reserves.  Chevron will be responsible foroperations and production, while Maraven will be responsible formarketing. Through the new arrangement, Chevron becomes the firstinternational oil company since 1975 to be responsible for such ahigh level of production in Venezuela.  "We're encouraged byMaraven's demonstration of trust in our technical expertise,"Matzke said. He noted that the work to be done, albeit challenging,will result in major economic enhancements for the Venezuelaneconomy."Boscan crude, with an API gravity of 10 degrees, is an excellentasphalt feedstock," explained Dave O'Reilly, president of ChevronU.S.A. (CUSA) Products Co., who signed the downstream agreements."This new alliance provides an opportunity for Chevron and Maravento collaborate on both upstream and downstream ventures," O'Reillysaid.Affiliates of Chevron and Maraven will also form a partnership toacquire and process feedstock into asphalt and other products formarketing in the Western U.S. The new joint venture, to be namedChevron Ven Asphalt Alliance, will have a processing and serviceagreement with CUSA Products which will retain its West Coastasphalt refineries and perform supply, processing and marketingfunctions on behalf of the joint venture.  "This venture shouldincrease asphalt production and offer new marketing opportunities,"said O'Reilly.Back to Headline List CopyrightENHANCED ENERGY RECOVERY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Occidental ExpandsEcuador OperationsOccidental Petroleum Corp. (10889 Wilshire Blvd, Los Angeles, CA90024-4201; Tel: 213/879-1700) and Canadian Occidental PetroleumLtd. have reached an agreement with Petroecuador, the Ecuadorianstate oil company, to increase exploration and developmentactivities on Block 15 in the prolific Oriente Basin in easternEcuador.The agreement calls for Occidental as operator to conduct anexploration program in the 97% of the block that has yet to beexplored.  In exchange, Occidental receives improved contract termsregarding new discoveries, including a minimum extension of sevenyears to develop new discoveries.Occidental acquired the 494,000-acre block in 1985 under a risk-service contract with Petroecuador. To date, six fields have beendiscovered, and four of those have been developed and are producingapproximately 24,000 barrels of oil per day.  The 20-yearexploitation period under the contract began in 1992. Occidentalhas an 85% interest in the block with Canadian Occidental holdingthe remaining 15%.Back to Headline List CopyrightENHANCED ENERGY RECOVERY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Parker OpensVietnam MarketA subsidiary of Parker Drilling Co. Inc. (8 E. 3rd St., Tulsa, OK74103; Tel: 918/585-8221) will become the first Western drillingcontractor to work on-land in Vietnam. Parker DrillingInternational Ltd. will drill two wells south of Hanoi for theAustralian oil company Anzoil NL.  The location is near the coastof the Gulf of Tonkin. Terms of the contract were not released."Parker has a long tradition in pioneering new drilling markets,"said Robert L. Parker, Jr., president and CEO. "Vietnam holds greatpotential and we plan to establish along-term presence in thisenergy-rich country," he added. The operator is hopeful significantreserves will be found, since offshore discoveries have alreadybeen made nearby, Parker explained. The contract calls for Parkerto provide a rig and crews to drill the two wells. A rig will bemobilized next month from operations in the Philippines.Back to Headline List CopyrightENHANCED ENERGY RECOVERY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Pennzoil in ChinaJoint VenturePennzoil Products Co. (Pennzoil Place, P.O. Box 2967, Houston, TX77262-8200; Tel: 713/546-6100) has acquired a 50% equity share ina new lubricant manufacturing and marketing joint venture betweenPennzoil and Lithcon Petroleum Inc. in Tianjin, China.William E. Welcher, group VP, products marketing, said thatPennzoil and Lithcon have purchased land and an existing, newbuilding in Tianjin which will be utilized for a lubricating oilblending plant and a sales and marketing office complex. "Theexisting facility is strategically located close to one of China'slargest ports in the Tianjin Economic Technological DevelopmentArea," said Welcher.  "It is also located in the Bohai Bay area,China's second largest economic zone."Welcher said that owing to Bohai Bay's natural and labor resources,large market and technology, this area is expected to become thenucleus of the northeast Asia's economic belt which spans north andnorth-east China, South Korea, Mongolia, Siberia and the Far East.The total lubricants requirement within the five provinces locatedaround Tianjin together with the municipalities of Beijing andTianjin is approximately one-third of China's total lubricantdemand.Back to Headline List CopyrightENHANCED ENERGY RECOVERY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Briefly Noted:    Nuevo Energy Co. (1221 Lamar, Houston, TX 77010; Tel: 713/753-1343) has successfully completed its ARCO Fee A-360 #1-H well,located in the Brookeland Field in Jasper County, TX.  This AustinChalk well tested at an initial rate of 12.4 million cubic feet ofgas per day, and 1,780 barrels of oil per day on a 48/64-inch chokewith a flowing tubing pressure of 1,750 pounds per square inch.This dual lateral horizontal well was drilled to a vertical depthof 11,200 ft., then drilled 9,410 ft. horizontally. The AustinChalk has been the focus of a great many horizontal wells in recentyears, which have rejuvenated this area.    Oceaneering International, Inc.( P.O. Box 218130, Houston, TX77218; Tel: 713/578-8868, Fax: 713/578-5243) will significantlyexpand the company's remotely operated vehicle (ROV) fleet.  Sevennew Hydra MAGNUM and QUANTUM work class vehicles will bemanufactured at Oceaneering's Morgan City, LA, facility fordelivery between January and July of 1996. These units are beingbuilt to meet increased market demand for ROVs around the world inwater depths greater than 1,000 ft. of sea water (fsw) and insevere weather conditions, such as those encountered off the Westof Shetlands in the North Sea.    Swift Energy Co. (16825 Northchase, Houston, TX 77060; Tel:713/874-2700 or 800/777-2412) has successfully tested anexploratory oil well as part of its expanded drilling activities.The K.M. Mines No. 1 located in Campbell County, WY discovered anew oil field producing from the Minnelusa "B" sand where it isestimated that two to four additional wells will be drilled tofully develop the field. The well was tested at a daily rate of 240barrels of 22 API gravity oil at a depth of approximately 9,600 ft.    Caltex Petroleum Co. (Irving, Texas) has signed a letter ofintent to sell its 50% interest in Nippon Petroleum RefiningCompany (NPRC, Tokyo, Japan) to its partner, Nippon Oil Co., Ltd.(2 Chome Chiyoda Ku, 2 3 Uchisaiwaicho, Tokyo 100) for 200 billionyen (approximately U.S. $2 billion). The parties have agreed tocomplete the sale by the end of the first quarter of 1996.Back to Headline List CopyrightENHANCED ENERGY RECOVERY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Making Well InfoMore AccessibleObtaining data for an oil or gas producing property is a timeconsuming and difficult task, limiting the producer's effectivenessto make sound business and engineering decisions. The data arelocated in a variety of places, some of which are inaccessible tothe average user. Independent producers would like more effectiveaccess to this crucial information to expand their businessoptions. Major oil companies with properties in which production isno longer justified would like more effective access to facilitatethe sale of any properties that independents might see as viable.Government agencies would like to see more effective access for theindependents to avoid the abandonment of wells that might beproductive.Sam Coleman (Tel: 510/422-4323) and Jeff Wagoner (Tel: 510/422-1374) of Lawrence Livermore National Lab (Univ. of California, P.O.Box 808, L-156, Livermore, CA 94551) are developing a database ofexisting oil field data for California and Texas. These states,like many other states, provide public access to oil and gasproduction data, and other types of well information. Much of thedata is centrally located. However, the data are in a format thatis difficult to search and retrieve with access mechanisms whichare ineffective, tedious, and expensive to maintain.The Oil and Gas Data Infrastructure Project is designing,implementing, and integrating inexpensive, standards-based,mechanisms for online access to data from Texas, California, andother states. The project will combine database, Internet, andWorld Wide Web technology to make existing Oil and Gas data readilyavailable for online analysis.Cost-effective access will be available through the existingInternet infrastructure using de facto Internet tools. Data will bedisplayed on the user's personal computer or downloaded foranalysis by a variety of existing commercial applications. Theproject will deliver a demonstration system that will serve as aprototype for use by government agencies and private corporations.It is anticipated that cost effective analysis of data willfacilitate the transfer of petroleum leases to independentproducers, slow the abandonment of wells, enhance the production ofexisting fields, and increase the efficiency of drillingactivities.The California Div. of Oil and Gas and Geothermal Resources and theTexas Railroad Commission maintain a great deal of information oneach well. This includes applications to do work, permits issued,drilling and exploration histories and maps.The information has been available to the public and industry, butinterested parties must come to the regional offices, identify andlocate information they need, and request or create hard copies ofany desired information. Both California and Texas governmentagencies are interested in providing electronic systems for wellrecords to improve public access and reduce operating expenses.The Dept. of Energys (DOE, 1000 Independence Ave. SW, Washington,DC 20585; Tel: 202/586-5000) Advanced Computational TechnologyInitiative is supporting software development at the nationallaboratories and the analysis of Texas and California data throughthe university partners.Back to Headline List CopyrightENHANCED ENERGY RECOVERY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Short Radius-CurvedBorehole ApparatusW. James Hughes, James W. McCabe, and Owen L. Marks, Jr. ofMaverick Tool Co. (211 Beeline Dr., Bensenville, IL 60106. Tel:708/860-5632) have developed a new method and apparatus to drill ashort radius curved boreholes portion of a horizontal ordirectional well. This technique can achieve a radius of curvatureof less than 20 ft.A tight radius of curvature is rotary drilled by use of flexiblecomposite drilling pipe or other common flexible pipe whichterminate within an eccentric collar on the final drill stringsection. The eccentric collar is equipped with a retractable andgrooved compression pad which expands outwardly to hold theeccentric collar (which is also grooved on its opposite side)against the side of the well bore to prevent the eccentric collarfrom rotating during the rotary drilling process. The final drillstring section connects to a lower drill bit collar and rotarydrill bit through a driving ball and socket connection. Theeccentric collar on the final drill string section that engages thewell bore forces the deflection of the drill bit about the ball andsocket connection and holds this orientation as the rotating drillproceeds forward.The short radius required for lateral or horizontal drilling hasbeen a difficult drilling process to control. In the past, awhipstock was employed to drill short radius horizontal holes belowa vertical cased well bore. This technique limits the smallestcurvature radius for surface drilling to 19 feet which is 3 ofdeflection per foot over 30 ft. of linear drilling to produce ahorizontal drainhole at depths greater than 2,000 ft.Although others have achieved some degree of success in drilling atight radius or curvature, Maverick's new patented (U.S. 5,467,834)apparatus addresses the problems of the inconsistent radius ofcurvature, the weakness of ball/pin flexible joint which could failunder normal operating conditions, and the difficulty inmaintaining the desired orientation of deflection. It overcomes theinability to accurately determine the direction and correct forerrors and the multiple problems caused by constant engagement ofspring-loaded blades ranging from misorientation to sticking in thehole.Back to Headline List CopyrightENHANCED ENERGY RECOVERY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Energy BioSystemsBetter BiocatalystEnergy BioSystems Corp. (4200 Research Forest Dr., The Woodlands,TX 77381; Tel: 713/364-6100, Fax: 713/364-6110) has made a majoradvance in the performance of the biocatalyst which drives thecompany's proprietary biocatalytic desulfurization (BDS) system.Application of recent discoveries has lead to a six- to eightfoldincrease in the specific activity of intermediate reactionscritical to BDS economics."In the last few months we have applied the discoveries reported inSeptember," said Dr. Daniel J. Monticello, VP of R&D at EnergyBiosystems. "The resulting improvement exceeds our expectation ofa three- to fivefold increase. We are now significantly closer tothe performance level needed for commercialization of BDS, butadditional development is required on a dinal reaction to producethe prototype biocatalyst necessary for pilot plant demonstrationruns," he continued. Further improvements are expected in early1996 which should lead to the biocatalyst performance required forcommercial demonstration of BDS technology.Energy BioSystems announced that the U.S. Patent and TrademarkOffice has issued two new process patents to the company. "Wecontinue to improve the process design of BDS as well as thebiocatalyst," commented Dr. Monticello, "and we continue to pursuestrong patent protection for these improvements in order to enhanceour competitive position as we move toward the commercialization ofBDS."The first patent (U.S. 5,472,875) claims a new reactor designinvolving the introduction of air or oxygen-enriched gas into theoil prior to treatment with the biocatalyst. The second patent(U.S. 5,468,626) claims a method by which a biosorption agentpreferentially adsorbs sulfur-containing compounds from petroleum.Such a process design could reduce the size of the bioreactor byconcentrating on those compounds requiring desulfurization, thusreducing capital equipment cost.Back to Headline List CopyrightENHANCED ENERGY RECOVERY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Exxon UpgradesSteam Cracker TarsResearchers at Exxon Corp. (1251 Avenue of the Americas, New York,NY 10020) have discovered a process for the production of gaseousmono- and di-olefins, particularly ethylene, propylene andbutadiene. The advantage of the process is that it prevents ormitigates reactions of asphaltene precursors to form asphaltenes.The patented process (U.S. 5,443,715) involves first introducing ahydrocarbon feedstock stream into a high temperature thermalcracking zone to produce a high temperature cracked product stream.The cracked product stream is quenched to stop the crackingreactions. At least one HDD (hydrogen donor diluent) such ashydrotreated steam cracked tar oils is injected into the crackedproduct stream at or downstream of the point at which the reactionis quenched, so as to prevent thermal degradation reactions of thesteam cracked liquids.Normally gaseous olefins are recovered from the cracked productstream, and a liquid product stream is recovered which contains adiminished asphaltene content. In this manner, the process upgradesthe tars that are formed during the production of gaseous olefins.The inventors are Dane C. Grenoble, Roy T. Halle, Martin L.Gorbaty, and Harold W. Helmke.Back to Headline List CopyrightENHANCED ENERGY RECOVERY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Solvent, SteamSoak PromisingResearchers at Maraven (Apdo. 829, Caracas 1010-A, Venezuela) haveevaluated using various additives to enhance oil recovery andimprove the economics of steam soak projects. Initial results areencouraging. Solvent injection with steam resulted in initial oilrates 50% higher than steam alone. The steam soak process can beefficient and economical, but in western Venezuela itseffectiveness is linked to formation compaction, the mainproduction mechanism. To optimize the effects of the steam soakprocess, various additives were tested to improve the cyclebehavior.The additives used in the tests included surfactants to increasevertical steam distribution and improve the flow of the heated oil,solvents to increase oil mobility and steam stimulation followed bya slug of natural gas to increase the heated area and reactivatethe solution gas drive mechanism.It was concluded that steam soak with solvent coinjection was themost feasible approach, since solvent additives are abundant andcost less than the other additives used in this study. Furtherobservation and evaluation of this approach was recommended. Theresults were first presented at the Unitar International Conferenceon Heavy Crude and Tar Sands held in Houston, TX.Back to Headline List CopyrightENHANCED ENERGY RECOVERY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996CALENDARJanuary 29-Feb. 2, 1996, Energy Week Conference & Exhibition,including Petro-Safe, at the George R. Brown Convention Center,Houston, TX. Sponsors: ASME International Petroleum Div. andAmerican Petroleum Institute. Contact: Michelle Chapel, 3050 PostOak Blvd., Suite 205, Houston, TX 77056-6524; Tel: 713/963-6215.January 31, 1996, Ukrainian Energy Conference, Houston, TX.Contact: Eugene Safley or Merle Grabhorn, Tel: 800/645-7525.February 5-6, 1996, CERI North American Crude Oil & LiquidsConference, Calgary, Alberta, Canada. For more information, callTel: 403/282-1231.February 14-15, 1996, SPE Formation Damage Control Symposium,Lafayette, LA. For details, call Tel: 214/952-9393.February 25-29, 1996, AIChE Spring National Meeting, SheratonHotel, New Orleans. Call Tel: 212/705-7845 for information.February 29-March 1, 1996, InterAmerican Petroleum and GasConference, Fairmont Hotel, Dallas, TX. For more information, callTel: 808/944-7526.Back to Headline List WT02-B35-13IA086-000616-B010-241http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/ey31.html 205.156.212.5 19970121235506 text/html 58094HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Tuesday, 21-Jan-97 23:53:06 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:37:22 GMTContent-length: 57909Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ey31.html Sample Issue Copyright EUROPE ENERGY via NewsNet October 25, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES SUPERPHENIX TO SHUT DOWN IN EARLY 1997 FOR REFURBISHMENT (263 words) PAPOUTSIS CALLS FOR PRE-COMPETITIVE ENERGY TECHNOLOGY POLICY. (163 words) COMMISSION LAUNCHES JOULE PROJECT SELECTION INVESTIGATION. (150 words) VAN MIERT SEEKS "CLARIFICATIONS" OVER ELECTRABEL ACCORDS (210 words) EUROPE'S LARGEST WIND ENERGY PLANT OPENS IN WALES (179 words) FRENCH PETROLEUM INDUSTRY EXPANDS DURING 1996 (301 words) BRITISH ENERGY TO SHED 1,460 JOBS OVER THREE YEARS (219 words) FOREIGN INVESTORS FLOCK TO GAZPROM (304 words) ON-SHORE BUSINESS SHAVES 7% OFF NORSK HYDRO PROFITS (307 words) SHELL THREATENS TO PROSECUTE ROMANIA'S CRP (252 words) ELF OFFERS OUTLETS FOR QATARI GAS (233 words) GEC ALSTHOM FORMS RUSSIAN MOTOR/GENERATOR VENTURE (93 words) INAUGURATION OF THE MAGHREB-EUROPE GAS PIPELINE (159 words) GREEN LIGHT FOR ELF NEGOTIATIONS ON NEW DEPOSIT IN AZERBAIJAN (265 words) RWE TO RAISE DIVIDENDS FOR 1995/96 (165 words) COAL USE AND OUTPUT IN WESTERN EUROPE STILL FALLING (273 words) EU PETROL AND HEATING OIL PRICES UP ON OCTOBER 21 (127 words) ELECTRICITY: EUROPEAN PRODUCTION BELOW OECD AVERAGE IN JULY (255 words) NORWAY EAGER TO SELL GAS TO POLAND. (170 words) TAXATION/EXCISE DUTIES: COMMISSION SOON TO PROPOSE TAXES ON ALL ENERGY SOURCES (741 words) AUSTRALIA LIFTS EMBARGO ON URANIUM SHIPMENTS TO FRANCE (359 words) EUROPEAN COMMISSION: ENERGY SECTOR PLANS UNDER 1997 WORK PROGRAMME (706 words) CEDEC CRITICISES ELECTRICITY DIRECTIVE COMMON POSITION (190 words) EU/VENEZUELA: EUROPEAN BUSINESSES ENCOURAGED TO INVEST (409 words) COMPETITION: VAN MIERT CONSIDERS FUTURE OF OIL SALES COMPETITION EXEMPTIONS (443 words) EUROPEAN COMMISSION TO CREATE ENERGY ADVISORY COMMITTEE (171 words) COGENERATION: NEW POLITICAL SUPPORT EXPRESSED AT CONFERENCE (690 words) CopyrightEUROPE ENERGY via NewsNetOctober 25, 1996SUPERPHENIX TO SHUT DOWN IN EARLY 1997 FOR REFURBISHMENTfrom EUROPE ENERGY, 25 October 1996, No. 478The Superphenix prototype nuclear plant will be shut down for five monthsin early 1997 for modifications to its fast breeder reactor, which willhenceforth be used for research, local authorities announced on October11. The modifications, announced during an information meeting with theofficials, will mainly involve the replacement of some subassemblies inthe reactor's core and the installation of experimental sub-assemblies"with a higher plutonium content or containing radioactive waste with along half-life, such as neptunium". The Superphenix plant, located atCreys-Malville, in France's Rhone-Alpes region, has encountered manyproblems since it was opened in 1986 and has actually operated very littlesince that date. Back on line in August 1994, the plant is now running at60% capacity. Its management expects authorisation for an increase to 90%shortly, but will not ask permission to turn Superphenix up to 100% power,given the short time remaining before the shutdown.In its annual report, the French Court of Auditors has estimated the totalcost of Superphenix at 60 billion French Francs. A spokesman for the plantsaid that this calculation was based on a shutdown in 2000, while theprogramme provided for operation until 2015. The representative alsoindicated that the 51% of the fast breeder reactor's costs were beingassumed by EDF and 49% by Italy and a consortium of several othercountries. He said that the reactor could make a "decisive" contributionto research into energy options for the year 2025 and beyond.Copyright 1996 EUROPE ENERGYBack to Headline List CopyrightEUROPE ENERGY via NewsNetOctober 25, 1996PAPOUTSIS CALLS FOR PRE-COMPETITIVE ENERGY TECHNOLOGY POLICY.from EUROPE ENERGY, 25 October 1996, No. 478"This is an opportune moment to define a Community-wide policy forpre-competitive activities in the field of energy technologies, with themain objective of meeting the urgent needs of EU industry and society atlarge", said Energy Commissioner Christos Papoutsis during a conference onOctober 11. He warned that while EU firms are among the world leaders inthe manufacture and supply of clean and efficient energy technologies, theEuropean Union has been less successful than the United States and Japanin the diffusion of research and the development and marketing of proventechnologies. A future initiative for energy technologies must focus noton the development of technology per se, he explained, but rather on itsuse to meet the immediate needs of the market and the citizen. It mustalso contain activities dealing with all the stages in the technologicaldevelopment process, including R&D and market commercialisation.Copyright 1996 EUROPE ENERGYBack to Headline List CopyrightEUROPE ENERGY via NewsNetOctober 25, 1996COMMISSION LAUNCHES JOULE PROJECT SELECTION INVESTIGATION.from EUROPE ENERGY, 25 October 1996, No. 478The European Commission has decided to launch a detailed inquiry to ensurethat the procedural rules governing EU funds for Joule projects ofresearch into renewable forms of energy are obeyed without exception,Research Commissioner Edith Cresson has responded in answer to aParliamentary question about the falsification of Joule programme expertreports. The Commission has already publicly denied and demonstrated tothe European Parliament that these accusations - the latest appearing inthe Austrian magazine Sonnenzeitung - were false, the Commissioner said,and it "vigorously refutes" any unjustified allegations made against theEzio Andreta, the Director responsible for research and technologicaldevelopment projects concerning energy. However, Commissioner Cressonconfirmed that another Commission official involved, Wolfgang Palz, hasbeen assigned to other duties - with his consent - while awaiting theresults of the inquiry.Copyright 1996 EUROPE ENERGYBack to Headline List CopyrightEUROPE ENERGY via NewsNetOctober 25, 1996VAN MIERT SEEKS "CLARIFICATIONS" OVER ELECTRABEL ACCORDSfrom EUROPE ENERGY, 25 October 1996, No. 478European Competition Commissioner Karel Van Miert has written to theBelgian Government asking for "clarifications" over plans by the powerutility ELECTRABEL, to force local authorities into long-term electricitysupply contracts, it was revealed on October 22. In March this year,Electrabel, which is privately owned, offered the Belgian intercommunales(joint ventures between municipalities for electricity distribution) thechance to buy stakes in the company in return for signing 30-yearelectricity distribution contracts. Mr Van Miert has repeatedly said that,under EU rules on free and fair competition, he will not accept contractslasting more than 15 years.The Commissioner is now reported to have asked the Belgian authorities fora clearer explanation of how much freedom the local authorities will haveto end the contracts with Electrabel and choose to go to another supplier.An EU source said that although the Commission had recently received aletter from Leo Peeters, Flemish Minister for Home Affairs, agreeing "inprinciple" to the 15-year contracts, Mr Van Miert was concerned aboutrecent indications that the parties to the agreements might be planning aU-turn over commitments made in May for a definite reduction in theirduration.Copyright 1996 EUROPE ENERGYBack to Headline List CopyrightEUROPE ENERGY via NewsNetOctober 25, 1996EUROPE'S LARGEST WIND ENERGY PLANT OPENS IN WALESfrom EUROPE ENERGY, 25 October 1996, No. 478The largest wind energy plant in Europe began operating on October 23,according to NATIONAL POWER, the British electricity production company.Located in Carno, Wales, the plant is capable of producing enough energyto meet the needs of 25,000 homes. The plant, equipped with 56 turbinesand able to generate up to 33 megawatts of electricity, cost NationalPower GBP26 million (about USD41 million). According to HughBabington-Smith, Executive Director of the British Wind EnergyAssociation, 10% of the UK's electricity could be produced by wind by2025. If the Government adopted this goal, 13,000 new jobs could becreated in wind energy production. Currently, about 150,000 people inBritain get their electricity from 31 wind energy plants. "We have 40% ofEurope's total wind resources, but we risk falling behind the rest of theworld in wind energy development", Mr Babington-Smith added. The County ofPowys, a rural area of Wales, will now obtain 40% of its electricity fromfour wind-powered generating plants.Copyright 1996 EUROPE ENERGYBack to Headline List CopyrightEUROPE ENERGY via NewsNetOctober 25, 1996FRENCH PETROLEUM INDUSTRY EXPANDS DURING 1996from EUROPE ENERGY, 25 October 1996, No. 478The French upstream oil industry is expected to see a slight increase inturnover during 1996, to about 49 billion French Francs from 48 billion in1995, according to an annual survey by the French Petroleum Institute(Institut Francais du Petrole - IFP), the Committee on Oil and MarineStudies (Comite d'Etudes Petrolires et Marines - CEPM) and the Groupementdes Entreprises Parapetrolires et paragazires (GEP) published on October22. Next year also looks promising, with three-quarters of the companiessurveyed (accounting for 65% of turnover in the industry) expecting theirbusiness to grow. Service providers were particularly optimistic. Despitestrong international competition, the French oil industry has once againmanaged to play an important role on the world market, according tofigures provided by the IFP, CEPM and GDP. The world oil exploration andproduction market is estimated at between USD110 and 120 billion,including the countries of the former Soviet Union. France claims a 6%market share. In 1995, turnover in the upstream oil industry, at 48billion Francs, was 6% higher than the year before. The increase wasparticularly marked in the offshore sector, which had a 32% rise inactivity, followed by a slight slump in 1996. More than 80% of turnover isgenerated outside the country and climbed from 25 to 40 billion Francsbetween 1990 and 1995. The share of business in the rest of WesternEurope, outside France, is estimated at FF13 billion. The UK, Norway andthe Netherlands are major customers, but Germany and other Europeancountries are also valuable markets. French firms conduct nearlyone-fourth of their foreign business in Africa. However, they are minorplayers in North America and particularly the United States.Copyright 1996 EUROPE ENERGYBack to Headline List CopyrightEUROPE ENERGY via NewsNetOctober 25, 1996BRITISH ENERGY TO SHED 1,460 JOBS OVER THREE YEARSfrom EUROPE ENERGY, 25 October 1996, No. 478BRITISH ENERGY, which owns and operates Britain's eight most modernnuclear power stations has rocked the trade unions by unveiling plans toshed 1,460 jobs over the next three years. The workforce of the companyprivatised in mid-July will be reduced to 4,800. British Energy's ManagingDirector, Robert Hawley, lays claim to a clear and simple strategy toreduce costs and improve efficiency in order to ensure the nuclear energycompany can continue to compete effectively with conventional electricitygeneration. Mr Hawley has reiterated the company's promise to nevercompromise its total commitment to safety, insisting there would be littlepoint in reducing staff numbers if safety standards could not bemaintained. The plan is expected to secure wage cost savings of aboutGBP50 million per year. British Energy will, however, need to offsetrestructuring costs of about GBP100 million, which will be covered byexisting funds and spread over three years.The restructuring at British Energy is part of a general trend of job cutsin the privatised energy sector. By the year 2000, British Energy willhave reduced its 1992 workforce by 40%. POWERGEN and NATIONAL POWER,Britain's leading traditional generators, will have reduced theirworkforces by 71 ands 63% respectively.Copyright 1996 EUROPE ENERGYBack to Headline List CopyrightEUROPE ENERGY via NewsNetOctober 25, 1996FOREIGN INVESTORS FLOCK TO GAZPROMfrom EUROPE ENERGY, 25 October 1996, No. 478GAZPROM will enter international markets at the relatively high price ofUSUSD1.57 a share, with foreign investors queuing up for a share of thejewel of Russian industry. However, analysts are still questioning whetherGazprom, which holds a quarter of global gas reserves, is really a gooddeal or rather an over-weight monster that will always be tarnished by thestigma of the Soviet era. The company has announced profits of USD3.5billion for 1995, but accounts will only be published according tointernational standards from this year, providing a more accuratebarometer of its health.The conglomerate has announced that Gazprom shares will begin trading oninternational stock markets on October 28, at USD15.75 for batches of tenshares. Company Chairman Rem Viakhirev, has indicated that the share issueis heavily over-subscribed despite the fact the price is three timeshigher than on internal stock markets (about USD0.6 a share). Gazprom willissue 23.7 million batches of ten shares -American Deposit Stocks (ADS)-representing a little more than 1% of the company. This initial sale isexpected to raise USD400 million, with Gazprom planing to float a further8% of capital on the international markets. The share price values theconglomerate at USD38.5 billion, a fairly modest sum, given that Gazprom,a giant even by monopoly standards, sells nearly USD8 billion worth ofnatural gas to the West each year. A brochure published by Gazprom at thebeginning of the year, estimated the company's real value at closer toUSD5 a share. Despite being Europe's leading gas exporter, with aworkforce of 230,000 employed in 40 subsidiaries, and 145,000 kilometresof gas pipelines throughout the former USSR, Gazprom nonetheless remains ahigh risk enigma for foreign investors.Copyright 1996 EUROPE ENERGYBack to Headline List CopyrightEUROPE ENERGY via NewsNetOctober 25, 1996ON-SHORE BUSINESS SHAVES 7% OFF NORSK HYDRO PROFITSfrom EUROPE ENERGY, 25 October 1996, No. 478The Norwegian group NORSK HYDRO (oil, gas, chemicals, petrochemicals,fertilizers) has announced a 7% fall in pre-tax profits over the firstnine months of the year, blamed on a decline in "on-shore" activitieswhich higher than anticipated oil prices have been unable to offset. At8.403 billion Norwegian Krone (USD 1.292 billion), profits are NKr 450million short of analysts' forecasts, and compare with a profit of NKr9.023 billion over the corresponding period last year. Norsk Hydroturnover is up 6% from NKr 59.464 billion to 63.121 billion (USD 9.710billion), with operating profits down 9% to NKr 7.899 billion.The company is blaming the fall in profits on a decline in revenue fromon-shore activities. High prices for aluminium and petrochemical productslast year have fallen back this year. In addition, the group has beenforced to tap operating profits to pay higher taxes brought about by anincrease in the proportion of revenue from the oil and gas sectors. NorskHydro Chairman Egil Myklebust claims this varied picture again illustrateshow the company's diverse activities have a balancing effect on ourrevenue. He believes the group's avowed goal of securing an operatingprofit of NKr 10 billion for the year as a whole is still within reach.The oil and gas sector has seen a 96% increase in operating profits to NKr4.291 billion (USD 660.1 million) over the first nine months of the year,thanks to the high price of hydrocarbons and increased production, up 17%to 3.4 million tonnes oil equivalent. The average price of crude oil hasrisen 32% over the third quarter to NKr 136 (USD 20.9) per barrel. In 1995the group posted record pre-tax profits of NKr 11.089 billion (USD1.706billion).Copyright 1996 EUROPE ENERGYBack to Headline List CopyrightEUROPE ENERGY via NewsNetOctober 25, 1996SHELL THREATENS TO PROSECUTE ROMANIA'S CRPfrom EUROPE ENERGY, 25 October 1996, No. 478Anglo-Dutch oil multinational ROYAL DUTCH SHELL is threatening to bringcharges against the state-controlled Romanian oil company CRP, which ithas accused of discriminating against private clients. In an open letterdated October 15 and signed jointly with the Italian oil company AGIP,Shell argues that the creation of CRP this Summer threatens to represent"a step backwards" with "disastrous consequences" for the Romanian oilindustry. If CRP wants to take a step forwards it must respect twofundamental principles: profitability and non-discrimination. Howeverrecent practices have, according to Shell, highlighted flagrant violationsof these principles. The company claims that refineries controlled by CRPtend to discriminate against independent distributors, and in favour ofother clients that have close ties with the company, despite being "badpayers". A CRP spokesman has rejected these accusations, insisting thatShell has enjoyed the same treatment as other clients. Since moving on tothe Romanian market two years ago, the Anglo-Dutch giant has established achain of service stations around Bucharest and plans to extend its networkthroughout the country. Shell warns that if the current situationcontinues, CRP will have to answer in court for the abuse of its dominantmarket position, and indeed violation of the Energy Charter that Romaniasigned. The World Bank, which has granted Romania a USD175 million loan toregenerate the oil sector, recently condemned the creation of the CRP as"contrary to market deregulation".Copyright 1996 EUROPE ENERGYBack to Headline List CopyrightEUROPE ENERGY via NewsNetOctober 25, 1996ELF OFFERS OUTLETS FOR QATARI GASfrom EUROPE ENERGY, 25 October 1996, No. 478The French oil company ELF AQUITAINE has highlighted access to outlets aspart of its bid to participate in liquefied natural gas projects in Qatar.Speaking on October 17, on the sidelines of an international gasconference in Abou Dhabi, Bruno Karcher of Elf's gas division indicatedthat the French oil group believes it can guarantee outlets in Europe forLNG from Qatar, which has the region's second largest gas reserves,estimated at 7,000 billion cubic metres. Mr Karcher indicated that thisoffer has been passed on to the Qatari Government. The state-runconglomerate Qatar General Petroleum Corporation (QGPC) is the majorityshareholder in three LNG export projects, one of which, Qatargas, shouldbe operational by the end of the year. The other two, Rasgas andEnron/QGPC are still at the planning stage. The foreign partners inQatargas are MOBIL (United States), TOTAL (France) and the Japanesecompanies MITSUI and MARUBENI, and outlets have already been secured inJapan for all Qatargas production. Rasgas, in which Mobil has a 30% stake,has thus far placed only a quarter of maximum projected production inSouth Korea. Finally, the American company ENRON and QGPC are expected tofinalise an agreement to build a third gas liquefaction plant later thisyear. Enron plans to market production in Israel, Jordan and India.Copyright 1996 EUROPE ENERGYBack to Headline List CopyrightEUROPE ENERGY via NewsNetOctober 25, 1996GEC ALSTHOM FORMS RUSSIAN MOTOR/GENERATOR VENTUREfrom EUROPE ENERGY, 25 October 1996, No. 478GEC ALSTHOM, a 50-50 joint venture between France's ALCATEL ALSTHOM andBritain's GEC Plc, said it had formed a joint venture with Russianindustrial group PRIVOD to build motors and generators. GEC Alsthom willhold 20 % of the new venture, named PRIVOD ELECTROMECHANICAL, which willmanufacture diesel-driven generators and turbo-generators up to 150megawatts as well as synchronous and asynchronous motors. PrivodElectromechanical will employ 800 people at an industrial site in Lysva inthe Ural Mountains.Copyright 1996 EUROPE ENERGYBack to Headline List CopyrightEUROPE ENERGY via NewsNetOctober 25, 1996INAUGURATION OF THE MAGHREB-EUROPE GAS PIPELINEfrom EUROPE ENERGY, 25 October 1996, No. 478The Maghreb-Europe gas pipeline will be opened at the end of October orthe beginning of November, Algeria's Energy Minister Amar Makhloufiannounced on October 14, indicating that final tests are progressingaccording to plan. Begun in 1994, the pipeline will link Algeria's HassiR'Mel gas field to the Spanish city of Seville, via Morocco and theStraits of Gibraltar. 1,265 km long and with an initial capacity of 8billion m3/year the pipeline will initially supply the Spanish andMoroccan markets, and later Portugal, France and Germany, as capacityincreases to 20 billion m3/year about the year 2000. With the entry intoservice of the Maghreb-Europe pipeline, the second structure linkingAlgeria to Europe, after the Transmed pipeline laid at the beginning ofthe 1980s between Hassi R'Mel and Italy, Algeria expects to double gasexports by the beginning of the next millennium.Copyright 1996 EUROPE ENERGYBack to Headline List CopyrightEUROPE ENERGY via NewsNetOctober 25, 1996GREEN LIGHT FOR ELF NEGOTIATIONS ON NEW DEPOSIT IN AZERBAIJANfrom EUROPE ENERGY, 25 October 1996, No. 478The Azerbaijani President, Gueidar Aliev, has authorised the French oilcompany ELF AQUITAINE to finalise negotiations on becoming the principaloperator of an major exploration zone in the Caspian Sea. Announced onOctober 11, the Presidential green light coincided with the French ForeignMinister Herve de Charette's visit to Baku, on the last stage of athree-day tour of the Caucuses that took him from Armenia to Georgia andfinally to Azerbaijan. ELF is now free to pursue negotiations with theAzerbaijani oil company SOCAR, and draw up a definitive agreement for theexploration and exploitation of the Leninakan offshore field, which maycontain up to 50 million tonnes of oil. The agreement will leave ELFcontrolling the field with a 75% stake in operations.Joel Bouchaud, Elf's Director for the Orient, the CIS and Latin American,explained that the company's objective will now be to finalise anagreement before President Aliev's the official visit to France on January13. Mr Bouchaud indicated that once contracts have been exchanged, Elf maysurrender a part of its stake. In April 1995 ELF missed out on animportant contract for the exploitation of the Chirag-Azeri-Gunshli field,now operated by the Americans. In June, Elf secured a 10% stake in theexploration of the Chahdeniz field controlled jointly by BRITISH PETROLEUMand the Norwegian company STATOIL. Azerbaijani oil reserves are estimatedat about a billion tonnes. 8 million tonnes are currently extractedannually, compared with 40 million tonnes during Azerbaijan's Sovietperiod.Copyright 1996 EUROPE ENERGYBack to Headline List CopyrightEUROPE ENERGY via NewsNetOctober 25, 1996RWE TO RAISE DIVIDENDS FOR 1995/96from EUROPE ENERGY, 25 October 1996, No. 478On October 19, RWE, Germany's leading regional energy utility, announcednet profits of 1.2 billion Deutschemarks for the 1995/96 financial year(July to June) a 10% improvement on the previous year. Turnover has risen2.9% from DM 63.6 billion to 65.4 billion. The group proposes to raise itsshare dividend from DM 1.40 in 1994/95 to DM 1.50. These figures are inline with provisional results published at the beginning of July.RWE's Board has also announced the appointment of Clemens Boersig to thepost of Financial Director from April 1, 1997. 48 years old, Mr Boersig iscurrently a member of the Board of ROBERT BOSH GmbH. Two Directors of RWEsubsidiaries will also join the Board next year: from April 1, ThomasGeitner, presently Chairman of the LAHMEYER AG and RHEINELEKTRA AG Boards,and from June 1, Rudolf Schwan a member of the RWE ENERGIE AG Board.Copyright 1996 EUROPE ENERGYBack to Headline List CopyrightEUROPE ENERGY via NewsNetOctober 25, 1996COAL USE AND OUTPUT IN WESTERN EUROPE STILL FALLINGfrom EUROPE ENERGY, 25 October 1996, No. 478With coal use in Western Europe expected to continue its decline as moreand more energy efficiency and ecological control measures areimplemented, the urgent application of clean coal technologies will beessential in asserting a role for coal in sustainable energy development,the United Nations Economic Commission for Europe (UN/ECE) reported onOctober 10. In a survey of coal developments in Eastern and Western Europein 1995/1996, the ECE says the future of coal will increasingly depend onthe electricity industry as demand from other sectors, such ascoke-making, is forecast to continue declining. Some 85% of the hard coaland virtually all of the brown coal consumed in the ECE region (whichcovers both East and West Europe) was used for heat and electricity in1995, compared with only about 12% of ECE hard coal output used forcoke-making. Coal provides close to 40% of the ECE region's electricity,and after oil and natural gas is the area's most important source ofprimary energy.The UN/ECE notes that the decline of coal production in Europe hasaccelerated since 1990, with hard coal output falling about 30 milliontonnes (or 5%) in 1995, taking it to 19% of global output as compared to25% in 1990. While a temporary stabilisation of output is forecast for1996, further reductions are planned for the 1996-2005 period, especiallyin Germany, France, Poland and Russia. Overall European coal exports havealso declined from some 80 million tonnes in 1990 to 70 million in 1995;Western European exports have virtually ceased.Copyright 1996 EUROPE ENERGYBack to Headline List CopyrightEUROPE ENERGY via NewsNetOctober 25, 1996EU PETROL AND HEATING OIL PRICES UP ON OCTOBER 21from EUROPE ENERGY, 25 October 1996, No. 478All categories of EU fuel and heating oil prices rose between October 7and October 21, according to figures from the European Commission's EnergyDirectorate-General (DGXVII). Continuing a four-week trend, the averageprice of premium-grade petrol rose slightly from ECU 216.92/1,000 litresto ECU 220.61/1,000 litres, Euro-super unleaded premium-grade was up toECU 232.46/1,000 litres from ECU 227.30/1,000 litres, and motor dieseljumped to ECU 251.14/1,000 litres from ECU 238.60/1,000 litres. Heatingoil prices increased to ECU 221.41/1,000 litres from ECU 219.50/1,000litres (and rose as high as ECU 225.58/1,000 litres on October 14), andresidual fuel oil prices were up to ECU 123.99 from ECU 119.83 per 1,000litres on average.Copyright 1996 EUROPE ENERGYBack to Headline List CopyrightEUROPE ENERGY via NewsNetOctober 25, 1996ELECTRICITY: EUROPEAN PRODUCTION BELOW OECD AVERAGE IN JULYfrom EUROPE ENERGY, 25 October 1996, No. 478European electricity production increased by 3.1% in the first sevenmonths of 1996 as compared to the same period last year, while output inthe Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development region as awhole rose 3.6%, the International Energy Agency announced in its monthlyelectricity survey published on October 10. By way of comparison,increases of 4.6% were registered in the United States, 3.3% in Japan,1.7% in Canada and 1.2% in Australia.Electricity output in OECD Europe increased by 1.4% to 187.8 terawatthours in July 1996 compared with twelve months before, and nuclear andthermal electricity production increased by 6.4% (to 60.7 TWh) and 3.7%(to 88.6 TWh) respectively. In contrast, hydro-electric power generationfell, for the second month in a row, by 10.0% to 38.5 TWhUS electricity output declined by 1.3% (to 288.9 TWh), due primarily to adrop in thermal and nuclear power generation of 2.2% (to 199.8 TWh) and1.7% (to 61.0 TWh) respectively and a 6.6% rise in hydro-electricityproduction (to 28.2 TWh).Electricity output in Japan increased by 4.7% following an 8.3% rise innuclear production, a 7.3% rise in thermal electricity output and a dropof 14.2% in hydro -electricity generation.Canada also saw an increase in electricity output; but only of 1.5%,resulting from a rise in hydro-power generation of 10.9% and a fall innuclear and thermal electricity production of 15.6% and 8.0% respectively.Copyright 1996 EUROPE ENERGYBack to Headline List CopyrightEUROPE ENERGY via NewsNetOctober 25, 1996NORWAY EAGER TO SELL GAS TO POLAND.from EUROPE ENERGY, 25 October 1996, No. 478The Norwegian Foreign Minister, Bjorn Tore Godal, has indicated that hisGovernment would support the sale of gas to Poland. Accompanying KingHarald V on an official visit to Warsaw on October 15, Mr Godal'sdeclaration came after a meeting with his Polish counterpart DariuszRosati. The two Ministers nevertheless agreed that the conclusion ofconcrete agreements should be left to specialised companies. Mr Rosaticlaims that Polish companies have long been interested in purchasing gasfrom Norway, as Russian gas supplies will be insufficient to cover demand.Moreover, the Minister is aware that Poland would do well to diversify itssupply sources, in order to guarantee energy security. At the end ofSeptember, Poland signed an important contract with Russia covering thesupply of 250 billion m3 of Siberian gas over 25 years. The first threebillion m3 should reach Poland in 1997, with supplies rising to 14 billionm3 per year by 2010.Copyright 1996 EUROPE ENERGYBack to Headline List CopyrightEUROPE ENERGY via NewsNetOctober 25, 1996TAXATION/EXCISE DUTIES: COMMISSION SOON TO PROPOSE TAXES ON ALL ENERGYSOURCESfrom EUROPE ENERGY, 25 October 1996, No. 478The European Commission is expected to come up with a proposal before theend of November for an increase in minimum excise duty rates on mineraloils and the inclusion of other energy sources - electricity, natural gas,coal and perhaps even biofuels - in the excise duty system. If theproposal is approved by the full team of Commissioners and the Council ofFinance Ministers (which could be more difficult), excise duties onmineral oils would gradually be increased, particularly in those MemberStates that currently have the lowest taxes. With the proposed energy/CO2tax stalled for the past four years, the Commission's main goal is now towin acceptance for the principle of some kind of tax, no matter how small,on all energy sources. The proposal, which puts more emphasis on theprinciple than actual tax rates, has already created "very serioustensions" within the Commission, according to well-placed sources.Since January 1, 1993, the Member States have been required to set exciseduties rates on mineral oils above a Community minimum rate (expressed inECU) for each product and its particular use (heating oil, lead-freepetrol, etc.) under Directive 92/82/EEC governing excise duties on mineraloils. The same excise duty system covers tobacco and alcoholic drinks too(although the Commission does not intend to modify the rates for theseproducts at the moment). A closer convergence of duty rates among theMember States within the Single Market to prevent distortions ofcompetition was one of the Commission's and the Member States' objectivesin adopting this system. Some current minimum rates are listed below.* Heavy fuel oil: ECU 13 per 1,000 kg* liquefied petroleum gas and methane for industrial use: ECU 36/1,000 kg* leaded petrol: ECU 337 /1,000 litres* lead-free petrol: ECU 287/1,000 litresCommission sources say that minimum rates should now be increased, notonly to keep pace with inflation, but also as a first step towards acloser approximation of rates (setting a minimum rate tends to beineffective, since market forces push rates downward, according toexperts). This approximation of rates would discourage cross-bordershopping and would incorporate environmental concerns into policies inother areas, now that the specific proposal for an energy/CO2 tax hasfoundered. New rates should be high enough to create an incentive, but notso high as to ruin the proposal's chances of adoption by theCommissioners, informed sources explain. To soften the psychological andpractical impact of these measures, the increase would be gradual.Commission experts speak of raising rates by about 30% over five to tenyears, but this is only theoretical. Several Directorate-Generals - DG III(Industry), DG XXI (Taxation), DG XI (Environment), DG XV (InternalMarket) and DG XVII (Energy) must still consult among themselves.Most of the Member States apply taxes at levels well above Communityminimum rates. But others (Portugal, Greece, Ireland and Luxembourg)impose rates on certain products (some types of mineral oils) that areequivalent to or only slightly higher than the minimum. These MemberStates would eventually be required to raise their minimum rates to complywith the new European minima (and for this reason are likely to oppose theproposal in Council). The rise would also concern those States whose ratesare already well above the minimum rates. "This increase would give MemberStates with high excise duty rates more room to manoeuvre, making exciseduties higher everywhere", says an expert on this issue, also bringing upthe concept of shifting taxes on labour to other bases, preferably with apositive impact in terms of environmental protection.These are exactly the arguments that have spurred the Commission tobroaden the scope of application of the Directive on excise duties toinclude other energy sources such as coal, natural gas and electricity.The Commission's first concern seems to be winning acceptance for theprinciple of taxation of these products, regardless of the rate, as afirst step towards compensating for the failure of the energy/CO2 taxproposal. As mentioned earlier, even biofuels could be include in thisproposal, which would thus supersede Directive 92/81/EEC on the structureof excise duties on mineral oils, that on excise duty rates (92/82/EEC)and the draft Directive on excise duty reductions for biofuels (still heldup in the Council).Copyright 1996 EUROPE ENERGYBack to Headline List CopyrightEUROPE ENERGY via NewsNetOctober 25, 1996AUSTRALIA LIFTS EMBARGO ON URANIUM SHIPMENTS TO FRANCEfrom EUROPE ENERGY, 25 October 1996, No. 478The Australian Government announced on October 21 that it would lift theembargo on new deliveries of uranium imposed in 1988 in protest of Frenchnuclear tests in the Pacific. This decision came in response to France'ssigning of the Nuclear Test Ban Treaty, the Australian Minster of ForeignAffairs and Trade, Tim Fischer. The embargo covered new uranium contracts,but not those signed before it took effect. Mr Fischer emphasised thatFrance's accession to the Treaty marked the fulfilment of promises it madeon January 29 to stop all nuclear testing. Australia's uranium exportpolicy prohibits sales of uranium for other than peaceful uses.During the crisis sparked last year by French nuclear tests on MururoaAtoll, Australia's Labour Government refused to impose a total embargo onshipments of uranium to France, explaining that such a measure would costAustralia more than France. The decision to lift the embargo wasimmediately condemned by environmentalists, who claimed that France hadnot promised not to use Australian uranium for military purposes. "Thefact that the Australian Government seems ready to do anything to sellAustralian uranium is unfortunate", said Jim Downey, head of an Australianconservation association, adding that France had not yet proved its goodfaith on nuclear issues.Australia originally imposed an embargo in 1983, lifted it in 1986 andreapplied it in 1988. According to the Australian Uranium InformationCentre, Australia currently has orders for AUSD11 million (eight millionUS Dollars) worth of non-enriched uranium, representing only 3% ofFrance's needs, but accounting for about 10% of Australia's exports.Uranium Miner Energy Resources of Australia Ltd (ERA) sells 272 tonnes ofconcentrated uranium oxide to France each year, at AUSD40,000(USUSD30,400) per tonne, under a long-term contract with Electricite deFrance (EDF). ERA's Director, Phillip Shirvington, indicated that the doorwas now open for new exports, but that extensive negotiations were stillrequired. "This decision allows us to extend our contract with EDF whenthe current one expires in the next century and to sign other contracts",Mr Shirvington added.Copyright 1996 EUROPE ENERGYBack to Headline List CopyrightEUROPE ENERGY via NewsNetOctober 25, 1996EUROPEAN COMMISSION: ENERGY SECTOR PLANS UNDER 1997 WORK PROGRAMMEfrom EUROPE ENERGY, 25 October 1996, No. 478"1997 will be a watershed year marked by three major events: theInter-Governmental Conference, Economic and Monetary Union, the financialpackage for post-1999 and enlargement", Jacques Santer told the EuropeanParliament, meeting in plenary in Strasbourg on October 22. The Presidentof the European Commission was presenting his institution's work programmefor 1997, along with a report on the implementation of the 1996 programme.While the Commission's main priorities as the turn of the century nearsare growth and employment, development of a European model of society andcloser relations with third countries, actions are also foreseen in theenergy and environment fields. Mr Santer's presentation did not sway theParliament, however, which gave the programme a critical reception andaccused the Commission of legislative inertia.Among the measures proposed specifically for the energy sector are aproposal on the promotion of clean coal technology (CARNOT) andcommunications on a renewable energy strategy, a cogeneration promotionstrategy, on the role of energy management in regions, cities and onislands, on the part played by technology and strategy for energy RTD, andon the harmonisation of nuclear transport conditions. The Commission alsoplans to engage in negotiations on radioactive waste and Euratom accessionand revise legislation on compulsory oil stocks and on the pricetransparency of crude oil and oil products. (See the list of plannedCommission actions below.)I>"The Single Market has taken shape but it remains incomplete", theCommission notes in its Work Programme. It therefore plans to work rightthroughout 1997 to win the Council's agreement on several pending piecesof legislation, including that on opening up the internal market fornatural gas. The Commission will put more pressure on the Member States tospeed up their transposition of Directives needed for the properfunctioning of the Internal Market. Rules on state aid will be assessed interms of their impact on employment. The Commission will also continue itsefforts to simplify legislation.The Commission plans to propose measures to make companies better able tocompete, particularly in high-tech sectors; defend its Fifth FrameworkProgramme for Research and Technological Development; and take initiativesto stimulate innovation at the conclusion of the process of consultationon the Green Paper it unveiled this year.As concerns the environment, apart from the revision of the Fifth ActionProgramme - Towards Sustainable Development, the Commission wants to be a"driving force" in preparations for the Conference to be held in 1997 as afollow-up to the Earth Summit in Rio in 1992.List of planned Commission actions in the energy, environmental protectionand research and development areas in 1997:ENERGY- Communication on a "renewable energy strategy"- Proposal on the promotion of clean coal technology (CARNOT)- Communication on a strategy for the promotion of co-generation- Communication on the role of energy management in regions, cities and onthe islands- Communication on the part played by technology and strategy for energyRTD- Communication on harmonisation of conditions for nuclear transport- Revision of legislation on compulsory oil stocks and revision oflegislation concerning price transparency of crude oil and oil products- Revision of Regulations N degrees 1 and n degrees 4 (Euratom) on notification ofinvestment projects- European Energy Charter: implementation and negotiating second phaseENVIRONMENT- Communication on environmental businesses and industry, job creation andgreening of industry- Negotiation of Convention on radioactive waste and Euratom accession- Approximation of environmental and radiation protection legislation inthe Central and Eastern European Countries- Implementing the IAEA's reinforced non-proliferation programme- Revision of Directive on control of shipments of radioactive waste- Revision of Directive on large combustion plants- Revision of Regulation on ozone-depleting substances- Directives on air quality (SO2, NOX, lead)- Heavy goods vehicle emissionsR&TD- Scientific and Technical Cooperation Agreements with third countries- Multilateral agreement on construction of the ITER fusion reactor- Euratom/US bilateral Agreement on controlled thermonuclear fusionCopyright 1996 EUROPE ENERGYBack to Headline List CopyrightEUROPE ENERGY via NewsNetOctober 25, 1996CEDEC CRITICISES ELECTRICITY DIRECTIVE COMMON POSITIONfrom EUROPE ENERGY, 25 October 1996, No. 478The EU Council of Ministers' June 20 common position on the internalelectricity market Directive cannot be defended from an economic, socialor legal point of view, and it compromises the rights and interests ofdistribution companies, the European Confederation of Public CommunalEnergy Distributors (CEDEC) says. "The existing version of the Directiveleads to a division of the single electricity market in two: on the onehand, a privileged group of 'eligible clients' that can freely choosetheir supplier in Europe and negotiate their prices, and on the otherhand, clients that will remain tied to their current distributor and uponwhom prices will be imposed as in the past", CEDEC argues in its Octobernewsletter."In fact, it would be economically and socially inadmissible that theadvantages of liberalised electricity production and sales on Europeanmarkets benefit only large industrial consumers of electricity", whilesmall consumers are excluded from the advantages that increasedcompetition will bring, CEDEC continues. CEDEC groups national communalenergy distribution associations in Belgium, Germany, France, Italy andAustria.Copyright 1996 EUROPE ENERGYBack to Headline List CopyrightEUROPE ENERGY via NewsNetOctober 25, 1996EU/VENEZUELA: EUROPEAN BUSINESSES ENCOURAGED TO INVESTfrom EUROPE ENERGY, 25 October 1996, No. 478Venezuela is reforming its economy and European companies are welcome toinvest in several industries, including those in the energy sector. Thisis the message the country is sending out through a series of seminars on"Doing Business in Venezuela" being held this month in Amsterdam,Brussels, Madrid, Milan and Padova as part of an effort to diversifysources of investment and enhance the country's access to new markets."Venezuela is the best kept secret in Latin America", Luis XavierGrisanti, Ambassador to the EU, Belgium and Luxembourg told Europe Energyon October 16. But with opportunities for foreign investors abounding andseminars like the one in Brussels on October 14 attracting 115participants from the financial, industrial and international servicessectors, the secret may not remain concealed for long.The Ambassador said that potential investors are being attracted primarilyby the country's extensive privatisation programme and other open marketreforms such as the abolition of exchange and price controls - includingpetrol and electricity price rises - liberalisation of interest rates andthe reduction of the fiscal deficit. These are being implemented as partof a global macro-economic stabilisation programme, called "AgendaVenezuela," that aims to help the country get fully back on its feet aftera serious financial crisis in 1994.A long list of assets and companies up for privatisation by early 1997includes several electric power systems, including the Nueva Esparta StatePower System, Energia Electrica de Barquisimeto (Enelbar) in the state ofLara and the Enelven-Enelco power system in the state of Zulia. The gas,petrochemical, coal and oil sectors are also being opened to foreigninvestment; a first round of tenders for "share-risk contracts" in newareas of oil exploration has already taken place, and bidding foroperational contracts for marginal wells is to be held in 1997. WithUSD1.3 billion spent in 1994 on purchasing materials and equipment for theoil industry, opportunities for companies providing goods and servicesalso exist.The seminars, in which high-level officials such as Venezuela's PlanningMinister Teodoro Petkoff, Deputy Minister of Energy and Mines EvananRomero and Bank Deposit Guarantee Fund President Esther de Margulis haveparticipated, are being sponsored by the Government of Venezuela, theEuropean Commission and the National Council for Investment Promotion(CONAPRI). A series of similar meetings is taking place in the UnitedStates.Copyright 1996 EUROPE ENERGYBack to Headline List CopyrightEUROPE ENERGY via NewsNetOctober 25, 1996COMPETITION: VAN MIERT CONSIDERS FUTURE OF OIL SALES COMPETITIONEXEMPTIONSfrom EUROPE ENERGY, 25 October 1996, No. 478The European Commissioner for Competition, Karel Van Miert, is consideringa proposal for a two-year extension of rules - which are due to expire atthe end of 1997 - that exempt exclusive supply and distribution agreementsin the oil and beer sectors from European Union competition rules underArticle 85.3 of the EU Treaty. The Commission said on October 16 that theproposal was to avoid a "legal vacuum" that could occur if the existing"block exemptions" from EU competition rules were to expire beforeconsultations on the Commission's Green Paper on the long-term future ofexclusive supply and distribution agreements, due to be published by early1997, were concluded. The Green Paper, also known as the verticalrestraints paper, is already a year overdue.The Regulations at stake cover tens of thousands of agreements by which asupplier, on the one hand, appoints a reseller as his exclusivedistributor in a given area (Regulation 1983/83), and on the other hand, areseller agrees to buy all his products from one supplier only (Regulation1984/83). These exemptions from normal EU competition rules currentlyallow oil companies to make exclusive supply agreements with petrolstations.The Green Paper is expected to call for the review of agreements withinthe oil, beer and perfume sectors and also to address the issue offranchising, covered by a separate block exemption which expires at theend of 1999. One solution which could be put forward in the Green Paperwould be to carry on with sectoral block exemptions. Another would be tobase exemptions on the market share of the company operating therestrictive agreements. In the meantime, when Mr Van Miert makes a formalproposal for the extension of the rules, his decision must be approved bythe full team of Commissioners.The European oil industry, represented by Europia, is especially concernedthat if the block exemptions were rescinded, petrol distributors which nowbenefit from acceptable exclusive purchasing or supply agreements couldsuffer in a climate of increased uncertainty. In informal talks with theCommission's Directorate-General responsible for Competition on thepreparation of the Green Paper, the industry has already indicated thatwhile it would like the legal certainty provided by Regulation 1984/83 tocontinue, the regime could be improved. Europia suggested that the newregime should allow a duration of 10 years or more for the exclusivepurchasing agreement, which would lead to adequate return on capitalemployed, and the inclusion within the exclusive purchasing regime oflubricants, company fuel card schemes and all-convenience store goods.Copyright 1996 EUROPE ENERGYBack to Headline List CopyrightEUROPE ENERGY via NewsNetOctober 25, 1996EUROPEAN COMMISSION TO CREATE ENERGY ADVISORY COMMITTEEfrom EUROPE ENERGY, 25 October 1996, No. 478The European Commission is likely to adopt by early November a Decision tocreate an Energy Advisory Committee, as called for in its December 1995Energy Policy White Paper, as part of an effort to establish an informalbut institutionalised dialogue with the energy sector and ensure itssupport when new areas of action in the energy field are chosen. ThisCommittee will be expected to assist in identifying energy policy areaswhere Commission action is deemed to be necessary, provide advice on themeans needed to implement Commission proposals and give opinions on theseproposals before they are finalised.The Committee is to be composed of 31 representatives of energy producers,distributors, consumers, unions, and associations dealing with theprotection of the environment. During the preparation of the White Paper,all these interested parties had indicated to the Commission the prioritythey place on dialogue and transparency in the formulation of EU energypolicy.Copyright 1996 EUROPE ENERGYBack to Headline List CopyrightEUROPE ENERGY via NewsNetOctober 25, 1996COGENERATION: NEW POLITICAL SUPPORT EXPRESSED AT CONFERENCEfrom EUROPE ENERGY, 25 October 1996, No. 478In a special report on the recent conference on Prospects and challengesfor Europe's cogeneration markets, freelance journalist Steve Hodgson,writing for Cogen Europe, looks at how a new political momentum isbuilding toward a new cogeneration strategy, what elements Cogen Europethinks this strategy should contain, and what cogeneration's prospects arein a liberalised electricity market.Prospects for an EU cogeneration strategy have received a major boost fromPeter Scholten of the Dutch Ministry of Economic Affairs. Speaking atCogen Europe's annual conference in Brussels on October 10-11 (see lastissue of Europe Energy), Mr Scholten announced that the proposed strategywill be on the agenda for the May 1997 Energy Council under theforthcoming Dutch EU Council Presidency if the Communication from theCommission on the subject is presented in time.Earlier during the conference, Joanna Tachmintzis, a member of EnergyCommissioner Christos Papoutsis' Cabinet, said that Europe's cogenerationindustry is entering "a new phase in its development," and that newcogeneration capacity will be an essential element of efforts to curbEurope's CO2 emissions in the coming years.She added that the prospects for cogeneration will boosted by both theproposed internal electricity market Directive and by the Communication oncogeneration from the Commission, which is due to be published early in1997. This strategy will be framed to take account of both EUenvironmental and energy policy objectives and could, said Ms Tachmintzis,include an EU target for cogeneration, something for which Cogen Europehas long been calling.As well as setting a European target for cogeneration, Cogen Europebelieves that the strategy should also:*provide ongoing monitoring of market barriers to cogeneration in eachcountry,*prioritise cogeneration's position within the EU's carbon reductionprogrammes, and*establish cogeneration support programmes for central and eastern Europe.Another major conclusion from the conference was that the liberalisationof electricity markets currently taking place in Europe will aid thedevelopment of decentralised cogeneration plant but may harm prospects forexisting city-wide cogeneration/district heating systems. Many nationalelectricity markets are already moving towards more competitive andtransparent structures, a trend which helps cogeneration and which CogenEurope supports.The amount of cogeneration used in each country is a function of itshistory, climate and level of industrialisation, but also of theprevailing legal/regulatory/market framework. While only some 7% ofEurope's electricity is generated by cogeneration, three countries - theNetherlands, Denmark and Finland - generate more than 30% in this way.Cogen Europe suggests that a 30% share could be achieved across thecontinent by 2010, providing ECU 140 billion of investment opportunities,new jobs and massive CO2 cuts.Announcing the preliminary results of a major Cogen Europe study at theconference, UK and Danish consultants Ilex and Ramboll said thatliberalisation helps cogeneration in industry, buildings and small-scaledistrict heating schemes by allowing energy users to self-generate theirown power and by removing a number of market barriers. City-wide systemsmay need protection in a more competitive environment.Equally importantly, liberalisation promotes more progressive utilitythinking as well as structures, said Ilex/Ramboll, and increases customerchoice. Thus the UK energy markets, perhaps the most liberalised in theEU, have helped cogeneration grow by 50% since the electricity industrywas first privatised in 1990.Cogen Europe believes that, to be helpful to cogeneration, nationalframeworks should include greater competition in electricity generation,more open access to the transmission system and a service-orienteddistribution system. If these measures were accompanied by moves toreflect environmental costs in energy prices, this would help cogenerationbegin to meet its enormous potential in Europe, both East and West.Over 230 delegates attended the conference to learn about the latest movesfrom Brussels and to hear presentations on the prospects for cogenerationwithin 13 countries, among them 10 EU Member States, Hungary, Poland andthe Czech Republic. Cogen Europe was able to report that it now has 117members, including a network of 11 national promotional organisations.Copyright 1996 EUROPE ENERGYBack to Headline List WT02-B35-14IA086-000616-B010-300http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/ey94.html 205.156.212.5 19970121235538 text/html 101400HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Tuesday, 21-Jan-97 23:53:27 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:40:40 GMTContent-length: 101214Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ey94.html Sample Issue Copyright EUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNet January 5, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES GADONNEIX TO PRESIDE OVER GDF AFTER FRENCH TOP JOBS RESHUFFLE (409 words) ITALY UNVEILS PLAN FOR ENEL SALE AND LIMITED DEREGULATION (551 words) COMMISSION HOPEFUL ON POWER (306 words) CO2 TAX SCHEDULE IN JEOPARDY (233 words) NESTE SELLS SOVEREIGN INTEREST TO UK REC NORTHERN ELECTRIC (198 words) STATOIL PLANS 1996 OUTPUT BOOST (279 words) STATOIL REPORTS MAJOR FIND (167 words) RECORD OUTPUT PREDICTION (183 words) SPAIN PLANS $200M REFINERY PIPELINE LINK BY 1997 (218 words) CEPSA SET TO BEAT SALES RECORD (145 words) ESSO SAYS IT WILL STOP LEADED PETROL MARKETING THIS YEAR (695 words) IPIC IN OMV SHAREHOLDER SPAT (224 words) HELSINKI TRIGGERS PROTESTS WITH REMOVAL OF PRICE SUBSIDY (265 words) TRANSGAS CANDIDATES MULTIPLY (93 words) COMPLAINTS OVER 'HIGH' PRICES (203 words) EVN SUCCESS IN HUNGARY (178 words) DRAFT DOMESTIC LICENCE DETAILS (133 words) GERMAN IMPORTERS PREDICT 10% SLUMP IN 1996 SALES (148 words) CDF STRIKE SETTLED QUICKLY (164 words) RWE VOWS TO FIGHT ON TO BRING MUELHEIM-KAERLICH BACK ON LINE (314 words) REACTOR SABOTAGED BY SALT (139 words) NORDIC MARKET BEGINS TRADING (362 words) DISTRIBUTION CONTRACTS DISPUTED (298 words) GEC, CEGELEC BUY AEG ASSETS (216 words) EVS/BADENWERK HYDRO TAKEOVER (259 words) HUNGARIAN POWER STAMPEDE (194 words) RAINS BREAK HYDRO DECLINE (615 words) MADRID IMPOSES TARIFF SQUEEZE (502 words) ENDESA'S LATIN AMERICA SPREE (235 words) NO NEW CAPACITY BEFORE 2000 (133 words) PORVOO REFINERY POWER PLAN (104 words) POWERGEN'S REFINERY CHP DEAL (132 words) OFFER AMENDS REC LICENCES (110 words) STEEL AUTOPRODUCER BUYOUT (203 words) HEALTHY YEAR FOR VERBUND (147 words) TARIFF RULING TO STAY IN PLACE (352 words) SWITZERLAND ORDERS REDUCTION IN CAR FUEL CONSUMPTION (294 words) GAS-DRIVEN BUS TRIAL IN BRISTOL (149 words) PUBLICATIONS REVIEW LITTLE CHANGE IN GERMAN INPUTS SEEN BUT CO2 PLANS QUERIED (568 words) SPECIAL REPORT - SPANISH GAS (1490 words) SWEDISH ENERGY COMMISSION REPORT ON NUCLEAR PHASE-OUT (1281 words) NEWS FORMER EDF HEAD AVOIDS OIL JOB (124 words) INCIDENT ON AMOCO GAS RIG (68 words) BAVARIAN/CZECH OIL LINK ON LINE (90 words) OMV EYES ADRIATIC RETAIL EXPANSION (122 words) GERMAN INTEREST IN KAZAKH OIL FIELD (56 words) RWE-DEA DETAILS INVESTMENT PLANS (73 words) WINTER WEATHER EXPOSES BG TO CRITICS (139 words) SNAM GAS SALES ON THE UP (59 words) EDP UNVEILS PRICE CUT PROGRAMME (82 words) EAST MIDLANDS OFFER CUSTOMERS REBATE (55 words) GERMAN MINI-CHP INTEREST BOOMS (91 words) DENMARK'S 3Q GAS DEMAND UP 9% (73 words) CopyrightEUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996GADONNEIX TO PRESIDE OVER GDF AFTER FRENCH TOP JOBS RESHUFFLEPierre Gadonneix has been appointed president of Gaz de France (GdF)following the sudden move of his predecessor, Loik le Floch-Prigent, totake over running the state railway company, SNCF. Employees of thelatter provided the backbone to the recent wave of strikes in France(EER 449/15): le Floch-Prigent was chosen by Paris because he managesto combine socialist politics with managerial competence.Gadonneix, who was appointed the general manager of GdF in July 1987,had already been passed over for the top job twice. In 1988, whenJacques Fournier left, it went to Francis Gutmann. In 1993, Gadonneixsaw le Floch-Prigent appointed over his head.It remains to be seen how far Gadonneix will pursue theinternationalist and market-oriented policies of his predecessor. Hemust renegotiate the company's charter with the government, whichdefines its activities. In its home market, GdF faces challenges fromboth electricity and fuel oil, and could also face an assault on itsmonopoly of gas distribution.Internationally, Gadonneix must manage those GdF assets alreadyacquired in Canada, Uruguay, and the US. Eventually, he will also haveto face pressure from Brussels to deregulate, even if the EuropeanCommission has concentrated on electricity in the first instance.In a spell at the industry ministry, Gadonneix worked with liberallyinclined ministers such as Michel d'Ornano, Rene Monory, and AlainMadelin. But he will face fierce opposition from the country's tradeunions to any liberalisation. The unions had already designated 4January as the next day of action to defend French-style publicservice.In fact, le Floch-Prigent's plans to exchange shareholdings with theRussian gas company Gazprom were always likely to cause problems if hehad got anywhere near putting them into practice. The fact that cur-rent industry minister Franck Borotra favours selling minority stakesto Elf or Norway's Statoil, or to individuals, will do Gadonneix nofavours.The appointment of Gadonneix contrasts with the recent politicallymotivated parachutage of Edmond Alphandery (EER 449/2) at the head ofElectricite de France (EdF). But like Alphandery, Gadonneix will takepart in nominating his deputy, thereby strengthening his authority,though there was no awkwardness between Gadonneix and his formerpresident, as there was under the 'ancien regime' at EdF.Among the names being mentioned for the general manager's post are thecurrent deputy general manager Jean Balazuc, as well as the director ofthe industry ministry's energy department, Claude Mandil.Back to Headline List CopyrightEUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996ITALY UNVEILS PLAN FOR ENEL SALE AND LIMITED DEREGULATIONWith shares in hydrocarbons conglomerate ENI now trading oninternational stock exchanges (EER 488/7), Italy has begun to firm upplans to divest state power utility Enel.The Enel sell-off will not, however, take place as rapidly as some,including budget minister Rainer Masera, had hoped for. Instead,premier Lamberto Dini opted for the more cautious approach favoured byindustry minister Alberto Clo: the privatisation will take place overthe next two to three years and will be accompanied by power sectorreforms.There may be further changes in the Enel sell-off arrangements, notleast due to the uncertain governmental situation, with Dini having -as promised - submitted his resignation at the start of the year onlyfor it to be rejected by Italy's president Oscar Luigi Scalfaro.In the meantime, the administration said the government stake in Enelcould be lowered to less than 51%, even though this was the levelsuggested by parliament.In his losing arguments, budget minister Masera had pushed for speedierand more comprehensive privatisation, saying that the government neededto send "strong and clear-cut signals" to potential investors and thatEnel's fragmented sale would be "a grave error".The government outlined a plan for a three-phase privatisation. Thefirst stage calls for the sale of a certain amount of Enel shares - thefigure of 30% has been mentioned - within the first few months of 1996,coupled with changes in Enel's accounting and management, includingproduction, distribution and transport.The second phase will involve the flotation of a second tranche and anew government policy on electricity. The third part of the processwill see the sale of the last segment of shares to be sold, with thestate losing overall control but hanging on to a substantial interest.Despite its privatisation, however, there seems little doubt that Enelwill continue to be the dominant force in Italian electricity, even ifin private hands. After the necessary go-ahead from the government'santi-trust authority, which is now studying the Enel case, the utilitywill retain certain exclusive rights, particularly in distribution.Despite the proposed liberalisation, the government reaffirmed theprinciple of the "single rate" and, among other guidelines, the"universality of electric services".As for production, this will be open to competition only for additionalenergy supplies deemed necessary, including from abroad "on the basisof reciprocity" and within EU regulations. Other producers can eithersell their energy to Enel or negotiate directly with "qualifiedconsumers", meaning large agencies or concerns.Nationwide, Enel will be designated the 'single buyer' responsible fordistributing electricity from producers to distributors and users. Highvoltage transmission will also be handled by Enel to some 70 municipalutility companies.Enel described such stipulations as "important because, whilesubstantially maintaining the unity of Enel, they open the market tocompetition in harmony with EU regulations."But the plan drew mixed reactions from observers. Some lauded thecautious sell-off approach and the accompanying reforms, while otherssaid the scheme did not go far enough and fell some way short of fullliberalisation. The municipal utilities of the larger cities,accounting for about 7% of electricity consumed in Italy, wereparticularly critical. Enel accounts for about 79% of power used.Back to Headline List CopyrightEUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996COMMISSION HOPEFUL ON POWERThe European Commission is still hoping to reconcile member states to asingle agreed text for deregulating the electricity market.Competition Commissioner Karel van Miert recently told a conferenceorganised by the Les Echos newspaper in Paris that the Commission couldwait to see whether a consensus was possible in the New Year.Elsewhere, Energy Commissioner Christos Papoutsis insisted that therewas no blockage, and that all contentious questions would be resolved.When member states' industry ministers held their delayed Councilmeeting on 20 December, they unsurprisingly failed to agree, butpromised to restart negotiations in the New Year. Furthermore, theCommission pointedly failed to invoke Article 90-3 of the Treaty ofRome, which allows it to impose directives.The Spanish energy minister, who presided over the meeting, said thatall the difficulties were surmountable, and that all of the conditionswere in place to reach agreement in the coming months.The Commissioners appeared to be taking the view that it was thestrikes and demonstrations in France that were impeding agreement,since the French government needed to prove that it was serious aboutdefending 'public service'.One possible structure of a compromise could be to designate powerdistributors among those consumers allowed to choose where they boughttheir electricity. This should provide a measure of freedom for thesupporters of liberalisation, led by Germany but including the UK andthe Nordic countries, while allowing France enough leeway to leaveElectricite de France largely in control of its electricitydistribution.French industry minister Franck Borotra reiterated his claim thatFrance was happy to let large industrial consumers benefit fromcompetition, provided that it could continue to organise its marketaround the idea of public service, which meant security and continuityof supplies, along with equal prices and equal access.Back to Headline List CopyrightEUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996CO2 TAX SCHEDULE IN JEOPARDYThe resignation of Austria's finance minister Andreas Staribacher on 2January will likely postpone introduction of the country's proposedenergy/CO2 tax on gas, coal and electricity. The tax had been intendedas a companion measure to the levy on mineral oils and fuels which wentinto effect last May (EER 431/8).Staribacher had been under considerable pressure to impose the extendedtax as part of a programme to resolve an unbearably large budgetdeficit projected for this year. State industry minister Viktor Klimahas now been named as his successor.The energy tax concept was originally proposed to reduce CO2 emissionsin line with Toronto targets; when it became clear that the Torontogoals would not be met, the tax as applied to petroleum reverted to ageneral income source.Arguments have been flying back and forth over the amount of the tax tobe applied to gas and electricity (EER 444/9), one factor which hasdelayed extension of the levy to energy sources beyond petroleum.In addition to Staribacher's resignation, federal chancellor FranzVranitzky is faced with the challenge of forming a new governmentfollowing elections last month. That factor, plus the ministerialchange, as well as renewed debate over the size of the tax and itsutilisation - restricted or general - will probably postpone anypossible introduction of the levy until after mid-year at the earliest.Back to Headline List CopyrightEUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996NESTE SELLS SOVEREIGN INTEREST TO UK REC NORTHERN ELECTRICNeste Corporation, the state-owned Finnish oil and gas company, hassigned a letter of intent to sell its 50.5% stake in SovereignExploration to Northgas, a subsidiary of the UK regional powerdistributor Northern Electric, Neste confirmed.In February 1994, Neste and Northern Electric formed an upstream gascompany based on Neste's Southern Gas Basin interests and including theVictor Gas field. As well as Victor, Sovereign Exploration also holdsinterests in the Schooner field, which is scheduled to start productionat the end of 1996.The sale of Sovereign Exploration marks Neste's latest phase indivesting non-essential oil production and exploration holdings. Thecompany had earlier sold its UK oil assets to Sweden's Sands Petroleumin a deal worth FM899m ($207m), as well as its oil and gas explorationinterests in the US.Instead, Neste intends to re-focus on its upstream activities on theNorwegian continental shelf, according to Neste's E&P planning manager,Jyrki Haapio."We will also concentrate on upstream activities in the Middle East andRussia," said Haapio. "This re-focusing of operations will result inNeste moving its international business unit, responsible for ourMiddle East operations, from London to Dubai."Back to Headline List CopyrightEUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996STATOIL PLANS 1996 OUTPUT BOOSTNorwegian state-owned oil company Statoil expects to produce anestimated 480mbbl of oil in 1996, the company's in-house magazineWeekly Status said. Statoil produced 448mbbl in 1995, down from 460mbblin 1994.This year's expected increase was attributed to the Heidrun and Ymefields. Heidrun is now pumping at capacity and Yme will beginproduction in a few weeks, the magazine said. Heidrun produced218,491bbl on 1 January, thus achieving the goal of 200,000bbl/d atyear-end by a wide margin, Statoil added.But the publication said an increase in production at Statfjordsatellites and the start of output at Heidrun in 1995 was not enough tooffset a considerable decrease at the old, giant Statfjord and Gullfaksfields. It said production at Statfjord and Gullfaks would continue tofall in 1996.Norway, which pumped more than 3mbbl/d in November, is second only toSaudi Arabia in the world's league of oil exporters.* Norwegian oil and natural gas liquids (NGL) production hit a newrecord in November, according to analysts Wood Mackenzie. Outputaveraged 3.19mbbl/d, 1,000bbl/d higher than the average level producedin October, Wood Mackenzie said."Output from Heidrun continued to come onstream averaging 87,000bbl/dfor the month and production from Troll oil increased to 187,000bbl/d,"said Wood Mackenzie in its December report on North West Europe. Butproduction from the Snorre, Gullfaks and Statfjord fields, loadedoffshore, fell slightly.Danish oil and NGL production, meanwhile, fell by 4% to 182,000bbl/d inNovember due to lower output from the Gorm and Skjold fields, said WoodMackenzie. Dutch oil and NGL output rose to 45,000bbl/d duringNovember, up almost 10% from October's 41,000bbl/d.Back to Headline List CopyrightEUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996STATOIL REPORTS MAJOR FINDNorwegian oil company Statoil appears to have made the biggest oilstrike in the Danish North Sea sector since the Skjold field wasdiscovered in 1977.Preliminary reports indicate that the Siri-1 field, which lies only 6kmfrom the border with the Norwegian sector, contains as much as 150mbblof oil - sufficient to meet Denmark's oil requirements for three years.The find is worth an estimated DKr15bn ($2.7bn).Statoil reckons production at Siri-1 can start as early as 1998 becausethe oil is in comparatively easily accessible strata. The find was made2,200 metres underground in an area where the sea depth is 60 metres.Denmark's energy minister Svend Auken expressed satisfaction that thefind was made so quickly after the recent granting of new explorationrights in the fourth Danish round of concessions.The interests in the fourth round licence in which the find was made(6/95) are as follows: Statoil (operator) 50%, Enterprise Oil 20%, Dong20% and Denerco 10%.Back to Headline List CopyrightEUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996RECORD OUTPUT PREDICTIONUK North Sea oil figures due for release this month are expected toreveal record output levels, according to the Royal Bank of ScotlandOil and Gas Index. Analyst Mark Shea said figures for November andDecember last year were expected to show peak production.He said oil output for November was likely to have equalled or beat theprevious peak of 2.82mbbl/d recorded in January 1985. But figures forDecember were expected to be even higher.Shea went on: "We are expecting this peak because we know which oilfields have come on stream and what production levels are likely to be.However, we cannot guarantee peak output will be achieved."Shea said the increasing production was down to a number of majorfactors, such as advancing technology and cost-cutting by the oilcompanies. "We are now seeing fields producing oil long after they wereforecast to run dry . . . These figures, despite the current low priceof oil, highlight how healthy the industry is and how important UKinvestment is to the rest of the world."Back to Headline List CopyrightEUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996SPAIN PLANS $200M REFINERY PIPELINE LINK BY 1997A Pta25bn ($203m) oil pipeline will link Repsol's Puertollano andCartagena refineries in 1997, the industry and energy ministry saidlast December.Puertollano, in the central Spanish province of Ciudad Real, is theonly refinery in Spain not situated at a port and is the best placed tomeet rising demand for oil products in central Spain.The 350km link will improve supplies of crude oil to the refinery, andlead to an increase in capacity from 7mt/yr to 7.5mt/yr. The projectwill receive Pta10bn ($81m) from the EU under the European RegionalDevelopment Fund programme.The port of Escombreras, Cartagena, is currently undergoing work whichwill allow it to admit 125,000cm capacity tankers initially intended toallow greater entry of liquefied natural gas to the Cartagenaregasification plant. The link to Puertollano opens up greaterpossibilities for Cartagena as a point of entry for crude oil.* The Banco Bilbao Vicaya (BBV) has increased its interest in Repsolfrom 4.5% to 5.13% to gain fiscal advantages offered to groupscontrolling a more than Pta60bn of share capital in another. The movetakes BBV ahead of Pemex (4.99%) as number two institutional Repsolshareholder behind the Spanish state (21%). Madrid is expected to sellaround 7% of Repsol before the upcoming March general election.Back to Headline List CopyrightEUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996CEPSA SET TO BEAT SALES RECORDCepsa, Spain's largest private oil refiner, is expected to surpass thePta1bn ($8m) sales mark for 1995. Up to November, the company reportedconsolidated sales of Pta960bn, and gross profits of Pta29.18bn, 19.9%up on the same period for 1994.Stronger domestic oil product sales, up to 17.2mt (0.6% up) andimproved refinery margins gave added impetus to a strong chemicalsperformance registered earlier in the year.The company invested Pta46bn over the first 11 months of 1995, with themain priority being the company's RKF and ORD blocks in the AlgerianSahara. The company expects the first of these to produce 12,000bbl/dlater this year, rising to 30,000bbl/d by the start of 1997.Cepsa has countered speculation in local press reports of 600mbbl ofreserves in the ORD block, saying that further research is necessarybefore it can comment on volumes.Back to Headline List CopyrightEUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996ESSO SAYS IT WILL STOP LEADED PETROL MARKETING THIS YEARBy mid-1996 demand for high-grade leaded petrol should be so low inGermany that Esso will stop marketing it. The warning came as Essounveiled plans to rationalise its retail petrol network.According to Herbert Kirchhoff, head of the oil company's fillingstation business, the share of leaded super in total petrol sales fellto 6% last year, from more than 30% as recently as 1990. In 1996 itwill reach only 2.5%, Esso says.Kirchhoff estimates that 5% of all cars registered in Germany - justunder 2m vehicles - are still in the market for leaded super. To offerthem an alternative, Esso - like its competitor Shell - has launched anerosion protection additive which must be added to each tankful ofunleaded. Some 70 Esso filling stations are already no longer sellingleaded super.Meanwhile, the concentration process in the filling station businesshas continued unabated in Germany. In the 25 years to 1994, the totalnumber of filling stations plummeted by 60% - from 44,600 in the formerWest Germany to 18,300 in unified Germany, 2,000 of which are locatedin the east.In the case of Esso this means that it cut the number of its ownstations from 5,560 to 1,627. Thanks to the restructuring, averagepetrol and diesel sales per station jumped - from 470,000 litre/yr to2.5m litres/yr.With an 8% share in the German filling station market, Esso accountsfor 12% in total motor fuel sales. The company points out that with3.6m litres/yr per station, Esso's own sales exceed the average annualfigure by one-third, giving a turnover of DM7m/yr ($4.9m/yr) per unit.Due to estimated investments of DM400,000 per station in additionalenvironmental protection measures needed to comply with newlegislation, the total number of filling stations in Germany is boundto shrink further.Esso's own plans foresee the closure of about 250 stations, with theconstruction of 50 new ones, predominantly in east Germany, alsoenvisaged. This would leave the total number of Esso stations at around1,400, with 150 of them in eastern Germany.In its survey of German energy consumption in the past year, Essopoints out that the German refineries are once again losing money. Itcomplains that while crude imports into Germany in 1995 dropped by 4%to 101.9mt, oil product imports rose by the same percentage rate to42.8mt. As a result, average refinery utilisation dropped to 92.2% from95.5% in 1994.Combined with high German production costs, this led to losses in thedownstream sector, surpassing those recorded a year earlier. Thus, tworefineries closed down last year. Consequently, overall distillationcapacity dropped to 111.9mt/yr from 113.1mt/yr in 1994. At the sametime, the sector invested in additional conversion capacity at theremaining refineries which led to an increase of 2% to 47.5mt/yr.With deliveries of 20.7mt, the CIS was Germany's largest supplier ofcrude last year, despite the fact that the volume was down 9% on 1994.A close second was Norway, which upped its crude exports to Germany by4% to 20.3mt, followed by the UK which raised them by 11% to 18.5mt.Deliveries from Libya dropped 3% to 11.4mt. As a result, German crudereceipts from the North Sea (38%) surpassed those from OPEC countries(35%) for the first time.Sales of oil products in the German market were up 1% to 127.3mt lastyear. Petrol consumption rose only 1.7% to 30.3mt, although motorregistration figures showed an increase of 2% to 40.7m vehicles. Salesof unleaded jumped by 1mt to 28.6mt.Thanks to the ongoing construction activity in east Germany, andGermany's increasing role as a transit country, demand for dieselexpanded by 4.1% to 26.6mt. By contrast, demand for LFO continued tofall, despite lower temperatures at end-1995 compared to a yearearlier: sales dropped 2.8% to 35mt.Against that, HFO sales rose 2% to 7.7mt, thus registering growth forthe first time in two years. However, Esso does not see any expansionpotential in this line in the long run, due to ever stricterenvironmental provisions.Back to Headline List CopyrightEUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996IPIC IN OMV SHAREHOLDER SPATAbu Dhabi's International Petroleum Investment Co (IPIC), a 19.6%shareholder in OMV, and the government's holding corporation OIAG, aresparring over possible changes to OMV's shareholder base.OIAG is seeking to sell off at least 24 percentage points of itspresent 49% OMV stake; unless IPIC boosts its holding, an OIAG sell-offcould trigger clauses in the syndicate agreement running to 2010 underwhich Abu Dhabi bought into OMV in 1994 (EER 412/5). The agreementguarantees government buyback of the IPIC holding should OIAG's sharefall below 30.1%.OIAG to date has failed to convince IPIC to boost its holding to acontrolling 25.1%. At the same time, the Austrian group has failed toagree to an IPIC representative on the OMV board; the syndicatecontract called for two board seats.An alternative further privatisation via public sale on the Viennastock exchange has been discounted by OIAG due to the depressed market.Difficulties on the IPIC-OIAG shareholder level notwithstanding, OMVhas hopes of winning an opportunity to participate in a $1bnpolyethylene plant to be built in Abu Dhabi. The emirate expectsWestern investors to take up 35% of the project.OMV is experienced in polyethylene production through its plasticssubsidiary and rates its chances in Abu Dhabi "at over 50%", accordingto OMV general director Richard Schenz.Back to Headline List CopyrightEUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996HELSINKI TRIGGERS PROTESTS WITH REMOVAL OF PRICE SUBSIDYFinland's largest industrial users of Russian-sourced natural gas arelobbying Neste to maintain prices at 1995 rates this year. The actionfollows the Finnish government move, on 1 January, to discontinue theprovision of subsidies aimed at increasing the competitiveness of gasimported from Russia, and which was worth around FM20m/yr ($4m/yr).The removal of the state gas subsidy, triggered by the ongoingharmonisation of Finnish economic provisions with EU measures, causedan automatic rise in the price of natural gas.With industrial companies opposed to paying the extra charges, Neste isbeing asked to absorb the cost differential left over following theexpiry of the subsidy. The state company has refused to take on theadded cost.The industrial protest group is headed by forest companies Enso,Ahlstrom, Kymmene and the power distribution company Etela SuomenVoima. Gas supplies are handled by Gasum, the joint venture company 75%-owned by Neste and 25% by Russia's Gazprom. Finland imported Russiangas worth FM1.3bn in 1994.The dispute is currently in arbitration and could yet end up in thecountry's marketing court. Obstructing the way to a solution is a 10-year price and supply contract, signed in 1990 and not due to expireuntil the end of the decade.Industrial companies claim that this contract constrains Gasum toadhere to a set price strategy over the 10-year period to 1999. Gasumargues that the 1990 contract did not take into account Finland'smembership of the EU in 1994, which was regarded as a remotepossibility when the contract was signed.Back to Headline List CopyrightEUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996TRANSGAS CANDIDATES MULTIPLYBritish Petroleum Portuguesa and Petrogal, Portugal's state-controlledoil company, have added their names to the list of international energycompanies interested in buying a stake in Transgas, Portugal's naturalgas utility, when it is privatised in a process expected to begin in1996.Petrogal's interest in the acquisition of a holding has reportedly beenwelcomed by Jose Penedos, the secretary of state for energy in the newSocialist government.Penedos has said that the previous government's plans to sell adominant stake in Transgas to a strategic partner are beingreconsidered.Back to Headline List CopyrightEUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996COMPLAINTS OVER 'HIGH' PRICESGerman industry pays more for its gas purchases than industry in anyother EU country other than Portugal, according to the VEA associationrepresenting the interests of industrial energy consumers.According to Eurostat figures for January 1995, the average price ofgas in the EU is 22% lower than average prices in Germany if Portugal,which currently uses only town gas at very high prices, is left out ofthe picture. Industrial customers in the UK pay the lowest prices,followed by Spain, France and Luxembourg.This regrettable state of affairs lays a heavy burden on Germanindustry, says the VEA. Countless jobs have been shifted abroad ongrounds of cost, and if something is not done about reducing the priceof energy to industry, "further considerable damage will be done to thedomestic industrial sector".The VEA puts the blame on lack of competition in Germany. Thedemarcation and concession contracts which give the gas companies theirown monopoly supply areas must be abolished, it demands. At the sametime, the VEA stressed its support for the so-far unsuccessfulproposals for a liberalisation of the energy markets made initially bythe federal economic affairs ministry some two years ago.Back to Headline List CopyrightEUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996EVN SUCCESS IN HUNGARYAmong Austrian bidders for a share in Hungary's gas privatisation (EER449/12), only regional utility EVN managed a successful offer.Jointly with Germany's Bayernwerk, EVN now holds 50% plus one share inKoegaz, a regional gas utility serving about 190,000 customers in asouthwestern region encircling Lake Balaton and extending to theSlovenian and Croatian borders. The consortium joint investment amountsto $67m, up $20m from its first bid.EVN will have few immediate gains from the deal; the service territorydoes not border on Austria, as would have been the case had EVN gaineda hold in other Hungarian gas utilities for which it had bid.Nevertheless, EVN's success is unlikely to induce much pleasure withAustria's state-controlled gas monopoly, OMV, which failed in itsHungarian bids.EVN's deal further strengthens its ties with the German utility, withwhich it shares major stakes in Austria's private gas and oil producerRAG. OMV and the 51% state-owned electricity authority Verbund havefelt themselves threatened by Bayernwerk, which has made offers onseveral Austrian privatisations.Back to Headline List CopyrightEUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996DRAFT DOMESTIC LICENCE DETAILSThe deregulation of the UK's domestic gas market was set to draw a fewconcrete steps nearer as EER went to press with the government expectedto publish the requirements it will impose on interested companieswithin days.With the first, limited stage of the liberalisation to take place inthe West Country from April, the department of trade and industry wasto publish draft proposals for gas supply and shipper licences.Parties interested in competing with British Gas (BG) in the 18mresidential consumer market will require a supply licence, while thosethat want to transport gas through BG's pipeline grid will also need ashipper's licence.The eagerly anticipated licences were expected to offer an insight intothe type of liberalised market the government has in its sights.Back to Headline List CopyrightEUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996GERMAN IMPORTERS PREDICT 10% SLUMP IN 1996 SALESThe German coal importers federation says it expects coal sales tosuffer a decline of 10% in 1996.Purchases of fresh coal are expected to be postponed as major consumersuse up the "comfortable" coal stocks which were accumulated during the'Jahrhundert' contract, which expired at the end of 1995. Sales of bothGerman and imported coal are expected to be affected to the samedegree.It is all the more ironic that import coal prices will probably remainat their current low level during 1996, assuming no significant shiftsin currency rates take place - "proof of the continuing value for moneyof imported coal", stresses the importers' association.In the first 10 months of 1995, imported steam coal prices averagedDM76/t ($53/t) hard coal equivalent (hce), while German steam coal costvirtually four times as much at DM291/t hce before subsidies tookeffect.Back to Headline List CopyrightEUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996CDF STRIKE SETTLED QUICKLYA strike by miners at the Charbonnages de France (CdF) subsidiaryHouilleres du Bassin de Lorraine ended quickly after miners obtainedconcessions, notably an increase in wages. The minimum salary for 1995was increased from FFr81,000 gross for the whole year to FFr85,000($17,125), with a bonus of FFr550 per man offered before the end of theyear.Earlier, some 4,000 miners had clashed with CRS riot police in front ofthe company's offices at Freyming-Merlebach (in the Moselledepartment). The miners, armed with pick-axe handles, bolts, and hoses,confronted some 200 CRS officers, and 500 mobile gendarmes. Some 50persons were injured, of whom two seriously.Workers at three of the four mines belonging to the company - Reumaux,Simon and Wouters - went back immediately after the offer. But theHouve mine at Merlebach held out a little longer, the local branch ofthe CGT union not wishing to give the impression of giving in to themanagement too quickly.Back to Headline List CopyrightEUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996RWE VOWS TO FIGHT ON TO BRING MUELHEIM-KAERLICH BACK ON LINERWE Energie, the operator of the 1,300 MW Muelheim-Kaerlich nuclearpower station off-line since 1988, is adamant that it will continue thelegal battle to bring the reactor back on stream (EER 448/17).The dispute has already turned into the longest and most costly battlethrough the courts in the history of German jurisprudence, according toKlaudia Martini, head of the environment department in Rhineland-Palatinate where the reactor is located.The energy concern announced that it has decided to appeal to thefederal administrative court. This is in defiance of a recent verdictfrom the superior district court in Koblenz finding that the firstpartial construction licence for the unit, overhauled in  1990, wasinvalid and that there was no appeal against this ruling.But RWE Energie claims that the oral verdict contained a faulty legalevaluation and that therefore an appeal was justified. Furthermore, adamage claim filed by RWE - which might amount to half the reactorconstruction costs of DM7.8bn ($5.4bn) - is still pending with thefederal supreme court.Martini has, meanwhile, suggested to RWE that it re-equip Muelheim-Kaerlich for electricity generation from another primary energy source.At the same time, she turned down a motion for the opening of formalreactor closure proceedings, tabled by the Greens in the stateparliament.Martini argued that such a step would open a can of worms, with RWEbound to fight every inch of the way for the subsequent partialconstruction licences which were all in force. Martini assumed thatthis state of affairs would not change, even if RWE were granted anappeal and tried, for the third time, to get a "new" first licence. Itwas now up to RWE "to set a sign of reconciliation in the region byrenouncing a continuation of the legal fight for a first partialconstruction licence."Back to Headline List CopyrightEUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996REACTOR SABOTAGED BY SALTAbout the time of the first moves by French trade unions to defendtheir concept of public service in early December, employees at theBlayais nuclear power station at Braud-et-St-Louis, in the Girondedepartment, were suspected of putting sodium chloride (table salt) intothe secondary cooling circuit of the plant's number three unit.According to the director of the power station, Martine Griffon-Fouco,the act could only have been committed by someone with clearance foraccess to the site. The management asked the local police toinvestigate.The salt did not present any great danger to the plant, but could, indue course, have damaged the cooling circuit. Furthermore, there were anumber of other incidents in preceding days, such as unexpected turbinestoppages. These various incidents were described as "malicious acts",some way short of sabotage.Back to Headline List CopyrightEUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996NORDIC MARKET BEGINS TRADINGThe world's first market in international power trade began operationson 2 January with Norwegian and Swedish players trading electricity forNKr28m ($4.4m), officials said."Volume was relatively good," said a spokesman for Statnett Marked,Norway's domestic electricity bourse company. "A gradual escalation isexpected." The joint power pool is based on the same floor as theNorwegian domestic electricity market, which started regular tradinglast spring.The spokesman said 180 GWh were traded, including 160 GWh by telephoneand 20 GWh by telefax. This compared to 85 GWh on 29 December, beforeSwedish traders entered the market, but dealers attributed the rise tothe prevailing cold spell.Norway and Sweden removed border tariffs on electricity from 1 January,allowing producers and consumers to trade power freely between theneighbouring states. The jointly owned wholesale power pool is seen asa starting point for a much wider market encompassing Finland andDenmark.In 1994, Statnett traded 25% of total Norwegian electricityconsumption, amounting to NKr5bn in turnover. This year trade isexpected to total one-third of consumption.The exchange offers a day ahead, or physical, market, and a weekly orfutures market.Meanwhile, against the backdrop of the liberalisation of Sweden'selectricity market, Finnish state energy company Imatran Voima (IVO)signed an electricity supply agreement with Sweden's TelgeKraft worthFM348m ($80m).The contract covers the supply of 300 GWh over the three-year period1996-1998, with first deliveries scheduled to begin as soon as 24January."The agreement with IVO is significant, and was based on an opencompetition where the best price pitched won," said TelgeKraft's CEOKjell Hasslert.Under the agreement, IVO is contracted to supply electricity producedusing renewable energy resources "whenever feasible". This portion ofthe contract will require IVO to source power supplied to TelgeKraftfrom hydro and biofuel-fired power plants.Founded in 1993, TelgeKraft is controlled by some of Sweden's largestindustrial groups, including Ericsson, Telge Energi, Scania and Astra.The company concentrates on the purchase and distribution of energy toits shareholders, and is forecast to purchase 1.5 TWh of electricityfrom Nordic suppliers in 1996.Back to Headline List CopyrightEUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996DISTRIBUTION CONTRACTS DISPUTEDBelgian power utility Electrabel has defended its ongoing negotiationsfor 18-year distribution contracts with local authorities, saying theyare needed to ensure long-term investments and are to the benefit ofconsumers.Freddy Willockx, a Belgian Socialist member of the European parliament,has claimed Electrabel's efforts to tie part-local authority-ownedcompanies to 18-year distribution contracts threaten EU liberalisation.Electrabel restarted talks with local authorities in November over the18-year contracts, which would be made in exchange for the authoritiestaking 5% stakes in Electrabel production units, Willockx said.An Electrabel spokesman said: "The European Commission is interested inthe interests of consumers, and a free and open market is not thebible. The most important aspect is the interest of the consumer.""We pledge ourselves to have investments with municipalities in inter-municipal distribution companies," the spokesman continued, "but wewill not make long-term investments if we are in short-term contracts."Willockx was "blind to the economics of the investment", the spokesmanadded.The Electrabel spokesman confirmed the contracts are linked to themunicipal authorities buying Electrabel shares, which will take placeduring the first half of the year. The 2,577,256 Electrabel shares,representing about 5% of the company's capital, are currently retainedby holding company Tractebel, although they were acquired by Electrabelin 1992 as part of an acquisition, he said.The shares were subsequently transferred to Tractebel, which holds asubstantial stake in Electrabel, to meet demands from the Belgianbanking and finance commission regulator, he said.Under the transfer agreement, Electrabel will receive any capital gainor loss made when the shares are sold to the municipalities, which willbe made at a market price, he said. The shares were acquired at avaluation of BFr5,600 ($188.74), he said.Back to Headline List CopyrightEUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996GEC, CEGELEC BUY AEG ASSETSFrench concerns GEC Alsthom and Cegelec, both linked to AlcatelAlsthom, have signed a preliminary agreement to buy what remains ofDaimler-Benz's electrical business, AEG. The price was not disclosed.GEC Alsthom is to take over the transmission and distribution (T&D)businesses of AEG, which should boost its turnover in this field bysome FFr7bn ($1.4bn), bringing it to FFr18.5bn/yr. It will also givethe company coverage of 35 countries against 24 previously, and make itthe largest company in T&D, ahead of ABB and Siemens.For Cegelec, taking over AEG's industrial process control business willboost its turnover in Germany to the equivalent of FFr6.5bn from thecurrent FFr1.4bn (which compares with worldwide turnover of FFr16.4 bnfor the whole of 1994).In addition, the takeover will give Cegelec a higher profile in CentralEurope, the Americas (north and south), and in South Africa, as well assome fresh clients in the petroleum industry.AEG will retain 49% in the holding company that is to be established torun these businesses, while GEC Alsthom will get 51%. One consequenceof the restructuring that will follow the takeover is likely to be joblosses. In the meantime, however, Daimler-Benz was still negotiatingthe possibility of contributing financially to some of the changes.Back to Headline List CopyrightEUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996EVS/BADENWERK HYDRO TAKEOVERA consortium of seven Baden-Wuerttemberg power suppliers, headed by EVSand Badenwerk, is to take over Neckar, the utility operating 24 hydrostations on the river Neckar between Mannheim and Plochingen.Up to now Neckar has been owned by the federal government (63.5%) andby the state of Baden-Wuerttemberg (35%), which are parting with theirshares "for financial reasons".The consortium will pay DM138.3m ($96m) for 99% of the shares. Neckargenerated 582.7 GWhe in 1994. According to EVS, this is twice as muchas it produces itself from hydro power, and equals 3.7% of its totalelectricity generation.EVS' own power sales reached the record level of just under 21 TWh in1995. This was an increase of 5% against a year earlier. It was duechiefly, according to chairman Wilfried Steuer, to a steep rise inelectricity deliveries abroad - up 33%.EVS also pitched in and helped temporarily with the tight supplysituation of French power giant Electricity de France (EdF), hit by therecent strike. At the time, EVS supplied roughly 5 GWh per day.But it could only generate part of the overall volume itself. For therest it depended on purchases from east German supra-regional powersupplier Veag.However, even without the booming foreign business, EVS sales wouldhave gone up. Power consumption in its own supply area also rose lastyear - by 2.3% against 1994. Due to the flagging economy, Steuerexpects deliveries to EVS' own supply area to increase by 1-2% only in1996.Back to Headline List CopyrightEUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996HUNGARIAN POWER STAMPEDEFollowing VEW and Ruhrgas' successful entry into the Hungarian gasmarket - via participations in a regional (DDGAZ) and a municipal(Foegaz) gas supplier (EER 449/20) - other German energy concerns havehastened to make sure they will play a role in Hungary's electricityprivatisation.RWE and its junior partner, southern German regional concern EVS,bought 46.15% of Elmu, a distributor serving the greater Budapest areawith sales of 7.8 TWh/yr, and 48.8% of Emasz, serving the northeastwith sales of 4.7 TWh/yr.The grouping also acquired a 38% stake in brown coal producer Matra,consisting of an 800 MW power station and two opencast mines. The groupwas granted the option to increase its stakes in all companies to 50%and one share by end-1997. It is planning to invest around DM1bn($693m), chiefly in Matra, over the next few years.Bayernwerk won a majority stake in southwestern supplier Dedasz (salesof 3.6 TWh/yr), while upper-Bavarian regional utility Isar-Amperwerke -which Bayernwerk is striving to take over - acquired 49.23% of easternHungarian supplier Titasz (sales 3.1 TWh/yr), together with the optionto raise its stake to 50.1% by end-1997.Back to Headline List CopyrightEUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996RAINS BREAK HYDRO DECLINESpain's plunging hydroelectric production spiral finally bottomed outin November last year after significant rainfall broke the drought.According to figures published in December by Spain's network company,Red Electrica de Espana (REE), the sector registered a fresh recordminimum for daily generating output before mid-month rainfall led tothe first notable production lift since March last year.Rains in the second week boosted the daily producible power figure to154 GW for 16 November, the first time this figure had overcome the 150GW mark since the first week in March 1995. This improvement came justover two weeks after REE reported the new record output low at 13 GW on1 November. This was 2.27 GW lower than the previous minimum set on 22October 1995.Six months of announcing successive record-breaking lows for thecontents of Spain's hydro generating reservoirs also ended in Novemberwhen REE said the water level nationwide had edged above the linemarking the previous November minimum, reaching 26.9% of their totalcapacity.This is the first time for six months that the water level inreservoirs has not set a fresh monthly minimum record, having plummetedsince the end of January 1995.The gap between the median figure and the real amount of collectedwater has been widening steadily since February 1994. Indeed, over thelast three years, the real figure has been higher than the median foronly six months; this was in one single spell from September 1993 toFebruary 1994.The disparity in reserves is echoed in REE's production figures for themonth of November as a whole: the 1. 255 TWh hydro-generated inNovember 1995 was vastly lower than in the corresponding months of 1994and 1993 - 42.7% and 62.9% less respectively.While total production for the month, including all power producingsources except autoproducers, was 3.7% up, coal and nuclear-generatedpower made up the difference increasing output by 19.8% to 6. 97 TWhand 7.5% to 4.65 TWh respectively.The 12.571 TWh total November demand took the figure for the firsteleven months to 138.339 TWh, 3.9% higher than the same period in 1994.Even heavy rainfall in December is unlikely to lift the total hydrogeneration figure for 1995 any higher than the third worst hydroperformance in the last 25 years. The output total to the end ofNovember in Spain reached 19. 583 TWh, already more than Unesa's twolowest readings, 19.511 TWh in 1992 and 18.671 TWh in 1989.Meanwhile, Portugal's five years of drought also appear to be over,according to meteorological officials, heralding a period of increasedhydroelectric production.Rainfall in the southern Alentejo region, the area worst hit bydrought, was greater in November and December than in the previous fouryears and several regions of Portugal continue to risk flooding.Agriculture accounts for more than 75% of all water consumption inPortugal, compared with 14% for industry and 7% for domesticconsumption.* Strike action in France led to strong power exports from Spain toFrance in November 1995, peaking at hourly readings of 1.3 GWh in thelast days of the month, said REE. While Spain's power relationship withElectricite de France (EdF) is hugely weighted in favour of imports,43.65 GWh went to France in November, 72% more than in October.November power imports from France totalled 439.25 GWh. REE signed a"support agreement" with EdF on 1 November which caps Spanish powerexports at 200 GWh, equivalent, said REE, to 400 hours at a maximum of500 MW. The agreement covers the period November 1995 to March 1996.Back to Headline List CopyrightEUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996MADRID IMPOSES TARIFF SQUEEZEMadrid has taken measures to rein in Spain's power sector profits for1996, freezing tariffs for the first time since 1973 and introducingtougher controls on sector income.Acting on advice from the national electricity systems commission(CSEN), the industry and energy ministry said the moves passed on thebenefits of economic recovery and technological advances to theconsumer.Between Christmas and New Year, the treasury's superior pricing boardaccepted the ministry's recommendation for an average "zero increase"in electricity charges, justified by estimates of a 3.5-4% demand liftthroughout the year.This level of confidence foresees a return to the degree of sustainedgrowth last witnessed during the mid-1980s. The "zero increase" is tobe applied to across the board to all tariff scales; domestic,industrial and the large-scale industry rate. Last year, tariff scalealterations produced an average 1.48% increase, well below inflation at4.3%.The decision to freeze tariffs followed approval by Madrid's commissionfor economic affairs of a revised legal framework reducing recognisedcosts borne by the sector by Pta29bn ($236m), 1.42% of the total 1995tariff.These alterations would appear to signal an end to the long-runningdebate between the CSEN, the major utilities and the industrialgrouping which represents their interests, Unesa (EER 448/19).Of the seven alterations to the recognised costs borne by the sector,only two went in favour of the utilities. Worth a total Pta10.28bn,these are increased allowance for costs brought about by the ongoingdrought, and by the enforced changes to billing methods.The new arrangements for adjusting the effects of the drought,calculated in terms of replacing 'lost' hydro-generated power byincreased fossil fuel firing, recognised Pta9.58bn in costs.The remaining Pta702m will pay for a new billing structure intended toshow consumers how much of their electricity bill will go toward payingoff Pta730bn over 25 years to cover assets lost in the now-permanentnuclear moratorium, as well as funds that subsidise the coal industry.These percentages, 3.54% of the bill for nuclear debt pay-off and 5%for the coal industry, will remain the same in 1996.The five considerations on the minus side for the utilities subtractPta39.39bn from recognised costs: this includes some Pta4.159bn less inthe allowance to pay off generating assets; a reduction of 2-3percentage points below the retail price index from operating andgenerating costs reflecting improved efficiency, totalling Pta10.24bnnext year; some Pta23bn deducted from 'structural' costs; and a furtherPta2bn off as the first step in removing the subsidy for the utilities'"employee electricity rate" from the tariff.This is the first time Spanish consumers will not subsidise theemployee rate, a next-to-nothing Pta0.15/kWh, which has remainedunchanged since it was introduced in 1944 when the domestic rate wasPta0.45/kWh.Some 66,000 power sector directors and employees, including retiredstaff, benefited from this rate last year. The CSEN recommendedemployees lose this perk on a gradual scale up to 2001.Back to Headline List CopyrightEUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996ENDESA'S LATIN AMERICA SPREEEndesa, Spain's 65%-state owned utility, announced Pta35bn ($285m) ofinvestment in Latin America at the end of December: Pta15bn in Peru andPta20bn in Argentina.Through its 72.5% interest in the Peruvian company Generalima, thecompany won 60% control of Eetvensa, proprietor of the 200 MWVentanilla power station, close to the city of Lima. Endesa beat off acompetitive bid from American Energy Systems. The remaining 40% ofEtevensa remains in state hands.Endesa will be responsible, through Generalima, for adding another 100MW of generating capacity, installing two gas-fired turbines. Theutility also secured a 30% interest in the Lima and Chancaydistribution company, Distrilima, which has 650,000 customers.In Argentina, Endesa paid some Pta20bn for 19.46% of the Buenos Airesdistribution company, Edenor, lifting its share to 36.46%. Edenordistributes half of the power sold in the Buenos Aires region.Also in December, Iberdrola, Spain's biggest private power utility,bought 100% of two Bolivian distribution companies, La Paz and Oruro,from Compania Boliviana de Energia Electrica and Bolivian Power Systemsrespectively. The investment cost Iberdrola Pta6bn all told, and givesthe Spanish company control of 45% of Bolivia's power distributionmarket.This is the first Iberdrola move outside Spain as a majorityshareholder. It also has a 20% interest in the 250 MW Guemes powerstation project and 26% of the Gas Litoral distribution company (bothArgentina).Back to Headline List CopyrightEUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996NO NEW CAPACITY BEFORE 2000Madrid has said no new power stations will be commissioned up to theyear 2000. The industry and energy ministry has calculated that none ofthe potential demand scenarios make additional generating installationsnecessary.Instead, the ministry introduced changes to the current national energyplan (PEN) for 1991-2000. Chief among these are move to anglegenerating policy toward substituting fuel oil as a generating inputwith natural gas and biofuels, lengthen the life of existing powerstations, boost renewable energy funding and promote energy savinginitiatives.The first step toward the achievement of these objectives was thepromise of a January invitation to tender for contracts to convert1,400 MW of current fuel oil-fired generating capacity to natural gas-firing. This represents 18.1% of Spain's existing fuel oil-firedinstalled power base.Back to Headline List CopyrightEUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996PORVOO REFINERY POWER PLANNeste's board of directors has approved plans by the Neste oil refineryat Porvoo to invest FM72m ($17m) in 1996 to build two to three 70-110MW gas-fired power plants, Neste Porvoo's general manager JoukoHuumonen said.The plan, which was first proposed in June 1994, would involve thephased development of on-site power generation capacity to supply oiland petrochemical refining units at Porvoo.According to Huumonen, Neste hoped to develop the small station conceptand have plants with a total generating capacity of 500-800 MW on siteby the year 2002. Excess production would be channelled into thenational grid.Back to Headline List CopyrightEUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996POWERGEN'S REFINERY CHP DEALPowerGen's CHP division has been awarded a contract to supply theelectricity and steam requirements of Conoco's Humber refinery. Thecontract will involve the construction of a new gas-fired CHP unitrated at 24 MWe and over 90 MWth.The #23m ($35m) plant will feature four independent gas turbines withback-up systems to ensure continuous running even when the primary gassupply is unavailable.To coincide with the plant construction, a connection between therefinery and the existing Theddlethorpe-Killingholme gas line will beinstalled by Kinetica, the PowerGen/Conoco joint venture.PowerGen CHP managing director Bob Kennett claimed, "We have broken newground in meeting the requirements of Conoco for efficient but flexibleplant. Both parties can be confident that the energy supply willsupport the refinery's demands in future."Back to Headline List CopyrightEUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996OFFER AMENDS REC LICENCESUK electricity regulator Stephen Littlechild has published proposals tomodify the licences of regional electricity companies (RECs) SWEB andEastern Group following their recent takeovers.The modifications deal with financial ring-fencing of the electricitybusinesses, restrictions on activities, availability of resources,disposal of assets, and provision of information to Offer. They havealready been agreed by Southern Electric International, now themajority shareholder in SWEB, and Hanson, the majority shareholder inEastern Group, and will be applied to other merged companies in duecourse.Littlechild explained that the "licence modifications will allow me tocontinue to regulate effectively and to ensure that customers continueto be fully  protected."Back to Headline List CopyrightEUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996STEEL AUTOPRODUCER BUYOUTElectricite de France (EdF) and Edison have completed the purchase of75% of the independent Italian electricity producer Ilva ServiziEnergie (ISE) for a total of L370bn ($232m).The deal was initially agreed at the beginning of 1995, but was subjectto conditions which were not met until towards the end of last year.The purchase was made through a joint company called Finel, in whichItalian firm Edison has 60% and EdF 40%.ISE is building a 500 MW thermal power station at Taranto (in Puglia),which will be fired with gases from the blast furnaces of the localsteelworks. It will use combined cycle technology to generate bothelectricity, which will be sold to state power utility Enel, and steam,which will be used by the steelworks.The project is due to come into operation in the second half of 1996.ISE already has overall capacity of some 600 MW, including a thermalpower station at Taranto, two at Piombino (in Tuscany), and a hydropower plant at Terni (in Umbria).EdF commented that it viewed this as an important step in developingcollaborations with other power generators in countries which wanted toencourage independent electricity producers.Back to Headline List CopyrightEUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996HEALTHY YEAR FOR VERBUNDA 3% increase in total electricity consumption as well as high waterflows through hydro generating plants have assured a good year in 1995for Austria's Verbund. At the same time, the federal electricity boardhas noted the impact of two major cogeneration plants which have comeon stream, trimming industrial electricity usage.No specific figures have as yet been released, but the Verbund notes anexport surplus in its electricity trading for 1995. Higher exports toGermany, Slovenia, Croatia and Hungary have been registered, althoughthese in part have been achieved at below-cost prices in order to workdown growing coal stockpiles (EER 449/13).On the financial side, the Verbund experienced costs of some Sch400-500m last year when its long-term borrowings in Swiss francs had to berevalued to reflect exchange rate differences. About a fifth of Verbundbonds are denominated in francs.Back to Headline List CopyrightEUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996TARIFF RULING TO STAY IN PLACEThe Swiss federal government will maintain its SFr0.16/kWh ($0.14/kWh)tariff recommendations for autoproducers, which were due to end on 31December, for a further three years. The move follows an officialevaluation report, which also urges that autoproducers be betterinformed about the federal recommendations and legal situation.After the two and a half years that the federal tariff recommendationshave been in force, the situation is that the recommendations areapplied "almost entirely" by electricity companies in less than a thirdof Swiss cantons (eight).They are followed only in part in nine cantons, while five othercantons refused to provide any information for the evaluation, and therecommendations are entirely ignored in the principal hydro cantons ofGraubuenden, Ticino and Valais, where the difference between theproduction cost of about SFr0.04/kWh and the SFr0.16/kWh recommendedfor autoproducers is simply considered too great.The authors of the evaluation report note that while the promotion ofdecentralised energy production is an objective for the country as awhole, this does not justify forcing the three hydro cantons to acceptconditions which would immediately result in local tariff increases.Martin Renggli, who heads the Federal Energy Office (FEO)'s energypolicy service, told EER that the SKr0.16/kWh average tariff paid toautoproducers who use renewable energy sources is the equivalent of thelong-term marginal cost. "Switzerland is virtually the only country toapply such a tariff, which parliament has limited to non-fossil fuelproducers," said Renggli. "The main beneficiaries are small hydro plantoperators, industrial autoproducers being relatively unimportant in ourcountry".Since the recommendations took effect, 80% of small hydro plants (lessthan 300 kW) surveyed have seen the prices paid for their energy riseand profitability improve.* Switzerland's ombudsman has secured an agreement with five majorregional electric companies for a freeze of tariffs for the next threeyears. The five companies are BKW, NOK, Atel, CKW and EOS. Announcingthe agreement, the ombudsman's office in Berne said it was madepossible by the regional utilities' "good, and in some cases very good,1994 results".Back to Headline List CopyrightEUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996SWITZERLAND ORDERS REDUCTION IN CAR FUEL CONSUMPTIONA new federal ordinance aimed at reducing the specific fuel consumptionof automobiles came into force in Switzerland on 1 January, despiteobjections by Swiss car importers. The new ruling is designed to reducethe average specific consumption, in litres per 100km, of all newlylicensed automobiles by a total of 15% within five years (1996-2001).The ordinance is designed to make it easier to achieve the objectivesof the federal Energy 2000 programme, and in particular to reduce CO2emissions attributable to automobiles."This reduction rate (of 3% per annum) is technically possible,economically sustainable, and essential from the standpoint of bothenergy and environmental policy," according to a statement by theFederal Energy Office (FEO).The FEO points out that automobiles which consume less than 5 litresper 100km are already available on the market and manufacturers arealready engaged in a process of further improving energy efficiency.German manufacturers have already announced plans to market 3litre/100km cars by the year 2000, the FEO notes.The ordinance makes it mandatory, in particular for car importers whoserole is especially important in Switzerland, to do everything possibleover the next five years to achieve the new "average consumptionthreshold values", and thus to contribute to more economic and rationalenergy utilisation.The FEO says this will require a major marketing effort by Swissimporters, assisted by the federal government. The question of aspecial label to distinguish the most energy-efficient cars in theshowroom is currently under consideration."This will considerably help the federal Energy 2000 programme,"according to the FEO. The E2000 objectives include stabilising theconsumption of fossil fuels and CO2 emissions at their 1990 levels bythe year 2000, and thereafter reducing them.Back to Headline List CopyrightEUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996GAS-DRIVEN BUS TRIAL IN BRISTOLGreener public transport moved one step closer for Bristol when theUK's first purpose-built gas-powered bus was unveiled by transportminister, Steven Norris.The bus, which has been specifically designed to use natural gas,rather than being converted from diesel power is the result of a fivecompany partnership - FirstBus Transit Developments, British Gas,Cummings, Plaxton Coach & Bus and Dennis Specialist Vehicles - and willbe operated by FirstBus.The spark ignited engine runs off the gas stored in six tanks held in aspecially designed pod on the roof of the bus. The bus will serve theTemple Meads, city centre, Redland and Clifton areas of Bristol.Speaking at the launch, Norris said: "Government is aware of publicconcern about air quality and the introduction of this new gas bus isan excellent initiative to help reduce vehicle emissions in an urbanarea."Back to Headline List CopyrightEUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996LITTLE CHANGE IN GERMAN INPUTS SEEN BUT CO2 PLANS QUERIEDPrimary energy consumption in Germany is expected to remain more orless constant over the next 25 years, thanks to massive increases inenergy productivity through energy saving and technical progress,according to a report by Swiss consultants Prognos for the Germanfederal economic affairs ministry.The primary energy matrix will only shift marginally during thisperiod, the report states - the shares of coal, lignite and nuclearpower will shrink, to the benefit mainly of gas, which will increase itshare from 16.8% today to nearly 24% in 2020.According to the consultancy, oil should maintain its market position,while renewable energy sources will manage to increase their share fromcurrently 2.3% to 3.6% by 2020 - low prices for fossil fuels willprevent a more significant expansion.CO2 emissions will fall by only around 10.5% by the year 2005 comparedwith 1990 levels, with a further drop of just 3% expected by the year2020.The drop predicted by Prognos is less than half of the 25% reductionwhich the German government has pledged to achieve by the year 2005.Thus the study casts considerable doubts on the ability of Bonn to makeany real progress on climate protection measures.Federal environment minister Angel Merkel criticised the Prognos CO2findings, claiming the effects of new energy and environment policymeasures had been ignored by the Prognos experts.But the consultants have retaliated sharply, pointing out that all thesignificant instruments - such as the new insulation regulations,amendments to heating boiler regulations, small combustion plantregulations, support programmes for renewables and voluntary measuresby industry - were indeed taken into account.Electricity generation in Germany is forecast to continue rising to theyear 2020 by a total of 18% compared with 1992. Gas will play anincreasingly significant role: a net increase in electricity generatingcapacity of 13,500 MW will be necessary over the next 25 years, ofwhich 61% will be gas-fired.At the moment, installed gas-fired capacity totals 18,750 MW; by 2020this will have reached 27,000 MW, says Prognos. Some 3,700 MW of newgas-firing capacity will be constructed in western Germany and 5,100 MWin eastern Germany, mainly by the new municipal utilities which havebeen founded since German unification .Gross electricity consumption will also rise, by 23% between 1992 and2020, with consumption in eastern Germany alone expected to rise muchmore steeply - by 52%. This reflects the recovery and expansion ofindustry now starting to take off after the economic difficultiesexperienced following unification.In western Germany most of the existing power station capacity willhave to be replaced by the year 2020, states Prognos, but theconsultancy finds it impossible to say at this point what the fuelstructure will be.For example, between 2005 and 2009, nearly 6,500 MW of the total 22,500MW nuclear capacity will have to be replaced, assuming a plant lifetimeof 30 years, followed by a further 4,800 MW between 2010-2014 and 9,900MW between 2015-2020.It is currently an open question whether the plant will be replacedwith nuclear power stations and if so, which options will be chosen,says the report - for example, extending the lifetime of old plant, oruse of a new reactor type such as the EPR being developed by Siemensand Framatome.Back to Headline List CopyrightEUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996SPECIAL REPORT - SPANISH GASWith the arrival of natural gas from North Africa now imminent, EERassesses Spain's state of readiness.The $2.6bn Maghreb-Europe pipeline is 160km away from completion,sources at Spain's Gas Natural told EER at the end of December.The news provided an end-1995 boost for the company, already buoyantafter the return to service of the Valle de Escombreras regasificationplant (Cartagena, Murcia) and the announcement of plans to increase itsoutput by a factor of 12.Even with three regasification plants in operation this year, the1,376km pipeline, to be operated by the EMPL venture, will be theleading gateway for natural gas imports to Spain from the secondquarter, providing logistical support for a 24-year, take-or-pay dealwith Algerian state hydrocarbons company, Sonatrach, to import 1,439bnthermies up to the year 2020.Two of the four sections which make up the Algeria-Spain link arecomplete: the Algerian stretch and the seabed link under the Strait ofGibraltar. The 48-inch diameter, 520km Algerian section, laid bySonatrach, runs from the Hassi R' Mel gas field to the Moroccan bordervia the towns of Mecheria and El Aricha.Two parallel, 22-inch, 46km lines, which will take natural gas underthe Strait of Gibraltar, link Cape Spartel, on the Moroccan coast westof Tangiers, and Zahara de los Atunes, on the Spanish coastline west ofTarifa.Pipeline company ownershipEMPL is 27%-owned by the Spanish company Sagane, in turn 91% controlledby Madrid and 9% held by Spain's sole natural gas sourcing company,Enagas. Portugal's Transgas owns the remaining 22% of EMPL.Between the Algerian and Strait of Gibraltar sections, EMPL has laid410km of the total 540km projected for the Moroccan stretch of thepipeline. The 48-inch line will link the Moroccan border city of Ain-Beni-Mathar to Cape Spartel, the two points in the entire pipelinewhere compression stations will be sited.The section running from Zahara de los Atunes to Cordoba, managed bythe Al Andalus company (70/30 Enagas and Transgas), has so far 240km ofthe total 274km, 48-inch pipeline in place. This final sectioncompletes what Madrid's industry and energy terms the "first phase" ofthe Maghreb-Europe pipeline. Initial capacity will allow an annualthroughput of 10bncm/yr.In practice, however, Madrid has put the initial annual volume cominginto Spain at 6bncm/yr, of which 2.5bncm/yr will go to Portugal where,according to Gas Natural, the 371km pipeline linking Setubal and Bragais now complete. The relationship between the two Iberian neighbours isa key element in planned extensions to the regional natural gastransport network in the northwestern quarter of the peninsular.Interconnection with PortugalThe Spain-Portugal 'interconnection', as Madrid terms the plan, isdesigned to allow both countries to benefit from their respectivegeographies. Portugal will receive natural gas from Algeria via the gashub in Cordoba. By extending the northern Portuguese network,meanwhile, Spain will be able to pipe natural gas to Galicia andAsturias, currently without piped natural gas west of Aviles.The new Portuguese pipeline will start in Braga going northwards acrossthe border to Tuy and on to Pontevedra, La Coruna, and Villalba (allGalicia), terminating in Oviedo.The "circuit" in western Spain will be completed by adding a pipelinebranching northwards to Asturias through Extremadura and Castilla yLeon from the $180m trunk line link from Cordoba to Campo Maior closeto Badajoz on the Spain-Portugal border. The Cordoba-Campo Maiorpipeline is the responsibility of the Gasoducto de Extremadura company(51% Enagas and 49% Transgas) and is made up of 192km of 32-inchpipeline and 64km of 28-inch pipeline.The EU's REGEN II Ecu500m finance initiative, aimed at supporting cross-border gas and electricity links between member states, has agreed tosupport the Cordoba-Campo Maior and Braga-Villalba pipeline projects tothe tune of Pta12.72bn ($103m), equal to 40% of the Pta31.8bn totalestimated spend. The Villalba-Oviedo extension is not supported byREGEN II since it is not a border-related link, but it will receive EUfunding under the European Regional Development Fund.In the last quarter of 1995, Madrid reaffirmed four key natural gasinfrastructural initiatives, which as part of the current (1991-2000)national energy plan (PEN) will ensure the arrival of natural gas inthe following regions: Castilla La Mancha, Valencia, Andalucia, Murcia,Castilla y Leon and Extremadura.The most significant is a pipeline proposal termed the 'second phase'of the Maghreb-Europe pipeline. It envisages 36- and 30-inch diameterpipelines, still under study according to Gas Natural, running 320kmnortheastwards from Cordoba, forking at Motilla (Castilla La Mancharegion). One branch is to run 260km northwards to Caspe, Zaragozaprovince, and the other, 150km eastwards to Sagunto, on theMediterranean coast 30km north of Valencia.Possible link to France?The Caspe link is designed to open up possibilities of a connectionthrough Aragon or Catalonia to France. This second phase of the Maghreb-Europe pipeline could lead to the pipe doubling its initial throughputcapacity to 20bncm/yr using the two Moroccan compression facilities.This second phase would involve another major pipeline constructioninitiative from Cordoba to northeast Spain capable of transporting"large quantities (of natural gas) towards northern Europe", theministry of industry and energy said.The other fork at Motilla would take Algerian gas to the 'MediterraneanArc' pipeline (Barcelona-Cartagena) at Sagunto. Both Motilla lineswould offer natural gas to areas of Castilla La Mancha, Aragon andValencia, currently not connected to the natural gas network.Until the Maghreb-Europe pipeline comes into service, Spain willcontinue to depend on its regasification plants to support nationaldemand. LNG produced some 77% of the 81.10bn thermies Enagas bought in1994 and 84% of the 42.77bn acquired in the first half of 1995. Thereopening of the Valle de Escombreras plant at the Mediterranean portof Cartagena, one of the modifications to the original PEN, brings thetotal of regasification facilities in Spain to three, alongside thoseat Palos de la Frontera (Huelva) and Barcelona.Regasification investmentEnagas said it would invest Pta13.2bn in boosting the currentEscombreras output capacity of 50,000cm/h (equivalent to 3.5bnthermies/yr) to 600,000cm/h in five years. The spend is part of theregional gas plan for Murcia announced last spring, with  globalinvestment of Pta38bn. The company is aiming at a target of 50,000domestic and 100 industrial customers in Murcia by the year 2000.Enagas has divided the expansion plan into two phases. The first,scheduled to run up to the middle of 1997 will increase emissioncapacity to 150,000cm/hr, at a pressure of 72 bars using the plant'sexisting storage capacity. The second phase, with two sub-stages, aimsto build two additional storage facilities holding 105,000cm each anddocking structures capable of receiving 125,000cm LNG tankers by 1998.Enagas said the plant would reach its the final output goal of600,000cm/h in 2000.The opening of both the Cartagena plant and extensions to thenorthwestern pipeline network have led the industry and energy ministryto suspend the original PEN project for a new regasification plant atthe port of El Ferrol (Galicia).Basques' separate courseMeanwhile, the autonomous Basque government is still reported to be innegotiations with the US and Japanese gas companies, Enron andMitsubishi, on its proposed regasification plant for the port ofBilbao. The plan, aimed at exclusive supply for the Basque region hasbeen costed at Pta28bn in the region's budget for 1996. None of thiswill come from Madrid, which has emphasised the plan's exclusion fromPEN.Only one other gas aim from the 1991 PEN proposals has yet to becarried out: a 100km pipe-line connecting Aranda del Duero andValladolid.Approved additions to PEN are: a 570km pipeline linking Almendralejo(Extremadura) and Oviedo (Asturias) with a compression station;extending the Aranda-Valladolid line to a junction with theAlmendralejo-Oviedo link at Zamora; and increasing the diameter of theplanned 220km pipeline linking Valencia, Orihela and Cartagena from 20to 30 inches. Enagas has said it is studying a further 175km extensionto this pipeline to Almeria, which would cost an estimated Pta10.32bn.Also in Andalucia, Gas Natural said last November that infrastructuralinvestment in the region would top Pta120bn by the year 2000. This sumincludes laying the Andalucian section of the Maghreb-Europe pipeline,the Cordoba-Jaen-Granada pipeline and pipelines to take Algerian gas toCadiz, Malaga, Jerez de la Frontera and Campo de Gibraltar.It also includes work carried out at the docking facilities at thePalos de la Frontera regasification plant. Gas Natural expectsAndalucia to consume 12.8bn thermies/yr after 2005.Power utility Sevillana has meanwhile awarded a Pta2bn contract to theindustrial group Babcock Wilcox to convert the 540 MW second generatinggroup of the company's Bahia de Algeciras power station to gas.Back to Headline List CopyrightEUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996SWEDISH ENERGY COMMISSION REPORT ON NUCLEAR PHASE-OUTOne of Sweden's 12 nuclear reactors can be closed before the nextgeneral elections in 1998, but all 12 cannot be phased out before 2010.This is the somewhat unsurprising conclusion of the national energycommission that has been studying the matter.That Sweden can manage on 11 reactors is proven by the fact thatSweden's oldest reactor, the 400 MW Oskarshamn 1, has been standingidle for over three years. But on the very same day that the commissionpublished its report, the Swedish nuclear inspectorate gave Sydkraftthe go-ahead to restart the reactor.The energy commission has not fulfilled its stated task of solvingSweden's nuclear power problems once and for all, but it has produced600 pages of background material for political bargaining on how tofulfil the parliamentary decision from 1980 to phase out nuclear power.Political commentator Anders Isaksson called the energy commission'sdocument "another meaningless report in an over-studied question, apolitically bespoke tailoring that has been run from the government,whose conclusions are based on - for the moment - politically correctassumptions."The last part of Isaksson's comment refers to the fact that, just a fewweeks ago, the commission majority believed that two reactors could beclosed by 1998. The change has been explained by the assumption thatthe government wanted space to negotiate.Political make-upThe political majority of the commission is constituted by theChristian Democratic Party, the Liberals and the ruling SocialDemocratic party. The conservative party is openly pro-nuclear thesedays, while the environmentalists and the leftists are too anti-nuclearfor the agreement.The government also wants the Centre Party to join the agreement, butthere will be a price to pay. The Centre is an anti-nuclear, pro-biomass farmer's party with a long-standing environmental reputation todefend. It does, however, accept slightly increased use of natural gasto make up for the loss of energy production when nuclear power plantsare closed, but the party does not want to abolish 2010 as the finalyear for nuclear, and wants to phase out two - not one - reactorsbefore 1998.The real negotiations are expected to start in March, when the SocialDemocrats will elect a new leader to follow outgoing premier IngvarCarlsson.The only candidate - finance minister Goeran Persson - has declaredthat he has the same views on energy as the current premier, whichmeans respecting the 1980 referendum decision to phase out all nuclearpower by 2010 without harnessing more hydro resources, while keepingCO2 emissions at the 1990 level and maintaining internationallycompetitive electricity prices.Persson says it will be hard to meet these goals. But all his promisesare currently being viewed with doubt, since he was still steadfastlydenying that he would stand as party leader only hours before heofficially accepted the offer from the election committee.Half nuclear, half hydroSweden currently uses 140 TWh/yr of electricity, of which half isnuclear, half hydro. The energy commission contends that Sweden willneed 159 TWh electricity by 2010, and that 15 TWh of the requirementcan be reduced by energy efficiency, while another 10 TWh can becovered by conversion to other forms of energy.Hydro power is projected to account for 64 TWh, roughly the same astoday. Current wind power, cogeneration in industry and districtheating will yield 13 TWh. New wind power and cogeneration plants couldprovide 11 TWh, which leaves 46 TWh of the electricity requirementstill to be covered.Energy minister Joergen Andersson says that natural gas could provide12-30 TWh of electricity and new hydro sources 27 TWh if all streamsand rivers were harnessed, which he himself does not believe to be arealistic possibility.The commission does not see natural gas as a large-scale alternative,and believes that if the gas network is to be expanded from Gothenburg,where it ends today, to Stockholm and on to Finland, it will be becauseother nations have interest in the gas - either to sell Russian orNorwegian gas or to consume it. In fact, Gazprom has offered to build agrid through Sweden, which is seen as a means of securing analternative route for Russian gas to the European market. Sweden onlyuses about 9 TWh/yr of natural gas.It will cost some SKr70-90bn ($10.6-13.6bn) to replace nuclear powerwith natural gas-fired plants, and possibly twice as much if biomass ischosen as a fuel, according to the energy commission, which believesthat electricity prices can increase to an acceptable level if thephase-out is allowed to be a slow process.The free market for electricity introduced from the start of 1996 willkeep prices down, according to the commission. The high voltage pricein Sweden currently is SKr0.20/kWh, while electricity from new naturalgas-fired plants would cost Skr0.25-0.30/kWh and from biomass overSKr0.40/kWh.Three phase-out guidelinesThe commission has set out three main possible guidelines for the phase-out:* 1) a law that would prohibit nuclear power. This could mean payingcompensation to the power utilities and tough negotiations. Theutilities claim they have a right to total compensation and insist thatit should be in the form of new production facilities.* 2) taxation of nuclear power plants. The tax should increase with theage of the reactor. This would make nuclear power less competitivesince the owners also need to invest in maintenance of the plants.* 3) subsidies to energy sources that are favourable for climatic andenvironmental reasons.A cold snap over the Christmas holiday season served to helpconcentrate minds on the matter of electricity supply. Some 24,000 MWwas needed each day between Christmas and New Year, 4,000 MW more thanusual at this time of the year. Sweden's total capacity is over 33,000MW, but grid problems reduce the available capacity to 29,000 MW.The nuclear inspectorate has meanwhile given permission to restartSweden's oldest nuclear reactor Oskarshamn 1, after over three years ofstandstill.Problems at OskarshamnThe inspectorate ordered the closure of Oskarshamn 1 and four otherreactors in September 1992 after a near-accident with the emergencycooling water system in the Barsebaeck 2 reactor. While repairs werebeing made other deficiencies were found and Oskarshamn 1 was given atotal renovation. Only the reactor tank has not been altered. Thereactor was started in 1972.Oskarshamn 1 has been given a provisional permit until summer, when theinspectorate will decide on prolonging the permit, at most until thesummer of 1999.The renovation of the reactor is something of a model for the demandson other reactors when they grow older, according to the inspectorate.New methods for analysis have shown the weakness in some of the olderconstructions, e.g. safety systems against fires and flooding should beimproved. The utilities' ambitions for improvements have not been highenough in earlier plans, says the inspectorate.* Meanwhile, a trade union dispute is taking place at the four reactorsin Oskarshamn. Electricians have refused to be undergo drug tests foralcohol and narcotics: other unions have agreed to random checks, butthe electricians do not believe them necessary for safety reasons.There was no problem in starting tests at the Ringhals nuclear plant.The tests were introduced after a woman was killed: her brother wassuspected of committing the crime and had worked at the nuclear plant,although he had previous convictions for narcotics crime and illegalpossession of weapons.Back to Headline List CopyrightEUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996FORMER EDF HEAD AVOIDS OIL JOBFormer Electricite de France (EdF) president Gilles Menage hassuccessfully resisted the presidency of the Institut francais dupetrole, which was being offered to him as a consolation prize for hissacking. Menage did not have any obvious qualification to head theresearch body, and did not want the post. Indeed, the institute, whichbrings together the French oil companies Elf and Total, as well as Gazde France and the motor manufacturers Peugeot/Citroen and Renault, willbe better off with Pierre Jacquard, who has spent over 25 years inhouse. Jacquard, who has been general manager since 1988, was electedunanimously to be both president and general manager. His electionmarks an effort by the institute to become more independent of thegovernment.Back to Headline List CopyrightEUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996INCIDENT ON AMOCO GAS RIGWorkers escaped injury in an apparent explosion on a North Sea gasproduction platform. Operators Amoco (UK) Exploration Company said aninvestigation was under way into the incident on 49/27/Alpha platform,58km northeast of Great Yarmouth, Norfolk. A spokesman said there was a"circuit breaker trip" - much like a fuse blowing. There was no fire,but some smoke. There was no evacuation after the incident, he said.Back to Headline List CopyrightEUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996BAVARIAN/CZECH OIL LINK ON LINEA 340km oil pipeline from Ingolstadt in southern Germany to the CzechRepublic has just come on stream. The joint Bavarian/Czech venture willbecome fully operational in April this year. The DM725m ($503m)project, dubbed 'Mero', is to help towards making the Czech Republicindependent of Russian crude. It will transport up to 15mt/yr of crudefrom Western to Eastern Europe. Mero is the first oil pipeline linkingGermany with a central European country. At the same time, theconstruction of a 600,000cm oil storage facility near Prague wasconcluded.Back to Headline List CopyrightEUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996OMV EYES ADRIATIC RETAIL EXPANSIONNow that a degree of peace has reached the area, Austria's state-controlled OMV energy concern has moved quickly in the Adriatic statesto gain market share before the expected arrival of major multinationaloil companies. Via its 50%-owned distributor Slomin Holding Druzba (EER427/10), OMV last year combined its retail activities in northernItaly, Slovenia and Croatia. From a starting base of 79 fillingstations, the Slomin Holding outlets have expanded to 94, with thenewest station opened in Maribor, Slovenia, last month. Slomin Holdinglast year retailed 560,000t of mineral oil products, with 1995 salestopping Sch2bn ($197m), a gain of 13.2% over 1994 on a 4.5% increase inproduct volume in tonnes. Investments totalling Sch422m are planned for1996.Back to Headline List CopyrightEUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996GERMAN INTEREST IN KAZAKH OIL FIELDGermany's RWE-DEA and Erdoel-Erdgas Gommern have signed contracts forthe joint development of the Akshabulak oil field in central Kazakhstanwith a local partner and the government of the country. The two Germanpartners are each holding 25% and the local oil company Yuzhkazneftegaz50% in the Kazgermunai joint venture set up to undertake the work.Back to Headline List CopyrightEUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996RWE-DEA DETAILS INVESTMENT PLANSThe RWE-DEA oil and chemicals group will invest "far more than DM1bn($693m)" in the 1995/1996 business year (ending 30 June) after DM723m ayear earlier, according to chairman Peter Koch. As he explained in anin-house publication, chemicals would account for 40% of the total, dueto a stake bought earlier in Italian company Enichem Augusta. Of theremainder, one third would be spent on downstream and another quarteron upstream activities.Back to Headline List CopyrightEUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996WINTER WEATHER EXPOSES BG TO CRITICSBritish Gas (BG) admitted it had been "caught out" by the severity ofthe UK's Christmas weather and had been unable to fulfil its commitmentto all its customers with service contracts. Thousands of people with'Three Star' contracts were reportedly left without heating during theholiday period - some for several days - after engineers failed to turnup to repair central heating faults. Under the "peace of mind" servicescheme, customers are promised that a gas engineer will be despatchedwithin 24 hours of the problem being reported. Spokesman Andrew Davissaid: "In some areas we were caught out . . . We will look at whathappened to make sure that we learn from this next year." He said thatconditions were so extreme in Glasgow, for example, that the dieselfuel in service vans froze.Back to Headline List CopyrightEUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996SNAM GAS SALES ON THE UPMethane gas sales by Snam, a subsidiary of Italian energy giant ENI,rose 11.1% in 1995 to 53bncm from 47.7bncm the year before, the companysaid in a statement. The company said industrial sales climbed 9% to21.8bncm, Methane gas sales to the domestic sector jumped 10.3% to22.5bncm, while sales in the thermoelectric sector rose 16.4% to7.8bncm.Back to Headline List CopyrightEUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996EDP UNVEILS PRICE CUT PROGRAMMEElectricidade de Portugal (EdP), the state power utility, is to cutprices for industrial and commercial users by 5-8% in nominal terms in1996. Taking account of expected inflation, this represents a reductionin real terms of 8.5-11.5%, says EdP. Prices are to be 5% lower duringpeak hours and 8% lower at other times. Prices for domestic consumerswill be held flat in nominal terms in 1996. EdP has also forecast thatits 1995 profits will double from 1994's Esc30.5bn ($203m).Back to Headline List CopyrightEUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996EAST MIDLANDS OFFER CUSTOMERS REBATEUK regional electricity company (REC) East Midlands Electricity is topay its customers a one-off #6 discount on top of the #50.56 ($77.83)payout following the National Grid flotation, the group announced. TheNottingham-based company said the #6 discount was as a result of itssuccess in reducing electricity purchase costs over the past year.Back to Headline List CopyrightEUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996GERMAN MINI-CHP INTEREST BOOMSAlthough supplying only a niche market, small unit-type CHP stationsare becoming ever more popular, according to the results of a survey bythe German utilities' association, VDEW. By the end of 1994, 1,577 ofthe mini-CHP plants, owned by industry and municipalities, were inoperation, some 37% more than in 1992. A further 75 were underconstruction and 33 planned. Almost 90% of the plant had an electricitygenerating capacity of under 1 MW. By end-1994, total capacity hadrisen to 872 MWe compared with 577 MWe two years previously.Back to Headline List CopyrightEUROPEAN ENERGY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996DENMARK'S 3Q GAS DEMAND UP 9%According to figures released by the Danish national statistics bureau,consumption of natural gas rose 9% to 14.15 PJ in the third quarter of1995, compared to the corresponding period the previous year. Oil salesfell by just under 2% to 72.35 PJ in July-September 1995 while sales ofelectricity were almost unchanged at 7.454 TWh. Meanwhile, biodieselsales increased 8% to comprise 51.5% of total diesel sales in theperiod under review.Back to Headline List WT02-B35-15IA086-000616-B010-328http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/ey15.html 205.156.212.5 19970121235617 text/html 41527HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Tuesday, 21-Jan-97 23:54:03 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:40:59 GMTContent-length: 41342Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ey15.html Sample Issue Copyright FLEETS & FUELS via NewsNet January 1, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES ||||||||||||||||| CALIFORNIA BACKPEDAL Air Resources Board Favoring Five-Year Delay in ZEV Mandates In Accord with the Voluntary System Proposed by Automakers (171 words) FEDERAL MILLIONS ARPA Largesse Expected for Electric Pickup; $5mm Project by Composite Firm, Partners (328 words) ON LINE AND FOR SALE Westinghouse Launches Manufacturing Of EV Drives, Controllers and Chargers (149 words) POWER CONTROL More Federal Support for SatCon: EV Power Controllers and Flywheels (150 words) IT'S EPIC, BUT WHEN? Everything But the Release Date As Chrysler Promotes Fleet Van (561 words) CHARGER SPLIT Ford, Chrysler Differ with GM On Conductive Versus Inductive (355 words) VOLUME BATTERIES IN FRANCE It's an Industry Now, Say the French, As Saft Sets Up Bordeaux Battery Plant (214 words) VOLUME BATTERIES IN TEXAS $80 Million Seen as Potential Value To Electrosource of Chrysler Order (253 words) |||||||||||||||||||| NEWT GINGRICH TO THE RESCUE? Clinton Administration Ducks the LNG Excise Tax Issue So the NGV and Gas Industry Takes its Case to Congress (175 words) INSIDE TRACK EDO Gets a Leg Up with Japanese OEMs As Fiber Supplier Toray, Sumitomo Buy In (602 words) NGV ECOTRANS GROUP Cardinal's Western Operations to Merge Today With Conversion Business of SoCal Gas Utility (60 words) LNG at LAX RFP in Preparation for Permanent Station (165 words) FIRST-EVER REBATE Payment to New York, New Jersey Port For Three New Vans and a Conversion (156 words) HEAVY HALF DOZEN? Big Rigs May Make Big Year for LNG Half a Dozen Truckmakers Offer NGVs (715 words) CLEAN FUEL CORRIDOR Diverse Groups Team in California For Clean Vehicle Fueling Facilities (129 words) |||||| Ford has turned out the first two prototype (146 words) German postal authorities have kicked off their (119 words) Got a breakthrough? A better widget, perhaps? How (100 words) Toyota has picked a 1,100-acre site in Princeton, (82 words) The city of Palm Desert, Calif. and the SunLine (46 words) Nevada's De Vaux Power is promoting the "engine (56 words) Kentucky's Bachman NGV has a contract to convert (59 words) CopyrightFLEETS & FUELS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996CALIFORNIA BACKPEDALAir Resources Board Favoring Five-Year Delay in ZEV MandatesIn Accord with the Voluntary System Proposed by AutomakersWatch for a delay in zero-emission vehicle sales mandates inCalifornia with two percent in 1998 effectively replaced by10 percent -- in 2003.     CARB has ordered its staff to develop a scheme toreplace the original 1998 deadline for meeting a 2-percentZEV sales mandate.     CARB will instead float a plan to have automakers meeta 10-percent ZEV sales mandate by 2003.     This approach, to be formally proposed by March,effectively gives automakers a five-year breather beforemeeting ZEV sales goals.     But the plan will also encourage ZEV introductions asearly as this year, by giving automakers credits, toward the2003 mandate, for ZEVs brought to market before 1998.Credits will also be given to ZEVs that use advanced batterydesigns.     Automakers, for their part, pledge to have capacity inplace to make 5,000 EVs in 1996 and 1997, and 14,000 peryear from 1998 until 2003's 10-percent mandate kicks in(figures spread over the "Big Seven" -- Chrysler, Ford andGeneral Motors; and Honda, Mazda, Nissan and Toyota).Back to Headline List CopyrightFLEETS & FUELS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996FEDERAL MILLIONSARPA Largesse Expected for Electric Pickup;$5mm Project by Composite Firm, PartnersDevelopers of a composite-bodied electric pickuptruck will match expected government funding of$2.5 million, making for a $5-million overalleffort, says Kerry Hitt, president of AdvancedComposite Products, of Harrisburg, Pa., leaddesigner of the vehicle.     ACP is a composite race car developer. Thenew truck is known as the UEV, for utilityelectric vehicle.     Hitt and his partners, including PennsylvaniaPower & Light and other utilities coordinated bythe Pennsylvania Electric Transportation Council(PETC) now await the formal award of money fromthe Pentagon's Advanced Research Projects Agency.Westinghouse Drive     The prototype UEV includes an electric drivetrain from Maryland's Westinghouse.     ACP plans to build three or four UEVs forcrash testing, hoping to take a crash-certifiedfinal design to an OEM -- "preferably aPennsylvania OEM," says Hitt -- for volumeproduction.     The UEV chassis is formed by a rectangulartube structural member which also serves as thebattery storage area. "The reinforcements used inthe chassis area include carbon fiber, chosen forits structural properties, and glass fiber,selected for structural and dielectricproperties," ACP says.     Other composite EV developers, says Hitt,have "merely substituted materials," usingcomposites instead of metals. "We have designedour vehicle around composite materials, aroundwhat they are and what they do," he told F&F.Shown in Atlanta     ACP's competitive edge is highly accurate andconsistent fiber orientation, Hitt says. Thecompany will employ a proprietary fabricationprocess, including resin transfer molding, tobuild the UEV. The RTM-based process, whichinvolves dry fiber preforms that approximate theshape of finished parts, "will cut labor intensityby up to 80 percent." The UEV design employs epoxyresins to consolidate the high-strength fibers andincludes both foam and honeycomb core materials.     The prototype UEV was shown at December'selectric vehicle infrastructure meeting inAtlanta.ACP, Mr. Kerry Hitt (president), 717-232-8237; fax232-5417PETC/PP&L, Ken Quinty, 610-774-5432; fax 610-774-6503Westinghouse, Carl Holub, 410-765-9005; fax 410-765-8281Back to Headline List CopyrightFLEETS & FUELS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996ON LINE AND FOR SALEWestinghouse Launches ManufacturingOf EV Drives, Controllers and ChargersWestinghouse says it's begun series production ofelectric vehicle drive trains and relatedcomponents, including chargers.     The company makes 100- and 230-horsepower EVdrives. It numbers Georgia's Blue Bird and China'sYuanwang Bus Group among its customers for thelarger system, and Ford and Chrysler, for Rangerpickups and the new Epic minivan (F&F, October 30;also Chrysler-Epic story on following page of thisissue) for the 100-horsepower system.     The Chrysler and Ford vehicles will alsoemploy a 6.0-kilowatt Westinghouse onboardcharger.     Westinghouse also offers a 135-kilowatt rapidcharge system that uses knowhow from Georgia'sElectronic Power Technology, Inc. (EPTI).     "Existing prototype systems can rechargelarge transit-style electric buses to 80 percentof capacity in under one hour," Westinghouse says.     EV component business is organizationallypart of the Westinghouse defense and electronicsbusinesses that were put up for sale following thecorporation's acquisition of the CBS televisionnetwork.Back to Headline List CopyrightFLEETS & FUELS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996POWER CONTROLMore Federal Support for SatCon:EV Power Controllers and FlywheelsSatCon Technology Corporation has new federalsupport for its ongoing efforts to perfect powercontrol and flywheel energy storage technology.New funding is coming from the Advanced ResearchProjects Agency and via the ARPA-supportedElectricore, the Mid-America Electric VehicleConsortium.     Massachusetts-based SatCon has a Phase I ARPAcontract valued at $100,000 to develop next-generation modular power controllers for electricdrives and some $200,000 from Electricore forpower management and flywheel-based storagesystem.Leveraging Other Projects     The Electricore contract carries a totalcost-shared value of $427,000, as SatCon can applymatching funds of as much as $227,000 from otherdevelopment projects.     Thermal management is the key to SatCon'spower controllers. SatCon has "developed ways todensely compact these modules and take the heatout," spokesman Bill O'Donnell told F&F, partlythrough the use of advanced materials but also viaproprietary engineering approaches.SatCon, Bill O'Donnell, 617-661-0540; fax 617-661-3373Back to Headline List CopyrightFLEETS & FUELS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996IT'S EPIC, BUT WHEN?Everything But the Release DateAs Chrysler Promotes Fleet Van"It's aimed at the fleet market," says Chrysler,and what's more represents "the next logical stepin the development of electric vehicles." Theautomaker said at last month's EV infrastructuremeeting in Atlanta that it is ready to build theElectric Powered Interurban Commuter -- the Epic-- minivan in Canada, with California a primemarket target.     But the timetable is a secret.'Supplier Issues'     "There are several final supplier issues thatneed to be worked through, so we're not ready togive an exact launch date," Chrysler electricminivan program executive engineer Bob Feldmaiersaid in a statement in Atlanta. But "we've made itclear," Feldmeier said, "that this vehicle wouldbe available by the 1998 model year, and that hasnot changed."     Demand is a key factor in establishing aspecific launch date, Chrysler says. "Cost andrange are the two critical market issues that willshape fleet customer demand," the automaker added.It is predicting a modest per-charge range ofabout 60 miles for the vehicle under "idealconditions." The company also says that itsonboard charger will require as much as eighthours for a complete "fill-up."Horizon Batteries, Westinghouse Drive     Chrysler has confirmed that it will use thelightweight Horizon lead acid battery fromElectrosource in the Epic van, and elsewhere atthe Atlanta gathering endorsed an onboardconductive charging system that would allow anelectric vehicle to be plugged in for chargingalmost anywhere. The new EV is also to employ aWestinghouse drive train, with a 100 peak-horsepower AC induction motor, and have a 6.0-kilowatt Westinghouse charger.     Chrysler says it's ready to build the Epicvan at its Windsor, Ont. assembly plant "as partof regular production. No conversion isnecessary." The EPIC model designation will beapplied to both Dodge Caravan and Plymouth VoyagerEV models.     "Because the minivan is by far our mostsuccessful vehicle, and because it has the uniqueability to work as either a commuter vehicle or autility vehicle, this platform made the most senseto us for electric power," Feldmaier said inAtlanta.     "The large flat floor also gives us plenty ofroom to store batteries, and more importantly, tochange battery types as new technologies aredeveloped.     "Right now we're able to get 27 modules atabout 1,600 pounds onboard of the advanced[Electrosource Horizon] lead-acid battery. Weanticipate a range of about 60 miles under idealconditions with that amount and type of battery."     The cost and price of the vehicle have alsonot been finalized, although Chrysler warns that"the low-volume componentry and the cost ofbatteries" will make the vehicle "significantlymore costly than a comparable gasoline minivan."Pricing will not be announced until the releasedate of the vehicle has been established.     Chrysler says it will target fleet andutility customers that have previously purchasedits electric and compressed natural gas vehicles.     The front-wheel drive Epic van will have agross weight of 5,900 pounds with 27 kilowatt-hours of power, enough for 60 miles withoutaccessories (the vehicle will include power brakesand power steering, an AM-FM radio and heat pumpair conditioning and auxiliary electric heatingsystem, and a rear defrost).     The Epic minivan will also have a batterymanagement system and an onboard charging system.Chrysler, Bob Feldmeier, 810-576-2645; fax 576-0929Back to Headline List CopyrightFLEETS & FUELS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996CHARGER SPLITFord, Chrysler Differ with GMOn Conductive Versus InductiveDetroit's Big Three have another reason to saythat electric vehicles aren't yet ready for market-- Chrysler and Ford have endorsed direct metalcontact conductive charging couplers while GeneralMotors prefers the Hughes-developed inductivepaddle connector now marketed by Delco.     Ford and Chrysler unveiled a prototype metal-to-metal connector in Atlanta, and said they weregiving meeting participants "a look into thefuture."GM Inductive Deal with Toyota     GM, meanwhile, has notched an agreementwhereby Toyota gets a license, includingmanufacturing rights, to the Delco paddle coupler.     Ford and Chrysler say they've taken a steptoward needed standardization in the EV industry."With EV infrastructure, the goal is to avoid theVHS versus Beta problems we saw with early videotape technology," Ford EV program director JohnWallace said in a joint statement.     "We believe conductive charging is safe andthe most efficient and cost-effective method ofcharging," said Chrysler executive engineer BobDavis.     The prototype unveiled in Atlanta wasproduced by SCI Systems, described as "the world'slargest contract manufacturer of electronicassemblies and products." The design, which is toavailable to other charger and couplermanufacturers, is said to have been made to thespecifications of Chrysler and Ford, "five othermajor auto manufacturers," the California AirResources Board and the Infrastructure WorkingCouncil sponsored by the Electric Power ResearchInstitute.     GM-Delco, for its part, claims the supportnot only of Chrysler and Ford but of Honda, Mazda,Nissan and Toyota behind the issuance of aRecommended Practice for Electric VehicleInductive Charging via the Society of AutomotiveEngineers a year ago (F&F, February 6, 1995).'No Plug-and-Socket'     "Inductive charging is known for its safetyfeatures and simple operation," says a Delcorelease. "The inductive charger has noconventional metal plug-and-socket connection.Instead, the user inserts a lightweight,waterproof plastic paddle into a vehicle's chargeport. This simple action transfers power through amagnetic field."     Ford and Chrysler say that their coupler issafe in all weathers, too.Chrysler, Bob Davis, 810-576-0903; fax 810-576-0929     Ford, John Wallace, 313-390-5589; fax 313-390-3251Toyota (communications), Koji Sekiyama, 81-3-5381-1730Back to Headline List CopyrightFLEETS & FUELS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996VOLUME BATTERIES IN FRANCEIt's an Industry Now, Say the French,As Saft Sets Up Bordeaux Battery PlantSaft has inaugurated "the world's first plant toproduce electric vehicle batteries in volume" atBordeaux in southwest France.     The big customers for the company's nickelcadmium batteries are the French automakers PSAand Renault for the Citroen AX, the Peugeot 106,and Renault's Clio and Express EVs.     The $20-million plant will be able to producebatteries for 5,000 vehicles per year. "Extensionsare planned to meet market growth," says a releasefrom Saft America (Valdosta, Ga.).     The French car companies and Saft have had anagreement on ni-cads since 1992. Saft claims aservice life of 60,000 miles for the advancedbatteries.     "Ongoing research is focused on nickel-basedbatteries for current generation electric vehiclesand lithium-based batteries for vehicles in thenext century," Saft says. "Incremental increasesin battery capability are planned to increasevehicle range to two-and-a-half times what it istoday."Saft America, Jim Miller, 912-245-2839; fax 247-8486PSA Peugeot Citroen may be plotting a return tothe U.S. market, according to remarks by chairmanJacques Calvet reported in The Wall StreetJournal. "He said Peugeot would consider such amove only if there was a niche his company couldfill," the Journal said on December 19. "[Calvet]declined to say whether that niche could be anelectric car."Back to Headline List CopyrightFLEETS & FUELS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996VOLUME BATTERIES IN TEXAS$80 Million Seen as Potential ValueTo Electrosource of Chrysler OrderAn order by Chrysler for its Epic electric minivanwill allow Electrosource to ramp up to full OEMsupplier status, the Austin, Texas-based supplierof Horizon brand lightweight lead-acid batteriessaid in Atlanta.     The Production Purchase Order could lead tobusiness exceeding a cumulative $80 million overthe next three years, Electrosource says. TheChrysler PPO also provides cost and delivery termsfor Horizon battery packs for the Epic van. Thefirst of an expected series of build orders hasalready been filled.     The Horizon battery saves weight by using alead-plated glass fiber mesh in lieu of leadplates. Electrosource claims "the highest peakpower of any battery technology currentlyavailable," noting that independent testing haspegged specific energy at 44.2 watt-hours perkilogram, about 50 percent better than that oftraditional lead-acid batteries.Quick-Charge Capable     And, "with proper equipment, the Horizonbattery can be recharged as quickly as 30 minutes,which effectively extends the vehicle's range,"the company says. Chrysler is believed to favorthe Norvik quick-charge system, though slow-chargewill be standard for the first of the Epic vans.     "Electrosource has met all of the technicalrequirements to qualify the advanced Horizonbattery for use in our electric minivans," BobFeldmaier, a Chrysler executive engineer in chargeof the electric minivan program, said in theElectrosource release.     "Electrosource's technical staff has helpedour program improve performance by contributinginsights into battery management systems andadvanced charging profiles," Feldmaier said.Electrosource, Bill Craven, 512-445-6606, ext 108;fax 512-445-6819Back to Headline List CopyrightFLEETS & FUELS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996NEWT GINGRICH TO THE RESCUE?Clinton Administration Ducks the LNG Excise Tax IssueSo the NGV and Gas Industry Takes its Case to CongressIt's falling to Congress to save vehicle users of LNG fromtaxes that make the clean-burning fuel more expensive thandiesel. The Clinton administration has refused to go to batfor the NGV industry following an adverse 1995 excise taxruling by the Internal Revenue Service (F&F, October 16).     The American Gas Association and its affiliated NaturalGas Vehicle Coalition are actively working the problem --not via the President, as had been planned, but throughCongress.     "Clinton doesn't want to take on the IRS," says oneindustry observer in Washington. And, he says, the overallgovernment goal of deficit reduction looms as a majorobstacle to reversing the ruling. "The Treasury is notinterested in finding new ways to decrease revenues. TheTreasury wants to tax anything it can get its hands on."     The NGV advocates' sole ace? Clean-burning LNG wouldallow truckers to meet 2004 standards for emissions now, andthe transportation industry could arguably could save moneyby doing so if the tax were readjusted.NGVC, Nancy Etkin, 703-527-3022; fax 703-527-3025Back to Headline List CopyrightFLEETS & FUELS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996INSIDE TRACKEDO Gets a Leg Up with Japanese OEMsAs Fiber Supplier Toray, Sumitomo Buy InComposite CNG tankmaker EDO Canada has snatched amajor marketing advantage with the huge Japaneseauto sector. The company has notched a dealmaking Sumitomo the exclusive distributor ofEDO's LiteRider brand tanks to Japanese OEMs,worldwide.     In return, for an aggregate $5,000,000Canadian (some $3.6 million U.S. at current ratesof exchange), two Sumitomo units and EDO's carbonfiber-supplier Toray Industries have taken acombined 16.4-percent stake in EDO's compressednatural gas cylinder manufacturing operation inCalgary.EDO Still Holds the Majority     The deal modifies the EDO Corporation-Province of Alberta 60-40 joint-venture ownershipof EDO Canada to give Sumitomo 6.6 percent andToray 9.8 percent of the company. New York City-based EDO Corporation retains the majority share.     EDO Canada makes LiteRider brand CNG tanksin Calgary, using polyethylene liners overwrappedwith carbon fiber. Its principal fiber supplierhas been Toray for high-strength T-700 material,although EDO is working with at least one othermanufacturer, believed to be Hercules.     [Toray is distinguished in the materialsworld as the supplier of toughened epoxycomposite material, made with T-800 carbon fiber,for the tail and floorbeams of BoeingCommercial's new 777 widebody jet. The 'triple-7'is the first American transport aircraft to bebuilt with composite primary structures.]Japanese in U.S. the 'First Target'     The initial EDO Canada deal with Sumitomomakes Japan's Sumitomo Corporation's OsakaMachinery Department and New York City's SumitomoCorporation of America the exclusive distributorsof LiteRider cylinders to Japanese automotivemanufacturers. Those with car or truckmanufacturing operations in the United States"are the first target," says EDO Corporationpresident Frank Fariello.     Honda, for example, is promising a naturalgas-powered car for the 1998 model year. Andalthough the vehicle is to be built in Ohio,component decisions are expected to be made inJapan.     [Prototype Honda NGVs use a two-tankconfiguration using all-composite cylinders fromLincoln Composites. Honda has indicated that itwill shift to one larger cylinder for theproduction vehicle.]     EDO may eventually grant LiteRidermanufacturing rights to its Japanese partners,although according to Fariello, the establishmentof an NGV industry in Japan awaits regulatorychanges and the building of a fuelinginfrastructure there.     Japanese LiteRider manufacture "is not partof this deal," the EDO chief told F&F. "That issubject to additional negotiations."     "At this time there are no plans forSumitomo to manufacture the CNG cylinders inJapan," says a Sumitomo spokeswoman in New York."However, we are leaving our options open for thefuture."A Tank Technical Task Force Too     The latest arrangement, publicized lastmonth, establishes a strategic alliance betweenEDO, Sumitomo and Toray designed to "accelerateand expand the alliance's presence in the U.S.and international NGV market."     The two Japanese firms get an EDO Canadaboard seat. The Toray deal further --> sets up an EDO-Toray technical task forceaimed at improving composite CNG tanks with theprimary thrust of "increasing the overall cost-effectiveness of NGV fuel storage;" and --> maintains Sumitomo as the sole distributor ofLiteRider cylinders to Japanese OEMs worldwide.     "For years, the principal applications ofcarbon fiber have been in the aerospace andsporting goods industries," Toray AdvancedComposites GM Kichi Fujisawa said in an EDOrelease.     The LiteRider cylinder, Fujisawa said,"presents us with an opportunity to expand theseapplications."     Fujisawa is now a director of EDO Canada.Toray Tokyo, Mr. Kichi Fujisawa, +81-3-3245-5743;fax +81-3-3245-5817Sumitomo New York, Mr. Takahiro Ichino, 212-207-0552; fax 212-207-0638Sumitomo Osaka, Mr. Tetsuro Takeoka, +81-6-220-6690; fax +81-6-220-7763EDO Canada, Tom Laidlaw, 403-569-5400; fax 569-5499Back to Headline List CopyrightFLEETS & FUELS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996NGV ECOTRANS GROUPCardinal's Western Operations to Merge TodayWith Conversion Business of SoCal Gas UtilitySouthern California Gas and NGV Systems aremerging their NGV Ecotrans Technology vehicleconversion business with the western operationsof Michigan-based Cardinal Automotive forming theNGV Ecotrans Group effective today, January 1.     The Los Angeles-based Group has 100,000square feet of combined manufacturing space inand capacity for 30,000 NGV conversions a year.NGV Ecotrans GM Russ Reeder, 213-689-1973Back to Headline List CopyrightFLEETS & FUELS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996LNG at LAXRFP in Preparation for Permanent StationThe Los Angeles International Airport board hasauthorized LAX to float a request for proposalsfor a permanent liquefied and compressed naturalgas fueling station in support of LAX vehicles.     The turnkey LNG/CNG fueling station onairport property near the intersection ofImperial Highway and Main Street will also beavailable to airport and other fleet operators,and to the public.     LAX has 14 LNG-powered shuttle buses, witheight more expected for delivery beginning inJanuary 1996. The Airports department alsooperates 33 CNG-powered utility trucks, pickuptrucks and sedans.     LNG fuel for the LAX buses is currentlysupplied by a temporary station. CNG comes from aSouthern California Gas station on UnitedAirlines' leasehold.     The new station "will help the departmentmeet California's State Implementation Plan as itapplies to civil airports, which is expected tomirror the federal plan that calls for a majorshift to low-emission vehicles," said executivedirector John Driscoll.LAX, Dave Waldner, 310-646-3263, ext 19; fax 310-215-5399Back to Headline List CopyrightFLEETS & FUELS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996FIRST-EVER REBATEPayment to New York, New Jersey PortFor Three New Vans and a ConversionNew Jersey's Public Service Electric & Gas hasdetermined its first natural gas vehicle rebate,a payment of $1,000 per vehicle for four NGVsplaced in service by the Port Authority of NewYork and New Jersey.     The Port has bought three new Chrysler NGVminivans and converted an existing jeep tonatural gas fuel. "The Port Authority's move tonatural gas vehicles is a good business decisionthat will eventually save us money by cuttingmaintenance and fuel costs," says Port projectmanager Sal D'Angelo. The Port will put more NGVsin service this year.     The Port uses New Jersey's first public-access CNG station, a facility put in servicenear the Holland Tunnel to New York City as ajoint venture of PSE&G and Shell (F&F, May 15,1995).     The PSE&G rebate will be available throughAugust 1997.Port, Mr. Sal D'Angelo, 201-216-2368; fax 201-216-2355PSG&E, Jorge Lopez, 201-912-3214; fax 201-379-4369Back to Headline List CopyrightFLEETS & FUELS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996HEAVY HALF DOZEN?Big Rigs May Make Big Year for LNGHalf a Dozen Truckmakers Offer NGVsThe current excise tax situation has made foruncertainty (see page 1), but big-rig trucksrepresent one alternative fuel vehicle marketthat may not be dependent on forced fleet buys orfuel subsidies, as operators eye economicadvantages to clean-burning liquefied natural gasfuel.     Nigh-on half a dozen U.S. manufacturers areexpected to offer dedicated natural gas-poweredmedium- and heavy-duty trucks for model year1996.     They include Volvo GM, Freightliner, theaffiliates Kenworth and Peterbilt, and possiblyNavistar. The vehicles will be outfitted withnatural gas engines from Navistar, Cummins andDetroit Diesel.'Products that Have Been Missing'     "These new vehicles will give customers thenatural gas products that have been missing fromour portfolio and will play a pivotal role inboosting NGV industry efforts to moreaggressively target high-fuel-use, medium- andheavy-duty markets," said Gas Research Instituteproduct manager Dan Kincaid.     "The availability of OEM-produced trucks isa significant development for GRI and the gasindustry, which has cofunded development of NGVengines," Kincaid said in a GRI statement.     But "Vehicle manufacturers believe thesuccess of these trucks will depend on definitivelegislation, customer demand, cost acceptance andfueling infrastructure," the GRI man cautioned.NAVISTARNavistar, for one, says it's too early to promiseNGVs or natural gas engines for 1996 due to anabsence of federal standards on fuel systems,particularly for liquefied natural gas. TheChicago-based company has worked with DetroitDiesel on modification of Navistar's T444E enginefor natural gas, but says its Class 6-7 Model4700 truck with a T444NG powerplant isn't quiteready for market. "Right now it's only availablewith the T444E clean diesel," says a Navistarspokesman. "We take a very conservativeapproach," says another company source.     The T444 is available for natural gasoperation through DDC as the 30G engine.     [Navistar is also working with otheralternative fuels, including dimethyl ether,which has been tested in a T444E engine andaccording to Navistar "can eliminate exhaustsmoke and greatly reduce other exhaust pollutantswhile reducing engine noise. Navistar is workingDME with Amoco and with Haldor Topsoe of Denmarkand AVL List of Germany. Topsoe has a process formaking DME from natural gas, coal, or renewables,Navistar says.]Navistar, Bob Carso or Archie Massicotte, 708-865-3484; fax 708-865-3330KENWORTHKenworth Truck Company (Kirkland, Wash.) has theClass 8 Model T800 and the Class 7 prototype T300configured for LNG operation. "After the first ofthe year is when we really expect to make anintroduction," says Kenworth's Evan Campbell.Kenworth, Evan Campbell, 206-828-5758; fax 206-828-5099PETERBILTPeterbilt (Denton, Texas) offers the Model 320and Model 330 trucks with Cummins L10G and B5.9Gengines for LNG operation.Peterbilt, Scott Pearson, 817-591-4239; fax 817-591-4091VOLVO GMGreensboro, N.C.-based Volvo GM Heavy Truck isoffering a refuse hauler, the "Xpeditor," with aCummins L10-300G natural gas engine available inLNG and CNG versions. The NGV Xpeditor wasunveiled in mid-1995 making "Volvo GM Heavy Truckthe first Class 8 truck manufacturer to offernatural gas engines as a factory option."Volvo GM, Dave Schrader, 910-393-2847; fax 393-2277FREIGHTLINERFreightliner Corporation of Portland, Ore. alsounveiled a natural gas-powered vehicle in mid-1995: the FL 60 business class truck with aCummins B5.9G (5.9-liter) engine.     The company now offers an even wider rangeof LNG-powered trucks, including the Class 5FL50, the Class 7 FL70, and the Class 8 FL106,FLD112, FLD112SD, FLD120, and FLD120SD models.     Engine options include the Cummins B5.9G andL10G and the 50G and 60G from Detroit Diesel.     Freightliner Custom Chassis (Gaffney, S.C.)offers the Class 3 Model MT-12FNG with a Hercules3.7-liter or Cummins B5.9G engine.     The MT-12FNG is designed for the postalservice, which according to GRI may buy as manyas 500 of the CNG-powered units this fiscal year.Freightliner, Bill Thomas, 503-735-8896Freightliner Custom Chassis, 803-488-8604CUMMINSBesides the well known L10G and B5.9G, Cumminslate last year promoted its first 8.9-liternatural gas-fueled engine, the C8.3G, withavailability this first quarter of 1996. The 250-horsepower C8.3G is available with torque ratingsof 660 and 750 pound-feet at 1,400 rpm. The six-cylinder engine is aimed at bus and truckmarkets.Cummins, Gary Farrell, 812-377-3747; fax 377-3082Back to Headline List CopyrightFLEETS & FUELS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996CLEAN FUEL CORRIDORDiverse Groups Team in CaliforniaFor Clean Vehicle Fueling FacilitiesA California consortium is claiming to be thefirst in the nation to offer private motorists aClean Fuels Corridor stretching across two bigsouthern counties: San Bernadino and Riverside.     Fuels covered at 15 sites include CNG andLNG, as well as electric vehicle charging.     New natural gas fueling sites in Ontario,Riverside, Temecula and Joshua Tree willsupplement some 77 CNG sites, about half of thempublic, currently in service in SouthernCalifornia.     Consortium members include SouthernCalifornia Gas, Southern California Edison,United Parcel Service and local governments.     The project has just under $750,000 invehicle registration funds and nearly $1.2million from private parties including consortiummembers, Applied LNG Technologies, Mesa Pacific,Amendt Oil and Lapis Energy.SoCal Gas (communications) Denise King, 213-244-3030; fax 213-244-8253Back to Headline List CopyrightFLEETS & FUELS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996Ford has turned out the first two prototypeFord has turned out the first two prototypeRanger pickup gliders from its assembly line inEdison, N.J. "The purpose of building theseprototypes was to learn how to move a glider mostefficiently through an assembly plant withoutdisrupting normal production," Ford EV marketingmanager Mike McCabe said in a statement. TDMWorldwide Conversions is building a plant inKansas for the installation of electric drives inthe trucks (F&F, October 30). TDM is shooting forQualified Vehicle Modifier status, meaning thatFord will warranty EV trucks from the Kansasplant. TDM has not yet gotten the QVM nod because"until that plant is built, Ford can't audit it,"says TDM project manager Bill Coppola. He notesthat TDM has already secured QVM status for FordNGV conversions. "We've seen the drill," Coppolatold F&F. "We've done it." TDM, Bill Coppola,810-673-6557; fax 673-2337.Back to Headline List CopyrightFLEETS & FUELS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996German postal authorities have kicked off theirGerman postal authorities have kicked off theirtest of the zinc-air battery system from Israel'sElectric Fuel, taking delivery last month of halfa dozen EVs and staging a ribbon-cutting ceremonyfor Electric Fuel's zinc regeneration facility inBremen. The Electric Fuel system uses replaceablezinc cassettes in lieu of conventional batterycharging. The test by Deutsche Post, the largestmail service in Europe, will involve 64 vehicles,among them Mercedes-Benz MB410E vans and CorsaCombo pickups from GM Opel. Three of each havenow been delivered. The German postal andtelephone companies may eventually purchase25,000 and 15,000 EVs each, Electric Fuel says.Electric Fuel (Jerusalem) +972-2-322-484; fax+972-2-322-252. Electric Fuel (New York), 212-230-2172; fax 212-230-2173.Back to Headline List CopyrightFLEETS & FUELS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996Got a breakthrough? A better widget, perhaps? HowGot a breakthrough? A better widget, perhaps? Howabout "the world's most efficient ultra-capacitance fiber nickel metal electric chassisflywheel CNG cylinder"? A photosatifor? Or even abetter Johnson rod? Calstart's Project hatcherywants to hear from you. "Project Hatchery is anincubator for small businesses with big ideas,"the California alternative transportationconsortium says. Project Hatchery promises accessto affordable office and prototype fabricationspace (including computer design systems),marketing via the Internet, help with trackingdown funding sources, and a "knowledge base of140+ private and public participants."Calstart/Project Hatchery, Glen Perry, 818-565-5600; fax 818-565-5610.Back to Headline List CopyrightFLEETS & FUELS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996Toyota has picked a 1,100-acre site in Princeton,Toyota has picked a 1,100-acre site in Princeton,Ind. -- 21 miles north of Evansville -- as thelocation for its fourth North American vehicleassembly plant. Workers at the new $700-millionfacility are to begin building the T100 truck,which is currently produced in Japan, in the fallof 1998. The Princeton plant will employapproximately 1,300 people turning out 100,000vehicles a year. The T100 will use a new V8engine. Toyota Motor Corporate Services of NorthAmerica, 212-223-0303.Back to Headline List CopyrightFLEETS & FUELS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996The city of Palm Desert, Calif. and the SunLineThe city of Palm Desert, Calif. and the SunLineTransit Agency in Thousand Palms have inaugurateda zero-emission electric bus service. The"Shopper Hopper" connects various Palm Desertshopping districts. The Specialty VehicleManufacturing Corporation bus employs lead-acidbatteries. SunLine, Dick Cromwell, 619-343-3456;fax 619-343-1986.Back to Headline List CopyrightFLEETS & FUELS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996Nevada's De Vaux Power is promoting the "engineNevada's De Vaux Power is promoting the "enginetechnology breakthrough of the century," aninternal combustion powerplant configured toproduce zero emissions, without pollutioncontrols, "by virtue of the amount of dwell weare able to induce." Today's conventional enginesare based on a faulty engineering premise, DeVaux says. Thomas Denner, 702-565-4829; fax same.Back to Headline List CopyrightFLEETS & FUELS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996Kentucky's Bachman NGV has a contract to convertKentucky's Bachman NGV has a contract to convert47 vehicles at Travis Air Force Base inCalifornia from gasoline to CNG-gasoline bi-fueloperation. The deal marks Bachman's second AirForce conversion job (F&F, October 16). Bachmanalso has a contract to convert 10 vehicles at theUniversity of Southern Mississippi atHattiesburg. Bachman, Bill Calvert, 502-493-9866;fax 502-495-2863.Back to Headline List WT02-B35-16IA086-000616-B010-347http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/ey09.html 205.156.212.5 19970121235637 text/html 17585HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Tuesday, 21-Jan-97 23:54:43 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:41:00 GMTContent-length: 17400Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ey09.html Sample Issue Copyright GAS DAILY via NewsNet MAY 31, 1994 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES SunShine gets FERC nod to enter Florida market (192 words) NGSA says power study skims over gas benefits (456 words) May, June spot prices stay weak in light trading (249 words) June market leaves many unanswered questions (375 words) Texaco to cut staff at Henry Plant (106 words) Midcoast to build New York pipeline (131 words) TransCanada forms Mexican partnership (189 words) Midcoast to build New York pipeline (106 words) Industry, FERC agree to keep recovery mechanism (351 words) Coastal to sell Argentine operations (92 words) CopyrightGAS DAILY via NewsNetMAY 31, 1994SunShine gets FERC nod to enter Florida market     SunShine Interstate Transmission has received FERC's blessingto build a 145-mile natural gas pipeline into Florida that willinterconnect with a proposed 570-mile intrastate pipeline to bebuilt by its affiliate.     The commission also approved the pipeline's levelized rates. Therates are based on the ultimate capacity of the project, even thoughit will be at only half of its proposed capacity for three years. Sincethe pipeline will be charging only the base rate, the lack ofcapacity for the first few years will result in under-recovery of itslevelized cost of service. FERC will allow SunShine to spread therecovery of the under-recovered costs over the life of the project.     This rate design will provide new pipelines with the opportunityto compete with already established pipelines, CommissionerDonald Santa said. "It's a way to avoid the potentially time-consuming debate on whether future expansion costs should berolled-in or incremental," he added.     The pipeline will serve customers on the Florida peninsula, anarea that  has only one established interstate pipeline, Florida GasTransmission. The increased competition will benefit the Floridaconsumers, Commissioner James Hoecker added.Back to Headline List CopyrightGAS DAILY via NewsNetMAY 31, 1994NGSA says power study skims over gas benefits     The Natural Gas Supply Assn. (NGSA) has challenged thefindings in a report by a coal industry-backed group that finds coalas the fuel of choice for the next century's new baseload electricitygeneration.     The study "fails to factor in the full costs of technologies thatwould make coal's exhaust stream as clean as gas exhaust andassumes that the current bias in environmental regulations willcontinue to permit higher pollution levels from coal than from gas,"said Bruce Craig, NGSA's director of environmental affairs.     Energy Ventures Analysis prepared the study, "Fuel Choice forNew Electric Generating Capacity in the Next Century: Coal orNatural Gas," for the Center for Energy and Economic Development,a coalition of coal companies and railroads. The report finds thatwhile natural gas-based technologies are the economical choice fornew peaking load power plant capacity, coal is the cost-effectivefuel of choice for baseload capacity units, says a recent study byEnergy Ventures Analysis.     The report determines that natural gas technologies have lowercapital and nonfuel operating costs than coal technologies, but coal-based technologies "offer a significant delivered fuel priceadvantage over its natural gas-based competitors to virtually anypower plant location." For baseload units, fuel costs are the largestelement of operating costs, making coal the most cost-effective fuelof choice, the study says.     Craig countered, "There's no need to make 'either-or' judgementsabout fueling future electricity generation. Gas, oil and coal will allplay an important role." He added that the energy industry shouldfocus on policies that create market incentives for higherefficiency, environmental stewardship and new technologies to keepthis country competitive.     The overall goal, Craig said, should be that consumers get thebest package of fuel, jobs and environmental benefits at the lowestcost.     The study says one reason coal is less expensive is because itsdomestic supply is greater than the natural gas supply. At currentrates of consumption, the United States has about a 250-yearsupply of recoverable coal reserves, which can be commerciallydeveloped at current price levels, Energy Ventures Analysisdetermines. For natural gas, reserves are more limited, possibly a50-year supply, and are increasingly costly to develop, the studysays.     However, NGSA said the study underestimates natural gasreserves and fails to factor in the growing trend toward competitionin the electricity market.     "The study inappropriately assumes that those working in theelectric generating field do not read market signals correctly anddo not use fuel supply, technology or market instruments that otherindustries use," Craig noted.     For an abstract or full text copy of the study, call the Center forEnergy and Economic Development office in Washington at 202-628-5627.Back to Headline List CopyrightGAS DAILY via NewsNetMAY 31, 1994May, June spot prices stay weak in light trading     Many in the gas industry began stretching the three-day holidayweekend into four days by taking off all or part of last Friday, sotrading was light for both May and June supplies.     May prices in South Louisiana changed little for deals doneFriday morning, but prices in South Texas dropped into the mid- tohigh-$1.50s into Natural Gas Pipeline of America (NGPL), KochGateway Pipeline, Tennessee Gas Pipeline and Trunkline Gas.     Very few deals were reported done Friday for June, but therewere no signs of a recovery in spot prices. One source reported asale into Texas Gas Transmission (TGT) in zone SL at $1.71. The gasis baseloaded from Thursday through the rest of the month.     All three nuclear plants operated by Arizona Public Service arescheduled to be operating by tomorrow, but they will run at lessthan full capacity for the rest of the year.     Palo Verde Unit 3, which has been down for refueling, isscheduled to start up tomorrow. All three of Palo Verde's 1,270 MWplants will then be generating electricity.     But the units won't run any higher than 86% of capacity becauseof potential problems with the tubes that carry steam up throughthe boilers. The steam turns turbines to generate electricity. Smallcracks have appeared in the tubes, said a source at the utility.     During periods of peak electrical demand, the utility will burnnatural gas to generate electricity or buy power from othercompanies, he said.Back to Headline List CopyrightGAS DAILY via NewsNetMAY 31, 1994June market leaves many unanswered questions     A lot of questions will begin to be answered today and tomorrow,but weather will set the tone for prices throughout the month.     How much gas was sold swing? How many buyers, particularlythe big guys, the LDCs, held off buying until after the first of themonth? How will the nuclear plants near Houston and Dallasperform after being restarted?     Not to mention shut-ins. Is gas being shut in because of price orbecause of no market? Will producers voluntarily shut in enoughgas to have an impact on prices? And lastly, is it ever going to gethot and muggy in Texas?     Beginning with the last question, a couple of sources said TUElectric in the Dallas area is expecting temperatures in NorthTexas to move into the 90s this week and is asking suppliers to beprepared to ship gas. Temperatures in Oklahoma, likewise, areexpected to move into the 90s today, if not yesterday.     TU Electric also operates the Comanche Peak nuclear plant whereUnit Two is out of service to repair cracked welds. A two-weekdelay in the restart date has been penciled in, indicating a restartaround mid-June.     As reported, TU burns nuclear and lignite as baseload and usesgas for peaking needs. But the lignite units are running at maximumlevels now, said one source, which is why TU is preparing to call ongas if temperatures rise.     Unit Two at the South Texas Nuclear Plant near Houston wasrunning at 12% of capacity last Friday morning and was expected toput electricity onto the grid system on Sunday or yesterday. Itcould be at 100% of capacity in the first or second week this month.     Only one June deal was reported on Friday, a large package atthe Katy Interchange on an intrastate pipeline at $1.65, down apenny on the low end from Thursday's range of $1.66-70.     May intrastate prices fell below $1.60 in South Texas and below$1.40 in West Texas. Producers had little fight left in them toquibble over a few pennies for a period of a few days. They wantedgas to flow and were afraid there'd be no market at all over thelight-demand holiday weekend.Back to Headline List CopyrightGAS DAILY via NewsNetMAY 31, 1994Texaco to cut staff at Henry Plant     Texaco will eliminate 32 of 70 jobs at its Henry Plant, nearErath, La., and the Henry Hub, by the end of the year, the companytold Gas Daily.     The reduction in the workforce is required because of changingoperations at the facility, a spokesperson said. Texaco will nolonger be processing liquids at the plant.     The company said liquids extraction is unprofitable in thecurrent low-price environment for natural gas liquids. In addition,gas delivered to the hub usually does not need processing.     Operations at the hub itself are not affected, said Jagit Yadov,president of Texaco's Sabine Pipeline, operator of the Henry Hub.Back to Headline List CopyrightGAS DAILY via NewsNetMAY 31, 1994Midcoast to build New York pipeline     Midcoast Energy Resources is staking out new turf, constructinga natural gas pipeline in Bethlehem, N.Y., to serve the Owens-Corning Del Mar plant.     This 3 million cf system will be the first New York project forMidcoast, a Corpus Christi, Texas-based company that hasprimarily served industrial end-users in the Midwest and GulfCoast.     The system is slated for completion by June 30, and will includeinterconnect facilities with an existing pipeline owned byTennessee Gas Pipeline.     "Midcoast continues to pursue significant opportunities toprovide gas transportation services to industrial customers atsubstantial discounts from their present suppliers," MidcoastPresident Dan Tutcher said.     Fiscal year 1993 revenues for publicly held Midcoast were about$16 million. Midcoast also serves the Owens Corning FiberglassPlant in Kansas City, Kansas.Back to Headline List CopyrightGAS DAILY via NewsNetMAY 31, 1994TransCanada forms Mexican partnership     TransCanada PipeLines and Corporacion Gutsa, one of Mexico'sleading construction companies, have signed a letter ofunderstanding for joint efforts in a variety of projects in Mexico.     "We intend to work together with Gutsa in the areas of powergeneration facilities and the supply, distribution andcommercialization of natural gas in Mexico," said Gerald Maier,TransCanada's chairman.     The Mexican ambassador to Canada, Sandra Fuentes-Berain, saidthe partnership is evidence of the success of the North AmericanFree Trade Agreement.     TransCanada also has revised its 1995-96 facilities constructionapplication to the Canadian National Energy Board (NEB). Thepipeline is seeking approval to build 16.8 miles of line in Ontarioand Manitoba and a 28 MW compressor in Ontario.     This is in addition to the 17.3 miles of line and 42.3 MW ofcompression included in the earlier application. Total cost of allthe projects is estimated at C$189.3 million.     If approved by the NEB, TransCanada plans to begin constructionin 1995 and put the facilities into service by Nov. 1 next year.     The new facilities would add 88.8 million cfd of firm, long-haulcapacity to the pipeline.Back to Headline List CopyrightGAS DAILY via NewsNetMAY 31, 1994Midcoast to build New York pipeline     Midcoast Energy Resources is staking out new turf, constructinga natural gas pipeline in Bethlehem, N.Y., to serve the Owens-Corning Del Mar plant.     This 3 million cf system will be the first New York project forMidcoast, a Corpus Christi, Texas-based company that hasprimarily served industrial end-users in the Midwest and GulfCoast.     The system is slated for completion by June 30, and will includeinterconnect facilities with an existing pipeline owned byTennessee Gas Pipeline.     Fiscal year 1993 revenues for publicly held Midcoast were about$16 million. Midcoast also serves an Owens Corning FiberglassPlant in Kansas City, Kansas. LMBack to Headline List CopyrightGAS DAILY via NewsNetMAY 31, 1994Industry, FERC agree to keep recovery mechanism     Industry and FERC apparently see eye-to-eye about keepingintact the pricing differential mechanism that pipelines use torecover gas supply realignment (GSR) costs.     Industry participants assembled at a technical conference inWashington last week to voice general approval of the recoverymechanism. FERC commissioners seemed to agree that the two-yearrecovery program should not be altered.     Order 636 required pipelines to reform their contracts tomarket levels or terminate them altogether. The rule provided forrecovery of the costs associated with realigning the bundled-salescontracts. The commission determined last year, in various cases,that it would permit pipelines to collect the difference between themarket price and the price established in their contracts as arecovery mechanism for the GSR costs. The mechanism has been inplace for only 11 months of its proposed two-year period.     Customer complaints that pipelines were taking advantage of thepricing mechanism prompted the commission to take a look at theGSR recovery option, despite Commissioner Donald Santa's concernthat the commission was considering a "mid-stream change." Thecustomers were concerned that pipelines were getting windfallprofits through the mechanism.     But many of the complaints were squelched before theconference took place, after pipelines helped their customersrealize that the pricing differential recoveries would cost them lessthan federally ordered buyouts of the contracts.      Many of thecustomers simply didn't realize the trade-offs that the pipelineshave made on their costs, a representative of the Natural Gas SupplyAssn (NGSA) said. Some pipelines have eaten many of theirtransition costs, the representative added.     Nicholas Bush, president of NGSA, said the pricing differentialcosts are part of larger compromise agreements negotiated betweenpipelines and their customers. "Altering these compromises wouldupset the balance of interests achieved in those original settlementagreements," he said. "A change in course before the expiration ofthis limited period, as some have suggested doing, would send aconfusing signal."     Many of the pipelines noted in comments on the issue that mostof their contracts would be terminated by the end of the two-yearperiod.Back to Headline List CopyrightGAS DAILY via NewsNetMAY 31, 1994Coastal to sell Argentine operations     Coastal is selling its 23.33% interest in five producing oil andnatural gas fields and related facilities in Tierra del Fuegoprovince of Argentina for $68 million plus contingentconsiderations.     The sale will be to other joint-interest owners in the venture,Coastal said. The transaction is subject to certain approvals andwill be completed next month.     "This sale gives Coastal an attractive return on its initialinvestment," said David Arledge, Coastal's president and COO. "Atthe same time, it provides additional funds for other opportunitiesthe company currently has under review."Back to Headline List WT02-B35-17IA086-000616-B010-389http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/ey08.html 205.156.212.5 19970121235700 text/html 85876HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Tuesday, 21-Jan-97 23:54:56 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:41:00 GMTContent-length: 85691Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ey08.html Sample Issue Copyright GAS MARKETS WEEK via NewsNet NOVEMBER 8, 1993 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES Intrastate Price Survey (97 words) Anadarko buys Hugoton reserves (86 words) MONTHLY CONTRACT INDEX (485 words) WEEKLY PRICE SURVEY (622 words) NYMEX GAS FUTURES TRADING (179 words) PG&E pursues first regional electronic hub (794 words) Buyers position themselves for cold weekend (705 words) First day of Order 636 operation seen as smooth (591 words) Centran creditors could be repaid this year (433 words) Indiana utility fights 20-year cap (198 words) SoCal gets active in refinancing (108 words) Gulf Coast indexes up 5-10 cents for November (224 words) FERC commissioners get up to speed on GISB (364 words) Mining company doesn't get rights (451 words) Curtis nominated by president (184 words) Suncor discovers new fields (91 words) LIG moves offices in Houston (93 words) Amoco sets up trading room in Houston (282 words) Sluggish demand expected to slow 1993 growth (469 words) U.S. Natural Gas Supply and Demand -- 1993 Forecast Producers target SoCal fee (366 words) Arcadian, Southern agree to settle on bypass (482 words) U.S. attorney seeks court order against Iroquois (529 words) Santa cites signficance of gathering in policy (329 words) Canada eyes NYMEX pricing (319 words) DOE outlines status of energy law (392 words) EBB hooks up traders at Alberta's AECO C hub. (343 words) Edisto to focus on domestic reserves (257 words) Oklahoma sets proration meetings (102 words) Washington Energy hawks E&P unit (213 words) Fires disrupt SoCal service (71 words) New York project gets permits (83 words) El Paso criticizes comments made about case (343 words) Williams introduces electronic gas trading system (346 words) Columbia finds new LNG partner (217 words) People (146 words) Order 636 didn't startle hedgers (287 words) CopyrightGAS MARKETS WEEK via NewsNetNOVEMBER 8, 1993Intrastate Price Survey         Gas Daily's survey reflectswhat was paid most recently for 1million cfd or more on a dry $ permillion btu basis into pipelines for30-day contracts.                  Oct.Delivery         Index         Oct.         Nov.TexasValero            1.84         2.05-06       1.96-2.01MidCon Texas      1.92         1.96-97         2.02-04Houston Pipe Line 1.92         2.06-08         2.00-05Lone Star         1.86         1.82-87         1.90-94Houston Ship Channel 2.04      2.00-05         2.08-13Katy              1.96         2.08-12         2.06-09OklahomaTransok           1.67         1.64-69         1.70-75Enogex            1.74         1.70-75         1.75-80LouisianaIntrastates (combined) 2.03    2.04-06         2.08-13Back to Headline List CopyrightGAS MARKETS WEEK via NewsNetNOVEMBER 8, 1993Anadarko buys Hugoton reserves         Anadarko Petroleum has signedan agreement to purchase deep producingoil and gas properties in the Hugotonarea of southwest Kansas.         Anadarko would not say who itwas purchasing the properties frombecause of an agreement with theoperator, but the $20 million deal isexpected to close by June 15. About 60%of the reserves are crude oil.         Anadarko expects average netproduction of about 1.4 million cfd ofgas and about 500 barrels of oil perday, to be marketed under short-termcontracts.Back to Headline List CopyrightGAS MARKETS WEEK via NewsNetNOVEMBER 8, 1993MONTHLY CONTRACT INDEX     Monthly contract index prices areweighted average costs of gas based onvolumes and prices for spot deals doneduring the week before pipelinenomination days. Prices are in $ permillion Btu on a dry basis.                    November     OctoberDelivery             index       change      indexTexas--West WahaEl Paso               1.80         --         1.80Transwestern          1.79         -1         1.81East Texas--Carthage areaNGPL (G8)             2.00         +7         1.93Tennessee             2.00         +12        1.88Texas Eastern (ETX)   2.07         +8         1.99Texas Gas             2.07         +9         1.98Koch Gateway (United) 2.02        +16         1.86East--Houston--KatyFlorida Gas           2.06         --         2.06NGPL G4               2.00         +7         1.93Tennessee             2.00         +12        1.88Texas Eastern (STX)   2.05         +7         1.98Transco Z2 St. 45     2.12         +7         2.05Trunkline             2.06         +8         1.98North--Texas PanhandleANR                   1.90         -1         1.91KN header             1.86         -1         1.87NGPL A8ii             1.88         -1         1.89Northern              1.81         +3         1.78PEPL                  1.90         -1         1.91Transwestern          1.77         -1         1.78South--Corpus ChristiFlorida Gas           2.05         +1         2.04NGPL G1               1.99         +6         1.93Tennessee             2.00         +12        1.88Texas Eastern (STX)   2.04         +6         1.98Transco Z1 St. 30     2.09         +6         2.03Trunkline             2.05         +10        1.95Koch Gateway (United) 1.95         +9         1.86Louisiana--Onshore SouthANR                   2.09         +3         2.06Columbia              2.11         +7         2.04FGT Z1                2.06         --         2.06  Z2                  2.11         +3         2.08  Z3                  2.13         +2         2.11Henry Hub             2.14         +7         2.07HIOS                  2.08         +4         2.04NGPL G5               2.07         +10        1.97Sonat                 2.05         +10        1.95Tennessee             2.03         +10        1.93Texas Eastern (WLA)   2.08         +5         2.03Texas Eastern (ELA)   2.10         +6         2.04Texas Gas SL          2.08         +11        1.97Transco  Z3, St. 50, 62, 65  2.16         +5         2.11  Z4, St. 85          2.14         +4         2.10Trunkline             2.08         +9         1.99Koch Gateway (United) 2.00         +9         1.91OklahomaANR                   1.90         -1         1.91Arkla Transm.         1.97         +6         1.91El Paso               1.79         --         1.79NGPL A9               1.87         -1         1.88Northern              1.81         +3         1.78ONG                   1.88         +2         1.86PEPL                  1.90         -1         1.91Williams              1.83         -1         1.84New Mexico--San Juan BasinEl Paso               1.77         --         1.77NW (Ignacio plant)    1.72         -1         1.73Transw. SJ            1.78         -1         1.79Transw. Central (St. 8)* 1.81      -1         1.82RockiesCIG (N. syst)         1.72         -2         1.74D-J Basin             1.72         --         1.72Kern River            1.79         +1         1.78KN mainline           1.73         -3         1.76Northwest (U.S. gas)  1.73         -3         1.76Questar               1.71         -1         1.72Canadian GasIroquois              2.24         +5         2.19NW-Sumas              1.79         +7         1.72NOVA                 C2.18         +41       C1.77PGT (Kingsgate)       1.82         --          --Tenn. (Niagara)       2.32         +15         2.17Viking (Emerson)      1.85         +13         1.72AppalachiaCNG                   2.37         +11         2.26OthersCal. border to utils  2.03         -13         2.16  to end-users        2.06         -11         2.17  Malin (via PGT)     2.08          --         --  Wheeler Ridge       2.06         -7          2.13Chicago (NGPL-LDCs)   2.29         +9          2.20KN mainline           1.73         -3          1.76Michigan  Con Pwr large       2.23         -2          2.25  MichCon large       2.24         -1          2.25Midwestern            2.21         +9          2.12MRT (Pryvl, La.)      2.09         +7          2.02MRT (West Leg)        2.06         +6          2.00Northern Border (Ven) 1.88         -1          1.89Northern (demarc)     1.88         -1          1.89Tex. Eastern (ETX) (Ark.) 2.07     +8          1.99*At the zone boundary.Back to Headline List CopyrightGAS MARKETS WEEK via NewsNetNOVEMBER 8, 1993WEEKLY PRICE SURVEY         Extensive daily coverage byGas Markets Week's survey team reflectsprices last week for 5 million cfd drypackages on a Btu basis into thepipelines indicated for 30-daycontracts or less. Small packages arefor 1 million cfd or less. Changecolumn indicates changes from lastweek. Year-ago prices are reported inthe left column.November         11/1-11/5     11/1-11/4         Change      SmallDelivery         1992           1993                         PackagesTexas--West WahaEl Paso         2.15         1.96           +19 cents         1.98-2.00Transwestern    2.14         1.94           +16         1.96-98East Texas--Carthage areaNGPL (G8)       2.28         2.12           +14         2.14-16Tennessee       2.24         2.10           +13         2.12-14Texas E. ETX    2.26         2.17           +16         2.19-21Texas Gas       2.29         2.19           +16         2.21-23Koch Gateway (UGPL) 2.22     2.12           +19         2.14-16East--Houston--KatyFlorida Gas     2.22         2.20           +26         2.22-24NGPL G4         2.27         2.12           +14         2.14-18Tennessee       2.24         2.10           +13         2.12-14Texas E. STX    2.26         2.16           +16         2.18-20Transco Z2 St. 45  2.31      2.20           +18         2.22-24Trunkline       2.24         2.16           +22         2.18-20North-Texas PanhandleANR             2.11         1.96           +12         1.98-2.00KN header       2.00         1.92           +12         1.94-96NGPL A8ii       2.06         1.94           +11         1.96-98Northern        2.05         1.87           +14         1.89-91PEPL            2.13         1.97           +6         1.99-2.01Transwestern    2.08         1.88           +13         1.90-92South--Corpus ChristiFlorida Gas     2.28         2.17           +24         2.19-21NGPL G1         2.25         2.12           +14         2.14-16Tennessee       2.22         2.10           +13         2.12-14Texas E. STX    2.26         2.16           +16         2.18-20Transco Z1 St 30 2.28        2.18           +18         2.20-22Trunkline       2.24         2.16           +22         2.18-20Koch Gateway (UGPL) 2.22     2.13           +20         2.15-17Louisiana--Onshore SouthANR             2.27         2.14           +14         2.16-18Columbia        2.31         2.23           +18         2.25-27FGT Z1          2.29         2.20           +26         2.22-24    Z2          2.32         2.23           +26         2.25-27    Z3          2.35         2.26           +27         2.28-30Henry Hub       2.34         2.26           +18         2.28-30HIOS            2.21         2.13           +15         2.15-17NGPL G5         2.30         2.17           +16         2.19-21Sonat           2.28         2.12           +19         2.14-16Tennessee       2.26         2.13           +12         2.15-17Texas E. WLA    2.26         2.22           +17         2.24-26Texas E. ELA    2.28         2.24           +17         2.26-28Texas Gas       2.28         2.23           +21         2.25-27Transco  Z3, St 50, 62, 65  2.32    2.25           +13         2.27-29  Z4            2.35         2.26           +12         2.28-30Trunkline       2.23         2.18           +20         2.20-22Koch Gateway (UGPL) 2.23     2.16           +20         2.18-20OklahomaANR             2.11         1.96           +12         1.98-2.00Arkla Transm.   2.02         2.04           +13         2.06-08El Paso         2.13         1.95           +19         1.97-99NGPL A9         2.04         1.93           +11         1.95-97Northern        2.05         1.87           +14         1.89-91ONG             2.01         1.95           +15         1.97-99PEPL            2.13         1.97           +6          1.99-2.01Williams        1.97         1.75           +2          1.77-79New Mexico--San Juan BasinEl Paso         2.15         1.94           +18         1.96-98NW (Ignacio plant)  --       1.75           +19         1.77-79Transw. SJ      2.16         1.94           +18         1.93-98Transw. central* 2.17        1.95           +14         1.97-99RockiesCIG (N.syst)    1.81         1.75           +19         1.77-79D-J Basin       1.83         1.75           +20         1.75-77Kern River      1.85         1.82           +17         1.84-86KN Mainline     1.78         1.70           +14         1.72-74Northwest       1.78         1.74           +11         1.76-78Questar         1.68         1.74           +11         1.76-78Canadian GasIroquois         --          2.23           +12         2.25-27NW-Sumas        1.48         1.78           +21         1.80-82NOVA           C1.44         C2.18          +43         C2.20-22Tenn. (Niagara) 2.63         2.31           +14         2.33-35Viking (Emerson) 2.66        1.87           +15         1.89-91AppalachiaCNG             2.92         2.42           +21         2.44-46Columbia        2.68         2.33           +13         2.35-37OthersChicago, LDCs, large end-users 2.47        2.44           +26         2.60-85KN mainline      1.78        1.70           +14         1.72-74Midwestern       2.39        2.36           +26         2.38-40MRT (Pryvl, La.) 2.29        2.14           +24         2.16-18MRT (West Leg)   2.26        2.12           +24         2.14-16Northern (Ventura) 2.18      1.98           +13         2.00-02Northern (demarc)  --        1.98           +13         2.00-02Tex. E. ETX (Ark.) 2.28      2.01           +6          2.03-05*At the zone boundary.Back to Headline List CopyrightGAS MARKETS WEEK via NewsNetNOVEMBER 8, 1993NYMEX GAS FUTURES TRADING     This table shows the closingprices for active gas futures in thefive trading days before press time.The last column on the right shows theopen interest in each contract atpress time.                  OpenClosing Prices         Interest          10/29/93   11/1/93   11/2/93   11/3/93   11/4/93   11/4/93December  2.368      2.434     2.407     2.441     2.446     19,173January   2.382      2.435     2.412     2.434     2.436     17,593February  2.230      2.265     2.254     2.259     2.265      9,701March     2.150      2.172     2.167     2.169     2.178     10,653April     2.110      2.122     2.122     2.122     2.130      9,300May       2.107      2.117     2.117     2.114     2.125      6,310June      2.107      2.115     2.115     2.111     2.120      6,035July      2.107      2.112     2.112     2.108     2.115      6,361August    2.130      2.137     2.132     2.130     2.137      5,729September 2.152      2.162     2.154     2.155     2.157      4,611October   2.222      2.232     2.228     2.225     2.227      4,520November  2.322      2.338     2.328     2.330     2.337      6,826December  2.457      2.482     2.468     2.474     2.486      7,564January   2.467      2.487     2.473     2.479     2.491      3,712February  2.327      2.337     2.323     2.329     2.341      2,418March     2.260      2.262     2.248     2.252     2.264      1,783April     2.245      2.232     2.218     2.219     2.231      1,552May       2.238      2.232     2.218     2.219     2.236      210Source: NYMEXBack to Headline List CopyrightGAS MARKETS WEEK via NewsNetNOVEMBER 8, 1993PG&E pursues first regionalelectronic hub         SAN FRANCISCO -- In whatcould develop into the first regionalelectronic marketing hub, Pacific Gas &Electric (PG&E) is pursuing thedevelopment of an electronic energymarketplace (EEM) by as early as 1996that would allow all segments of theindustry from Alberta to the Southwestto come together and conduct businesson one electronic system.         "It's in the conceptualizationstage," Kenneth Hamkik, PG&E's directorof strategic planning, told Gas MarketsWeek. "That means what we're trying todo is look at the long term in relationto what's happening in 1993 with theimplementation of Order 636 and FERCtrying to push standardization," hesaid.         "It's a marketplace," saidHamik, "and a marketplace implies thatyou have multiple players that can cometogether on a single log-in, in thiscase, and have the ease of use to beable to do business in a number of newways," he said.         Along with Southern CaliforniaGas and San Diego Gas & Electric, whichboth agree with the concept of an EEM,according to Hamik, PG&E may bestarting what could be called a localdistribution company (LDC) revolutionin the gas industry.         Hamik said with all thecompetition going on in the pipelinesegment of the industry with theirproprietary electronic bulletin boards(EBBs), seeds are starting to be sownwith the LDCs to make sense of thechaos. He said LDCs want to get infront of EBB developments and form anelectronic marketplace where they getfull benefit of the businessopportunities out there.         He said it will probably haveto start on the regional level and "theLDCs should at least have a heavy-handed influence to help shape this."Hamik said pipelines won't be excludedin the process, but LDCs will benefitthe most from regional EEMs.         Hamik said the EEM will gobeyond the traditional posting systemsof EBBs, "Technology is not thebarrier," Hamik said, "There's a lot ofvendors that have already started topresent Windows-based products whereyou don't have to know boo aboutcomputers," he added.         And one of those vendorsworking on the West Coast EEM isInteractive Images, headed by theformer manager of Enron's informationsystems Robert Hadlow. Hadlow said withthe free market environment evolvingfrom Order 636, the West Coast naturalgas industry is going to need an EEMthat will serve as a common electronichub through which all segments of theindustry can conduct their dailybusiness. He said the system will needto be quick, easy to use and usersshould be able to work across multiplecompanies.         Hadlow said the EEM willdiffer from EBBs in that it willinitiate and approve transactionsthrough the entire daisy chain oftransactions on behalf of all thecustomers it serves. Through the EEM,Hadlow said, from producer to end-user,including futures and secondary marketplayers, all users will be able toconduct business across multiplecompanies as if those companies wereone.         He said the EEM will notreplace each industry segment'sinternal proprietary systems, but itwill replace their EBBs with a single,common system for the West Coastmarket.         PG&E's Hamik said the firstphase of developing the West Coast EEMwas identifying the landscape. "Whatare the baby steps or maybe even someof the big leaps we need to starttaking now in order to bridge thefuture with the present?"          Hamik said when developingthe scenario for the implementation ofthe EEM, PG&E looked at the banking andairline industries as an example of howfast the EEM could be developed.         He said one company can't makethe EEM happen. It will have to be aconsortium. "The marketplace has to beopen or it's not going to work," saidHamik. He said PG&E has talked to 20 to25 different companies and the answerit's received have been "yes" to theEEM, but opinions differ on how it'sgoing to happen. Hamik said somecompanies are "bearish" on the issue ofhaving the EEM up and running by theend of the decade.         "I don't get involved inprojects that don't happen within thedecade," was Hadlow's response. Hadlowalso said he is in the process ofestimating the cost of the project butno firm figures are available yet.         Hadlow proposed a possibletimeline for the implementation of theWest Coast EEM:         % 1994: PG&E's systemoperational for transactions;         % 1995: Multi-company accessavailable;         % 1996: Some cross-companytransaction capabilities;         % 1997: West Coast EEM fullyoperational;         % 1998: Links to otherregional EEMs achieved;         % 1999: North American EEMfully operational.         For more information on theWest Coast EEM, contact Hadlow at 415-885-0278.Back to Headline List CopyrightGAS MARKETS WEEK via NewsNetNOVEMBER 8, 1993Buyers position themselves forcold weekend         Prices were up everywhere onThursday -- Gulf Coast, Midcontinentand West Texas -- as buyers wanted toensure they had a supplier for what wasexpected to be a winter-like weekend.         Sellers limited sales to oneday only in most cases, playing formore time and more threats of chillingtemperatures to push prices up anotherfew pennies Friday through Monday.         The exception was West Texaswhere California buyers are having tocompete with gas going to Texasintrastate markets and gas headed northinto the mouth of the cold front.Buyers and sellers were negotiatingdeals for Saturday through Tuesday, buttalks were in a very narrow range forboth swing and four-day deals.         Sellers asked $2.02 and buyerstried to keep the lid on at $2.00 even,up from $1.91-95 Wednesday. A marketerbought a four-day deal at $2.00, whileanother marketer sold Saturday onlypackages at $2.00-01 and was working onwrapping up some four-day deals.         Gulf Coast Louisiana pricesranged from $2.32-34 for most salesinto Columbia, with a high of $2.35, upfrom a high of $2.30 the day before.There was only a penny spread betweenequity sales and marketers' resales,said one source.         Texas Eastern at EastLouisiana was $2.30-33. A marketer sold5 million at the Transco Station 65pooling point at $2.30. A marketerbought 50 million cfd on Texas Gas SLat $2.35, up from a high of $2.30 a dayearlier.         Midcontinent prices jumped to$2.05-09 on Panhandle Eastern forpurchases, while sales topped at $2.10.Wednesday's Panhandle gas topped out at$2.02. One buyer turned back Panhandlegas at $2.10, however, while a buyer onArkla resisted a $2.10 price and gotthe seller to come down to $2.07.Marketers bought a range of $2.06-09 onArkla, up from $2.04-08 the day before.         Houston Ship Channel pricesjumped to $2.28 Thursday up from $2.22-25 earlier in the week. Katy prices,which had moved up earlier, stayed flatat $2.20-24 Thursday, with one pricereported at $2.25.         South Texas prices ranged from$2.15-22 on Texas Eastern on the mid-Gulf Coast. A package of 10 million cfdwas sold into Koch Gateway in the samearea at $2.24, competing with pricesinto Houston Pipe Line at $2.19-20, upfrom a previous high of $2.17. Apackage in deep south Texas went for$2.15, and packages were was sold intoTejas Natural Gas near Agua Dulce at$2.17-18.         Meanwhile, Permian and SanJuan basin prices rebounded on at mid-week from a low Tuesday of at least$1.84 back to $1.90 and above forFriday deals.         Swing prices into El PasoNatural Gas had dropped last Monday andTuesday for a combination of reasons. APacific Gas & Electric (PG&E) gas-firedpower plant went down early in theweek, causing some loss of gas demand,although two smaller gas-fired unitswere brought on line by the utility,said a source, PG&E did cut 100million-140 million cfd.         The utility also picked upsome cheaper supplies out of Canada,displacing more supplies out of thePermian and San Juan. Another sourcesaid PG&E had to turn back 70 millionof baseload gas because of anoperational problem. SouthernCalifornia Gas (SoCal) also cut about80 million of swing last Monday, said asource.         But all that turned aroundWednesday, PG&E will be bringing thebig power plant back on line Saturdayand the baseload supplies will beflowing again tomorrow, said amarketer.         A California utility onWednesday was trying to buy gas in thePermian to flow Thursday throughTuesday at $1.90 into El Paso. Thecompany apparently was trying to do thefive-day deals to lock up suppliesbefore a predicted cold front wasexpected to swoop into Texas this pastweekend. A supplier said his company'sweather report had predictedtemperatures would drop to 35 inHouston Sunday.         "The smart seller will sellhis gas one day at a time starting at$1.90-92 for Friday," said a supplierlate last week. "Then he'll get betterprices for Saturday through Tuesday."RK/MR/DGBack to Headline List CopyrightGAS MARKETS WEEK via NewsNetNOVEMBER 8, 1993First day of Order 636 operationseen as smooth         A number of pipelinescompleted the transition to operatingunder Order 636 last week and officialswere generally saying "so far, sogood."         Officials at Koch GatewayPipeline, Pacific Gas Transmission,Mississippi River Transmission,Columbia Gas Transmission, ColumbiaGulf Transmission and NorthwestPipeline all said the transition wasgoing smoothly. Others scheduled toimplement Order 636 yesterday includedNorthern Natural Gas, Viking GasTransmission, Southern Natural Gas,Texas Gas Transmission and ANRPipeline.         "Considering the number of newservices and the magnitude of thechanges that we've had to implement,we've been pleased with the initialmonth's nominiations process andpleased with our first day operatingunder Order 636," said a Columbia Gasofficial. "We are experiencing thetypical minor bugs and startup problemsthat you would expect under such a bigchange, but there's nothing that we'reoverly concerned about, that we won'tbe able to work out," he added.                  Joe Pollard, directorof transportation services for GreatLakes, said the pipeline began itscapacity release and flexible receiptand delivery point programs today, andthere's been no major trouble. Therehave been a number of assignments,releases and conversions as part of thetransition, but everything has gonesmoothly, he added.         Pacific Gas Transmission (PGT)had the fullest plate yesterday, as itbegan operations under Order 636 andbegan transporting expansion volumes.According to a spokesperson, thepipeline also started its electronicbulletin board and had its firstcapacity releases.         The expansion allows PGT totransport more than 2.4 billion cfd tothe Pacific Northwest and California.Total PGT volumes were running about1.6 billion cfd yesterday, and thecontracted expansion volumes of about900 million cfd were about 70% full,the spokesperson said. About 340million cfd of the total system volumeswere moving under interruptiblecontracts, he added.         "We're very pleased to havereached our goal on schedule," saidStephen Reynolds, PGT president andCEO. "Getting from blueprints toreality on a project of this magnituderequired an incredible amount ofgroundwork and follow-through."         On a related note, Alberta &Southern Gas ceased buying and sellinggas yesterday after more than 30 years.Alberta & Southern transported about9.5 trillion cf of gas through a long-term contract with PGT to California.         San Diego Gas & Electricreported no problems so far early lastweek getting its first volumes from thePGT expansion.         San Diego is getting about 54million cfd of gas off the expandedline from four Calgary suppliers: BowValley Industries, Canadian HunterMarketing, Summit Resources and HuskyOil Operations.         The contracts range from eightto 11 years, with prices indexed to themarket. According to SDG&E's latest 10-K, future minimum payments under theCanadian deals are forecast to be $6million in 1993. $36 million in 199,$38 million in 1995, $40 million in1996, $42 million in 1997 and $281million thereafter.         For the remainder of its spotgas for November, San Diego receivedmore than 180 bids from 45 companiesfor a total 1.8 billion cfd.         The utility accepted 15 bidsfrom 11 companies for a total of about160 million cfd. About 85 million ofthat came from the San Juan Basin on ElPaso Natural Gas, 27 million was boughtinto Transwestern Pipeline in thePermian Basin and the central zone atstation 8. Another 48 million wasbought at the border, and 10 millioncfd of spot gas came from Canada.         As of the end of October, SanDiego's storage allotments were full,the buyers added.Back to Headline List CopyrightGAS MARKETS WEEK via NewsNetNOVEMBER 8, 1993Centran creditors could be repaidthis year         The old Centran has a newname, a new parent and a new balancesheet, and creditors of theMinneapolis-based marketer might bepaid part of what they are owed by theend of the year.         Northern States Power (NSP)christened the marketer "Cenergy" latelast month after acquiring most of theassets Oct. 1. Cenergy "has had capitalinfused" by the new parent, explainedVice President Bruce Hoffarber, butotherwise has its own relationship withregional bank Norwest.         It appears the financing ofCenergy will have to be separate fromits parent. In general, publicutilities in Minnesota are not allowedto finance their unregulatedsubsidiaries, explained Bob Harding, arates analyst at the state PublicUtility Commission.         NSP's creation of Cenergy andacquisition of Viking Gas Transmissionwill be examined by the commission inthe future, Harding added.         Hoffarber said Centran wasmarketing about 70 million cfd inOctober, and Cenergy is doing 100million cfd of business in November. Headded that Cenergy cannot do businesswith NSP Gas.         Meanwhile, the creditorscommittee of Centran has hired aliquidator, Jim Bartholomew, to disposeof the estate of what is now a paperentity. And sources said a plan todivide the remaining assets is expectedto be filed with the federal bankruptcycourt in Minneapolis by next week.         The assets would include thepurchase price of $2.2 million paid forCentran, another $235,000 from the saleof a gathering system, revenues fromthe sale of a coal company and a grainelevator and other cash. Also, NSP willpay another $250,000 on Jan. 17 as partof a "holdback" in the deal.         Bartholomew's job is tocollect any accounts still receivableby Centran and eventually makedistributions, said Charles Hofer,credit manager at Trident NGL andchairman of the creditors committee.         Creditors and a judge have toapprove the plan before anydisbursements, but Hofer said heexpects most of the funds to bedistributed at year's end, some inMarch 1994 and some a year later.         He told Gas Daily that heexpects creditors to get 20-30 cents onthe dollar. "We did not leave thedecisions to the lawyers," he said. "Wewere very aware of the costs that couldeat up a  bankruptcy and tried to limitthe administrative expense."         One of the smaller creditorsthat wasn't involved on the committeesaid it expects to get $50,000 to$60,000, but is not optimistic aboutgetting it soon.         Centran was the first of anumber of marketers that filed forcourt protection from creditors thisyear.Back to Headline List CopyrightGAS MARKETS WEEK via NewsNetNOVEMBER 8, 1993Indiana utility fights 20-year cap         FERC's order refusing TexasGas Transmission's proposed 10-year capon contracts with its customers isunlawful, according to Indiana Gas.         A cap maximizes the number ofyears specific types of contracts canbe bargained for. The commission choseto keep Texas Gas customer contractscapped at 20 years.         Indiana Gas said last month'sorder is "unwise" and "highlycontradictory" considering commissioncomments in a previous FERC order.         FERC stated in July, "Webelieve the 10-year cap proposed byTexas Gas is a reasonable compromisebetween the 20-year maximum and thethree to five-year caps proposed by thecommentors."         The utility said thecommission's final decision was"unsupported by substantial evidence ofrecord" and that 20 years is an"excessive time period given thedynamic nature of the gas market whichexists today."         Indiana Gas noted that onlyone commentor, Fuel ManagersAssociates, opposed the 10-year cap,and, to the best of Indiana Gas'knowledge, no member of the associationis currently a Texas Gas customer. "Itwould be unreasonable to shackle TexasGas customers with a 20-year contractcap simply because someone allegespotential future customers desire alonger term."  (RS92-24).Back to Headline List CopyrightGAS MARKETS WEEK via NewsNetNOVEMBER 8, 1993SoCal gets active in refinancing         Holders of SoCal Gas' Series Xfirst mortgage bonds will have toaccept a lower yield if they decide tosell them back to the utility in anoffer announced last week. But the highcoupon bonds may have a limited lifeanyway, since the utility can call themDec. 1, 1995.         SoCal Gas will buy any and allof its $120 million of 9.75% firstmortgage bonds due 2020, but the offerexpires Nov. 10. The purchase price forthe bond will be determined by using ayield to the maturity of the U.S.Treasury 5.125% notes due Nov. 15,1995, plus 0.15% and accrued interest.Back to Headline List CopyrightGAS MARKETS WEEK via NewsNetNOVEMBER 8, 1993Gulf Coast indexes up 5-10 centsfor November         Gas Daily's Monthly ContractIndexes for November along the GulfCoast were up 5-10 cents while mostMidcontinent indexes dropped a penny,setting the stage for what many sourcesare expecting for next month -- higherafter-market prices.         The November index forsupplies into Texas Gas Transmissionjumped 11 cents over the October indexto $2.08, the biggest increase thismonth in south Louisiana. The index forsupplies into Columbia GulfTransmission finished at $2.11, up 7cents.         November indexes forMidcontinent volumes into ANR Pipeline,Panhandle Eastern Pipe Line and NaturalGas Pipeline of America (NGPL) eachfell a penny. The Panhandle and ANRindexes finished at $1.90, while theNGPL was $1.87 in Oklahoma. The indexfor volumes into Northern Natural Gasin the field climbed 3 cents, while theindexes into Northern at Ventura and atthe demarcation point each dropped apenny to $1.89. Firm transportationrates under Order 636 allowed buyers topay higher prices in the field whilegetting lower prices at Ventura and atthe demarcation point, sources said.         The November index forsupplies into El Paso Natural Gas inthe Permian Basin was unchanged fromOctober to November, remaining at$1.80. Those who sold baseload suppliesduring bid week were probablyregretting that by the end of last weekas swing prices climbed above $2.MRBack to Headline List CopyrightGAS MARKETS WEEK via NewsNetNOVEMBER 8, 1993FERC commissioners get up to speedon GISB         Industry officialsrepresenting the Gas Industry StandardsBoard (GISB) took a seat before theFERC commissioners yesterday to answersquestions on the board's progressbefore its debut next September.         The panel said the scope willprobably be narrow at first and thetarget date for an up and running GISBis Sept. 1, 1994.         After a general rundown ofdevelopments so far of GISB, FERCCommissioner Donald Santa asked therepresentatives to explain thejurisdictional tie between thestandards the board may come up withand FERC's responsibilities under theNatural Gas Act.         Marvin Clifton with MobilNatural Gas answered they didn't knowthe answer to that question but theboard's attorneys could provide FERCwith the answer.         On the same track as Santa,FERC Chair Elizabeth Moler said issuesthat GISB proposes to take up in itssecond generation such as thedefinition of gas day, noticerequirements, nominations and systemsbalancing "are all directly FERCjurisdictional items and will requirechanges in FERC tariffs."         "To the extent the FERC hasjurisdiction over something and thepipelines are required to make tariffchanges obviously they would proceedand FERC would act accordingly," saidConsolidated Edison's Steve Salese.         "We hope that what we would bedoing though is coming to thecommission with something that theindustry has said 'This is going towork for us' just like we've done inthe working groups," said Salese.         When asked by FERCCommissioner Vickey Bailey about themake up and management of GISB, MikeBray with Panhandle Eastern Pipe Linesaid the board has gotten past theinitial criticism of its make up. ChuckLinderman with the Edison ElectricInstitute said if anyone feels left outof the process, the question should beasked of them, "Where were you?"         Another criticism Bailey saidwas being voiced is that GISB is justanother level of regulation for the gasindustry.         Mobil's Clifton said, "If thatis true, then I would like to withdrawmy support for GISB." He said thepurpose of GISB is to get the industrytogether to develop industry solutions.Clifton stressed that GISB is not meantto add regulation to the industry.TCBack to Headline List CopyrightGAS MARKETS WEEK via NewsNetNOVEMBER 8, 1993Mining company doesn't get rights         The Alabama Supreme Courtruled recently that the rights to drillfor gas in coalbeds do not belong to amining company.         In a blow to the alreadyfinancially strapped mining company,Jim Walter Resources is not entitled todevelop and sell the coalbed methanegas that accumulates in an area of themine that houses mining refuse, ruledthe Alabama Supreme Court.         The court said Jim WalterResources (JWR) may develop the coalbedgas that is within the coal seam,which, in any event, must be ventilatedfor safety reasons. But once thecoalbed gas migrates out of the coalseam and into the gob -- undergroundcoal dumping area -- the gas thenbelongs to the holder of the gasestate, the court ruled last month.         The gob methane gas productionrepresents 70% of the gas captured fromthe operation, which is then sold.         The case stems from twoappeals to gain title to coalbedmethane gas on property in TuscaloosaCounty, Ala. JWR sought title to thegas it has been selling in apartnership with Sonat Coal Gas andothers. The company sued NCNB NationsBank of Texas to gain title of themethane gas, and the bank counter-sued.         The land that JWR is mining issubject to 1953 and 1954 deeds, whichconveyed the property owner's interestto the coal to what is now JWR, butreserved the property owner's interestin "all gas." NCNB is the trustee ofthe estate, and owns a 22.5% interestin all the gas reserved by the deed.         The court had to decidewhether the deed, which conveyed all ofthe coal and connected mining rights toJWR, but reserved the rights to all ofthe gas to the property owner, alsoreserved the rights of the coalbedmethane gas to the property owner.         In a jury trial, the lowercourt determined that all of the gasproduced from the property was coalbedgas and that none of the gas resided ina non-coal area before mining.         The court said the language inthe deeds in this case is unambiguous.The deeds specifically reserve "all ofthe oil, gas, petroleum and sulphur in,on and under" the areas where JWR minesto the property owner.         Neither JWR nor the bankdispute that the coalbed gas is "gas,"and the court said it could find "noscientific or legal basis to supportthe proposition that coalbed methanegas should be treated as a resourceseparate and distinct from othernatural gas."         However, the court added thatproperty law cases indicate that theownership of the gas depends upon thelocation of the gas at the time it iscaptured or located.Back to Headline List CopyrightGAS MARKETS WEEK via NewsNetNOVEMBER 8, 1993Curtis nominated by president         The first chairman of FERC,Charles Curtis, will get the tap asunder secretary of energy, PresidentClinton said.         If confirmed, Curtis will bein charge of science and technologyprograms, waste cleanup, nuclearweapons programs and energy policy.Thomas Grumbly, assistant secretary forenvironmental restoration and wastemanagement, has been acting undersecretary.         "There are few Americans whocan match Charles Curtis' governmentalexperience, or his knowledge of energypolicy," the president said in hisannouncement.         At FERC, Curtis solidified areputation as scholarly and fair.Curtis had served as chief counsel tothe House Energy Committee for fiveyears when President Carter nominatedhim to be the last chairman of theFederal Power Commission (FPC) in 1977.         Under a separate nomination amonth later, Curtis became FERC's firstchairman. The new commission took overall the FPC tasks, with the addition ofoil pipeline rate regulation anddeciding appeals from price controlhearings in the Energy Dept. He hasworked at the Securities and ExchangeCommission,  and is now a partner inthe Washington law firm of Van Ness,Feldman & Curtis.Back to Headline List CopyrightGAS MARKETS WEEK via NewsNetNOVEMBER 8, 1993Suncor discovers new fields         Suncor, a Canadian integratedoil and gas company, has discovered newoil and gas fields in the GrandePrairie area of west-central Alberta.Preliminary estimates indicate provedand probable reserves of 10 millionbarrels of oil equivalent, includingoil, gas and natural gas liquids.         Development plans includenominating gas plant processingcapacity of 38 million cfd in a newfacility to be built by 1995. Oil andnatural gas liquids production from thearea is forecast to exceed 1,000barrels per day, and Suncor is alsobuilding oil producing facilities.Back to Headline List CopyrightGAS MARKETS WEEK via NewsNetNOVEMBER 8, 1993LIG moves offices in Houston         Louisiana Intrastate Gas hasmoved from its offices at FirstInterstate Plaza in downtown Houston toBP Plaza, where parent firm EquitableResources is housed. Equitable acquiredLIG on June 30 for $191 million.         The acquisition was part ofthe Pittsburgh-based firm's effort toextend and diversify operations on theGulf Coast. The phone number forLIG/Equitable is 713-597-9979, and theaddress is 200 Westlake Park Boulevard,Suite 900, Houston, Texas 77079. BudElkins is transportation director,Chuck Headington is marketing managerand George Matthews is gas supplymanager.Back to Headline List CopyrightGAS MARKETS WEEK via NewsNetNOVEMBER 8, 1993Amoco sets up trading room inHouston         Amoco is hoping to have itsnew gas trading room operating inFebruary, the major's new natural gasvice president told reporters lastweek.         "We may not be first but wehope to have the best" gas tradingroom, Rebecca McDonald, AmocoProduction's natural gas vice presidentsaid. Amoco has learned from themistakes of others, she added, whichhave already set up trading-type roomsat other companies, including Tenneco,where McDonald headed the marketingdivision before coming to Amoco.         About 80 out of the gasdivision's 200 employees will work inthe Houston trading room where futurestraders, cash traders, transportationrepresentatives and gas control peoplewill be centralized, said McDonald.         The trading room is a resultof customer meetings initiated byMcDonald seeking to expand the servicesoffered by the major.         The customers wanted morecreative solutions to contracting withfinancial hedging instruments somethingsome wanted Amoco's help with, McDonaldsaid.         McDonald's hiring signifiesthe "cultural change" at Amoco, whichhas realized that the business ofnatural gas is different than thebusiness of oil, according to BillBenham, Amoco's vice president ofregulatory affairs.         Amoco wants to make sure itgets the most for its natural gasassets, Benham added, with a shift togas marketing signifying the commitmentthe major now sees for natural gas.         She added that Amoco plans tobuy even more gas from third partiesthis winter and next year. Amoco nowbuys about 250 million cfd to 300million cfd from independents to add tothe major's portfolio. Amoco is askingsome producers to "double and triple"their sales to it, contending thatselling to Amoco adds value to theindependents' gas.          DMBack to Headline List CopyrightGAS MARKETS WEEK via NewsNetNOVEMBER 8, 1993Sluggish demand expected to slow1993 growth         NEW ORLEANS -- Producershave now lowered their expectationsthat gas demand will again be strongthis year, with the IndependentPetroleum Assn. of America (IPAA)predicting gas use will rise only about1% to "just kiss 20 trillion cf."         Gas demand has risen for thelast couple of years by about 3% a yearwith the expectation by most in theindustry that gas use would continue togrow at those levels this year as well.         But IPAA's latest short-termsupply and demand outlook releasedyesterday at its annual meeting showsthat gas demand may not even rise by 1%this year, with the outlook onlyslightly more optimistic for next yearwhen demand is expected to increase1.4% and finally top the 20 trillioncf/year level not seen since 1979. Gasdemand last year was 19.78 trillion cf.         Increased electric generationusing hydropower and nuclear power wasthe biggest factor for lower gas demandthis year, members of IPAA's supply anddemand committee told reportersyesterday. IPAA's forecast shows thatgas use for electric generation thisyear will likely fall by 4.7% and ispredicted to drop another 1.4% in 1994.IPAA uses figures released from theEnergy Information Administration forthe first two quarters of this year asa basis to predict gas demand for theremaining half of the year.         In addition, oil prices,including residual fuel, weresignificantly lower than expected andindustrial fuel-switching customerschose resid over gas this year, IPAAsaid. Higher natural gas prices thisyear also contributed to the lower thanexpected demand, said Larry Hilgers,market and risk assessment manager forOryx, the committee's chairman.         IPAA had predicted last yearthat demand would be up as much as 3%this year. Despite "limited" gas demandgrowth, demand for coal is expected torise by 3% this year even with theMississippi River floods and strikes.Hydropower use is seen rising by 5%this year and nuclear poweredgeneration is also expected to be up by2% in 1993, according to IPAA.         "As soon as gas demand lastwinter didn't materialize, we began tosuspect that we may have been toooptimistic last year," said Hilgers.         Increased use of hydropower inthe Northwest and the West probablytook about 200 billion cfd and 300billion cfd of gas demand away, Hilgersadded.         Gas imports from Canada areexpected to slow this year to only a 5%increase over last year to about 2.2trillion cf/year. Canadian gas importsincreased by about 10% last year. IPAAattributed the slowing Canadian importgrowth to increased competition drivingthe market.         IPAA also predicted slowed gasexports to Mexico by 11% to 192 billioncf this year due to the change in therelative price between gas and fueloil.          DMBack to Headline List CopyrightGAS MARKETS WEEK via NewsNetNOVEMBER 8, 1993U.S. Natural Gas Supply and Demand-- 1993 ForecastProducers target SoCal fee         More major producers arecalling Southern California Gas'(SoCal) fee to access one of itspipeline interconnections "illegal anddiscriminatory."         Shell, Mobil, Texaco, alongwith Pacific Gas & Electric, are just afew of the new supporters of UnionPacific's original allegations ofillegal fees.  The originalcomplaintants were Union Pacific Fuels,Amoco Energy Trading, and Petro-CanadaHydrocarbons.         These shippers/producers areasking FERC to either declare this feenull and void requiring a refund, orregulate SoCal as an interstatepipeline.         Union Pacific claims the feeis an intrastate rate designed torecover costs associated with certainSoCal downstream compressionfacilities. And, the company said,SoCal is charging this rate to shippersdelivering upstream of the intrastatefacilities.         Union Pacific added that ifSoCal is permitted to collect this kindof fee, there is nothing to preventother utilities from imposing tolls.The fight appears to be yet anotherextension of the ongoing jurisdictionfight between FERC and Californiautilities.         Union Pacific and supportersallege SoCal has "implemented anillegal and discriminatory incrementalaccess fee" charged to interstateshippers delivering to SoCal's WheelerRidge interconnection. This connectsSoCal with Pacific Gas and Electric,Transwestern Pipeline, El PasoPipeline, and the Kern River Gas-Mojavesystem.         Union Pacific said the fee isa "burden on interstate commerce thatviolates the constitution."         SoCal admits the fee is anintrastate rate designed to recovercosts from intrastate compressionfacilities, and that it has been onlycharging the fees to interstateshippers and not intrastate shippers.         In fact, it gives fuel creditsto intrastate shippers. It alsoadmitted it has told shippers that ifthe fee is not paid, delivery of gasinto Wheeler Ridge will not bepermitted.         What SoCal is denying is thatthe fee is in any way illegal or inviolation of federal law. And it firmlymaintains the fee is approved by theCalifornia Public Utilities Commission.         SoCal explained the WheelerRidge facility was built for interstatepurposes and that some opponents onthis issue rejected the constructionopportunity.          SoCal also asserts this issueis not under FERC jurisdiction and thatno precedence exists which addressesjurisdiction over of an LDCinterconnection charge.Back to Headline List CopyrightGAS MARKETS WEEK via NewsNetNOVEMBER 8, 1993Arcadian, Southern agree to settleon bypass         Arcadian Corp. and SouthernNatural Gas are hammering out asettlement that's expected to end muchof the regulatory and legal proceedingssurrounding the forced bypass ofAtlanta Gas Light (AGL) by Southern toArcadian's Augusta, Ga., plant.         FERC last year reversed adecision on rehearing and forcedSouthern to provide a direct link tothe Augusta fertilizer plant, bypassingAGL, which is Southern's biggestcustomer. FERC found that Southern wasacting in a discriminatory manner whenit refused the Arcadian link afterproviding a similar bypass for an AirProducts & Chemicals plant in NewOrleans. Arcadian started getting gasdirectly from Southern in January, andestimates the connection will save itabout $4.4 million per year.         Southern, AGL and othersappealed the FERC decision in the 11thCircuit Court of Appeals, but the casehasn't been decided.         Before FERC granted the link,Arcadian filed an antitrust suitagainst Southern and AGL in U.S. courtin Georgia, charging them with a"conspiracy" to protect thedistributor's "monopoly" hold on itsservice area. Arcadian asked fordamages of $45 million plus courtcosts. That case is still pending aswell.         Announcement of the deal byArcadian last week was forced by thecompanies' pending quarterly reports,which mention the settlement, accordingto Randall Saint Aubyn, Arcadian's vicepresident, gas department.         The settlement will result inthe withdrawal of all regulatory andcourt action by all parties, to theagreement, Saint Aubyn indicated.         "The settlement also willenable us to avoid the costs anduncertainties associated with theantitrust lawsuit and relatedlitigation and to establish abeneficial, long-term commercialrelationship with Southern," said DougCampbell, president and CEO ofArcadian.         James Cleary, vice presidentand general counsel at Southern, saidthe pipeline's position would be knownonce the settlement is filed at FERC,which is expected to happen in the nextweek.         Some sources close to Arcadiansuggested there will likely be somecash payment or discounted services bySouthern involved as well, but it maynot be disclosed by the companies. Thesettlement also may address payment oftransition and take-or-pay costs toSouthern for which AGL is liable fromserving the Augusta plant.         Another obstacle Arcadianstill faces is action by the GeorgiaPublic Service Commission (PSC) earlierthis year, which asserted jurisdictionover negative imbalances on Southern'ssystem. The PSC, acting on a suggestionfrom Atlanta Gas Light, contends thatany imbalance gas sold to Arcadian as aresult of an imbalance on Southern'ssystem is actually a retail sale andsubject to state jurisdiction. If thePSC were to press the issue, it couldorder Southern to stop transporting gasto Arcadian until it applies for statecertification of such "sales." SaintAubyn said Arcadian expects thisproblem to be resolved soon, since ithas asked for a summary judgement ofthe issue.         SGBack to Headline List CopyrightGAS MARKETS WEEK via NewsNetNOVEMBER 8, 1993U.S. attorney seeks court orderagainst Iroquois         A federal prosecutor hassought to block Iroquois GasTransmission from taking testimony froma long-time pipeline foe in a contractdispute in order to protect the ongoingfederal criminal investigation.         Craig Benedict, assistant U.S.attorney for the Northern District ofNew York, is seeking a court order froma U.S. district court judge to preventIroquois from taking a deposition fromAnne Mueser in a case brought by L.A.Topsoil Co. seeking damages against thepipeline. The disgruntled contractorwants more than $3 million for failureto pay for work contracted.         Benedict is heading theinvestigation that is a result of araid by the FBI on Iroquois' officelast year.         Mueser has been the head theGASP coalition, a group of landownersoriginally opposed to Iroquois, and isnow working for a constructioncontractor which helped build thepipeline. As a long-time participant inthe environment and regulatory review,she was in a position to know whetheror not permits were in compliance withfederal and state laws. She was witnessto some of the work performed by thedisgruntled contractor.         The subpoena issued by thecourt on behalf of Iroquois asks Mueserto reveal her discussions with a listof federal offices including theJustice Dept. and the FBI, which havenothing to do with the civil contractdispute, the federal attorney told thecourt.         Benedict argues that Iroquoisis using the disposition to try touncover information in the ongoingfederal investigation into whetherIroquois violated environmental laws inthe construction of the pipeline. "Itis important for the court to considerwhether the real motivation behind therequested civil discovery is to obtainimproper criminal discovery," Benedicttold the court.         In the motion seeking a courtorder, Benedict also admits that thecase against Iroquois is now before agrand jury.         Benedict noted that thefederal government is not asking toblock all testimony in the civil case,"only the prohibition of the taking ofa single disposition." Maybe theparties "can resolve their contractualdisputes without impinging upon thefederal criminal investigation,"Benedict added.         Iroquois said yesterday thatBenedict's motion is just the firstvolley of what is expected to be anumber of procedural legal motions inongoing suits against the pipeline.         "There is nothing reallyatypical to the action by Mr.Benedict," an Iroquois official said.         Mueser told the court thatbesides the subpoena from Iroquois fora disposition scheduled Wednesday,Iroquois has asked to see allinformation Mueser has accumulated onthe pipeline in the last seven years --about 50 file boxes of materials.         These boxes are now in the"custody of the government," Muesersaid, and going through them forIroquois would be time-consuming.         "Iroquois' tactics are atransparent effort to seek informationthat might be helpful in a pendingfederal criminal investigation, as wellas an exercise calculated to harass andcause undue hardship to a non-partywitness who successfully opposed thiscompany," Mueser told the court. Alegal assistant to the district courtjudge said that a decision in the caseis likely by the end of the month.DMBack to Headline List CopyrightGAS MARKETS WEEK via NewsNetNOVEMBER 8, 1993Santa cites signficance ofgathering in policy         How FERC handles the gatheringissue should be indicative of how theentire range of "second-tier" Order 636issues are dealt with at thecommission, said FERC CommissionerDonald Santa.         FERC's determination on howmuch regulation is needed in areaswhere competition can be shown --possibly in the gathering issue, Santasaid.         He said his preliminary notionabout gathering is to be as light-handed as possible and realize thatgathering is not simply an extension oftransmission with its own set ofproblems.         "We ought to acknowledge thishalf-slave half-free nature ofgathering" Santa said. FERC hasscheduled a technical conference inFebruary to discuss the gatheringissues. Santa outlined at the NaturalGas Roundtable in Washington yesterdaythe issues he sees as critical toresolving the gathering issue.          "First, let's get the factsstraight," Santa said about pointnumber one. "The commission does notknow much about gathering," Santa said."The first step is for the commissionto understand how gathering works inreal life."         Santa noted the primary reasonfor the upcoming public conference inFebruary is so the commission can "makesome well informed policy decisions,based on fact."         Second, the commissioner said,FERC must find an "answer to thethreshold question; whether gathering,nationally or locally, is a competitiveenterprise. Is regulation needed toremedy market failure, and converselydoes the existing regulatory schemecreate a marketing failure?"         Santa said the third basicobjective is to determine thedifferences between pipeline, affiliateand independently owned gatheringsystems, and why or if they should beregulated individually.         The commissioner noted thatthe pending Tenth Circuit Courtdecision on Williams Gas Processing vs.FERC, an argument of FERC jurisdictionon gathering, may define "thecommission's ability to make somedistinction between pipeline- owned andaffiliate-owned gathering."         The fourth point, Santa said,is to answer the question, "does thecommission really need to regulategathering in order to satisfy itsstatutory obligation?"          RRBack to Headline List CopyrightGAS MARKETS WEEK via NewsNetNOVEMBER 8, 1993Canada eyes NYMEX pricing         Canadian marketers face thesame decision that their statesidecounterparts have already tackled: howto use the NYMEX when it does notreflect local fundamentals.         NYMEX-based pricing crept intoone-year deals that started Nov. 1, andmany suppliers use it in at least a fewcontracts. The next step, traders say,would be to use it for monthly anddaily pricing.         The NYMEX has manifesteditself in swap quotes at Empress.Dealers and large marketers offered tofix prices there for a year at levelsup to C5 cents higher than cash,sources said.         These parties need thatpremium to cover their basis risk atEmpress, where the swap market isilliquid, a marketer said. If theycan't find a counterparty to lay offthe basis, the dealers have to hedge onthe NYMEX, which may not reflectAlberta prices.         Using Gas Daily's monthly Novaindex for the past 12 months, addingC20 cents for transportation toEmpress, and converting it to U.S.dollars at C78 cents to U.S.$1, thecorrelation to the average of the lastthree days of futures settlement pricesis 77.7%. The conversions fromgigajoules to mmBtus were also made.         "Physical players in theprovince are not taking this basisrisk," the marketer said.         This lack of correlation maywork in a supplier's favor at times,because the swap quotes affect thephysical price quotes. Another marketerwas surprised that Empress prices fellto $C2.25 per gigajoule this fall, sohe bought some gas at that level.         And while those contemplatingfixed price swaps are wary about a lackof correlation with the NYMEX, thebasis risk acceptors are unsure abouttrade publication indexes at Empress,showing risk for both sides of thetrade.         A third kind of risk is creditrisk, which a Canadian analyst saidprevents swaps more than a year induration from being done at Empress.Back to Headline List CopyrightGAS MARKETS WEEK via NewsNetNOVEMBER 8, 1993DOE outlines status of energy law         The Energy Dept. (DOE)requirements under the Energy PolicyAct of 1992 (EPACT) will have littleimpact on the natural gas industry ifDOE's latest implementation statusreport is any indication.         In fact, under the natural gassection of EPACT, DOE's only duty is toautomatically approve certain gasimports and exports. As far as thestatus of that, DOE said it is "workingwith [FERC] to ensure implementation ofthis provision."         There are other itemsscattered throughout the EPACTImplementation Status Report that couldbenefit the gas industry, such as anumber of cost-shared gas technologyprojects planned for 1994. The projectswill cover drilling, atlases anddatabases, low permeability formations,fracture technology, upgrading lowquality gas and secondary gas recovery.         DOE also plans to assist GasResearch Institute efforts to improvecoalbed methane recovery. Otherprograms include a five-year researchand development program to increase therecoverable natural gas resource baseand another five-year R&D program onadvanced natural gas supplytechnologies. DOE is also assisting theInterior Dept. with an EPACTrequirement to amend various leaseagreements and permits for oil and gasproduction.         DOE does have a number ofrequirements under the alternative fuelvehicles (AFVs) section of EPACT,however, which includes natural gasvehicles. For example, in 1994, DOEmust establish data collection by theEnergy Information Administration onalternative fuels, AFVs and how AFVsare currently used.         Some of the AFV programs havebeen delayed. DOE was supposed to issueguidelines to federal agencies tomeasure the percentage of alternativefuel use in dual-fueled vehicles by theend of October, but that has beendelayed, awaiting action by the Officeof Management and Budget.         DOE must also issue guidelinesto federal agencies for measuring thepercentage of alternative fuel use, andissue regulations establishingguidelines for state AFV incentives andplanning. That was scheduled to becompleted in October as well, but hasbeen delayed as well. Another plan toestablish a low interest loan programfor businesses that own or operatefleets for conversion or purchase ofAFVs also scheduled for Octobercompletion has been pushed back toDecember.         DOE has made some progress inits AFV requirements. The departmenthas arranged for the purchase of morethan 5,000 AFVs for the federal fleet,and provided AFV training to federalemployees.Back to Headline List CopyrightGAS MARKETS WEEK via NewsNetNOVEMBER 8, 1993EBB hooks up traders at Alberta'sAECO C hub.         Alberta Energy kicked off itselectronic bulletin board (EBB)yesterday when dedicated computerterminals in the offices of five largecustomers were used to nominate gas atthe AECO C hub in southeast Alberta.         Another 35 customers will getthe terminals later this week, saidGwyn Morgan, president of AEC Oil andGas, and another 40 early next year.AECO C is a large storage facility andhub at Suffield, Alberta, where dailytrading occurs.         The hub is on the Nova systemand is a C10-13 cents haul fromTransCanada PipeLines at the Empressborder station with Saskatchewan.Morgan said more than 80 companies arecustomers there, trading at least 1.7million cfd.         Customers using the new AECOLINK system can make nominations andcommunicate with other players at thehub via the EBB. The system alsoprovides a record of trades and theirstatus at the hub.         "For the exchange of title,you would get a confirmation backelectronically," Morgan said. "It savesthe telephone tag."         AECO LINK also allowscustomers outside of Alberta to arrangefor transportation after buying gas atthe hub. A balancing service providedby Alberta Energy is also part of theEBB.         The terminals are installed atno cost to Alberta Energy's customers,and the system is supported by about 15people on the marketing staff. Hedeclined to comment on the cost of thesystem, which was developed in-house.         While players can post if theyare short or long on transportation andgas, AECO LINK is not yet an electronictrading network, Morgan added. Asupplemental service is being developedwherein traders can electronicallyinform accountants at Price Waterhouseabout their deals, which would go intoa price index for AECO.         Traders that participated thatday would have access to the index,Morgan explained.         Other companies in Canada,such as Williams, WestCoast and DirectEnergy  are trying to create electronictrading networks. Morgan said AlbertaEnergy is having discussions with themabout tying into AECO LINK. "The moreservices the better," he said.DGBack to Headline List CopyrightGAS MARKETS WEEK via NewsNetNOVEMBER 8, 1993Edisto to focus on domesticreserves         Edisto Exploration &Production, a unit of Edisto Resources,acquired a new, more flexible creditline of $30 million which will be usedto acquire domestic reserves, expandpipeline operations and attempt toincrease the market share of its gasmarketing operations at Vesta Energy.International and certain other assetsare being sold.         In line with increasing marketshare, Edisto is pursuing acquisitionsof gas marketing companies to enhanceits Vesta activities. The focus onmarketing shows strong support forVesta, which has been the subject ofindustry rumors that it would be soldfollowing Edisto's filing forbankruptcy and subsequentreorganization in June. The company hasalways denied it.         Vesta again made headlines inAugust when Debbie Branch, president ofthe Tulsa-based marketer, left thecompany, as well as Robert Davis,president and CEO of Esco, parentcompany of Vesta Branch subsequentlyformed her own company and took anumber of Vesta officials with her.         Newly elected Chairman and CEOMichael McGovern reviewed Edisto'sassets following its reorganization.          In addition to focusing onmarketing, Edisto plans to increasedomestic reserves through developmentof existing properties and throughacquisition. Edisto also wants toexpand transportation on its 214-mileMissouri intrastate pipeline.         International activitiesoffshore Tunisia are up for sale,following the previous sale of onshoreproperties in Tunisia and offshoreproperties in Malaysia.         The Multifex Internationaloperations also are up for sale.Multiflex is a manufacturer andsupplier of hose bundles and subseawell control umbilicals.         Edisto acquired an 80% equityinterest in March 1990.Back to Headline List CopyrightGAS MARKETS WEEK via NewsNetNOVEMBER 8, 1993Oklahoma sets proration meetings         The Oklahoma CorporationCommission has scheduled meetings toconsider production limits for thefirst quarter of 1994.         The first one is an informaltechnical conference to be held Nov. 5at 10:30 a.m., in the auditorium of theOklahoma Historical Society Building inOklahoma City. A public hearing is thenscheduled for Nov. 30 to considerproration recommendations.         The production ceiling in thefirst quarter of this year was set atthe greater of 1 million cfd or 40% ofopen flow. Prorationing limits in thefourth quarter were the greater of 1million cfd or 45% of open flow.Back to Headline List CopyrightGAS MARKETS WEEK via NewsNetNOVEMBER 8, 1993Washington Energy hawks E&P unit         Washington Energy isconsidering selling some of the assetsof its subsidiary Washington EnergyResources (WER), in an effort toconvert some of the exploration andproduction company to cash.         Washington Energy is alsolooking at possible mergeropportunities and a public or privatestock offering. This doesn't mean anoutright sale of WER, a companyspokesperson said. It's an effort tosee what value the marketplace puts onWER, she explained.         WER holds reserves of 33.9million barrels of oil equivalent as ofJune 30, and has interests in 248producing wells. WER holds an equityinterest in additional reserves andinterests in another 45 wells throughits investment in an unconsolidatedaffiliate. The company also brokers gasfor third parties and provides gasmanagement services.         Washington Energy said itsefforts to monetize WER are unrelatedto a recent rate case whichsubstantially reduced the annualrevenues of its largest subsidiary,Washington Natural Gas. WashingtonNatural requested a 9.98% overall rateof return, but the Washington Utilitiesand Transportation Commission approveda rate of 9.15%. As a result,Washington Natural filed rates lastmonth to reduce annual revenues by$16.9 million.         This also prompted theWashington Energy board of directors toreduce the company's quarterly dividendfrom 35 cents to 25 centsBack to Headline List CopyrightGAS MARKETS WEEK via NewsNetNOVEMBER 8, 1993Fires disrupt SoCal service         Southern California Gas(SoCal) will waive gas bills for thosecustomers left homeless by last week'sfires in the southern part of thestate.         A SoCal spokesperson said thecompany had about 2,000 customerswithout service last week. About 1,100of those customers were in the LagunaBeach area. More than 300 were withoutservice in the Altadena area, but manyAltadena customers shut off their ownmeters, the company noted.Back to Headline List CopyrightGAS MARKETS WEEK via NewsNetNOVEMBER 8, 1993New York project gets permits         After it recently obtainedstate and local approvals, U.S.Generating moved forward withconstruction on a natural gas combined-cycle power plant in Wallkill, N.Y.         Wallkill Generating, anaffiliate of U.S. Generating, receivedenvironmental permits from the stateDept. of Environmental Conservation andapprovals from the town of Wallkillwhich allow the company to develop the$150 million plant. The project willsupply 150 MW of power to Orange andRockland Utilities and other utilitiesin the mid-Hudson region.Back to Headline List CopyrightGAS MARKETS WEEK via NewsNetNOVEMBER 8, 1993El Paso criticizes comments madeabout case         A high-ranking official of ElPaso Natural Gas took issue withstatements last week about allegationsby an independent marketer against thepipeline.         Rick Baish, senior vicepresident of marketing, rates andregulation for the pipeline, said hecouldn't comment on charges made byWindward Energy & Marketing against thepipeline, Meridian Oil and BurlingtonResources.         He said the charges  "areunproven allegations to try to avoidjudgement on the claim that we madeagainst [Windward] on the money theyowe us. That's pending before a federalcourt in Tulsa.         "It's obviously not pleasantfor us to read about that [in GasDaily], but beyond that we had a realconcern that someone ... would think itappropriate to argue the merits of thepending case in the newspapers whenit's before a federal judge," Baishsaid.         The stories published in GasMarkets Week last weekwere taken frompublic documents, and the accuserswouldn't comment to Gas Markets Week onthe case. An attorney's commentsappeared at the end of the story.         Baish was critical of theattorney who was quoted anonymously inthe story about Windward's charges. Theattorney said that the gathering issuewas especially ripe since FERC wasconsidering how to handle gatheringjurisdictionally in the post-Order 636environment.         Baish asked that the anonymousattorney be identified in any futurestories "so your readers can judge forthemselves what that person's agendamight be." He found the attorney'sstatements "grossly offensive."         He thought the attorney may berepresenting someone who would have aninterest in the outcome of the FERCdeliberations on gathering policy. "Infairness, readers ought to be able tomake their own judgements about whatthat person's agenda might be," Baishsaid. "I thought what that person saidwas entirely improper if not unethical.I'm hard-pressed to be gentlemanlyabout it. I find it hard to understandhow an attorney could make statementsobviously trying to influence FERCbased on allegations that he knew orshould have known [but which] have notbeen proven."         MRBack to Headline List CopyrightGAS MARKETS WEEK via NewsNetNOVEMBER 8, 1993Williams introduces electronic gastrading system         Williams Energy Venturesushered in the new era of electronicgas trading last week with all theglitz and glamour that used to beassociated with the oil boom of thelate-1970s.         The theme of the show was"It's a jungle out there" in today'sgas trading business. A showroom andmultimedia presentation carried out thetheme with the message that Streamline,as Williams calls its electronicsystem, will turn the jungle into amaster planned community of orderlytrading.         Unlike the unveiling of theNYMEX-EnerSoft electronic tradingsystem on Oct. 20, also in Houston,several computers had been set up todemonstrate how buy and sell orderswill be posted, transacted andnominated to pipelines.         The few threads laid bare bythe unveiling were caused bydemonstrators who knew far more aboutcomputers than they did about naturalgas trading. While they could dasharound with ease from window to windowin the colorful displays, they couldn'tanswer certain detailed questions.         Industry people attending theshow were forgiving, however, willingto concede that electronic trading isthe future. As one trader joked to hisgroup, does this mean he won't able tohide his big margins any longer?         Streamline will one dayprovide cash discovery at hubs aroundthe country if it's as successful asWilliams envisions. The system isavailable now for installation andtraining.         The first hub, at Carthage innortheast Texas, is expected to haveenough customers to become operationalby Feb. 1 or by the end of the firstquarter. Carthage ties in to sixinterstate and eight intrastatepipelines that supply 1 billion cfd.Plus, hub operator East Texas GasSystems recently began operatingAmerican Pipeline, which has nearbyinterconnects with Natural Gas Pipelineof America, Tejas Natural Gas (formerlyExxon Gas Systems) and Texoma/HoustonPipe Line. East Texas Gas is amajority-owned affiliate of UnionPacific Fuels.         An Intra-Alberta Hub, locatedon Nova Pipeline, is scheduled to be inplace early next year. A WestcoastEnergy subsidiary will put that systemon line.         RKBack to Headline List CopyrightGAS MARKETS WEEK via NewsNetNOVEMBER 8, 1993Columbia finds new LNG partner         To meet the need forelectricity in the Washington, D.C.,area and comply with the Clean Air Act,Potomac Electric Power (Pepco) willjoin Columbia Gas system in a jointventure to restart the liquefiednatural gas (LNG) terminal in CovePoint, Md.         Columbia LNG and Pepco willalso seek FERC approval this week toprovide peak-day load-shaving servicesto local distribution companiesstarting with the winter of 1995-1996.         A pipeline extends from CovePoint to Loudon, Va. Pepco's interestin Cove Point is to secure a reliableand cost-effective source oftransportation to its Chalk Pointgenerating station via the pipeline.         Columbia LNG will contributethe terminal and pipeline in exchangefor an equity interest in thepartnership, and Pepco's subsidiarywill invest up to $25 million in equityand debt. Pepco's investment will beused to recommission parts of theterminal, which has been shut down formany years, and build a newliquefaction unit.         Cove Point, built in the mid-1970s, is one of four terminals in thecountry designed to receive deliveriesof LNG by ship. Currently, only aterminal in Boston has enough demand tojustify operations.           At one point last year,Shell LNG was going to buy Cove Pointfrom Columbia, but the deal fellthrough.Back to Headline List CopyrightGAS MARKETS WEEK via NewsNetNOVEMBER 8, 1993People         Texaco Gas Marketing hasappointed Scott Potter vice presidentfor trading and transportation. Potterwas with Aquila Energy. Randy Curryhas been named vice president for long-term sales at Texaco Gas Marketing andSteven Baker has been named vicepresident for fuels management.          ENSERCH elected DianaNatalicio, president of the Universityof Texas at El Paso since 1988, to itsboard of directors.         George Bush has resignedfrom Harken Energy's board of directorsand his position as consultant "inorder to devote his time to othermatters," which are expected to includerunning for public office in Texas.         William Smith, who willcontinue as Sonat's executive vicepresident, became vice chairman ofSonat Exploration. James Moylan,currently Sonat's vice president andcontroller, will become president ofSouthern Natural Gas. Richard Bates,currently executive vice president ofSonat Exploration, will becomepresident of Sonat Energy Services.Back to Headline List CopyrightGAS MARKETS WEEK via NewsNetNOVEMBER 8, 1993Order 636 didn't startle hedgers         Order 636 hardly affected thehedging plans of traders that Gas Dailytalked to this week, and brokers alsoreported no changes in customeractivity. But lower temperatures andmore pipeline constraints in theunbundled environment might have apronounced impact later, sources added.         Spot cash prices have beenshooting up for the past week as fallturns to early winter. Spot volumesavailable for incremental needs seem tobe dwindling. A trader reported aseller sought, but didn't get, aDecember NYMEX equivalent for Novembergas at Station 65 into TranscontinentalGas Pipe Line.         December futures have beenvolatile enough this week for differentbrokers to talk about reaching $2.50 orfalling to $2.35. And at times gasfutures seemed to be trading insympathy with the rest of the energycomplex on the NYMEX.         "The Merc will latch on towhatever it needs to, and now thestrongest thing is cash," a buyercountered.         Order 636 went in place forthe bulk of pipelines during atransition from a weak to strongfutures market, explained Tom Lord ofMorgan Stanley. "How do you sort out636 from a change in market psychologyin the last two weeks?" he asked.         Over the medium term, a tradersaid "there's the possibility that ifwe do get severe weather, there will beenough uncertainty about supply that wemight get more volatile price spikescompared to last year."         With pipeline sales gas gone,Order 636 changes the way storage isfilled, said a trading manager at amarketing affiliate. "Wall Street feelsstorage is the biggest factor in themarket," he said. "You'll probably seegreater efficiency in the use ofstorage, and hedging to make it work."Back to Headline List WT02-B35-18IA086-000616-B011-38http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/ey05.html 205.156.212.5 19970121235735 text/html 60061HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Tuesday, 21-Jan-97 23:55:21 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:41:01 GMTContent-length: 59876Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ey05.html Sample Issue Copyright GAS STORAGE REPORT via NewsNet MAY 1994 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES Injections amounted to bulk of demand in spring (497 words) EIA revises data to reflect NGPL reclassification (549 words) American operates unique single complex facility (1050 words) Entre to develop first offshore gas storage field (306 words) ANR seeks rehearing on market-based rate plan (475 words) Alberta Energy to expand storage at hub (220 words) Changing industry means team approach to development is needed (770 words) Potential Indiana storage project considers hub (256 words) Richfield requests waiver of an EBB standard (385 words) SoCal to provide storage to off-system customer (225 words) Officials see storage release market down the road (528 words) LDC wants gathering line added to Jackson Prairie (304 words) Design problems for existing cavern and bedded salt cavern construction (1257 words) Amoco Canada adds partners to planned storage hub (223 words) PG&E storage decision delayed (192 words) Market molecules (426 words) Enron files for section 311 service (110 words) RG&E releases storage on CNG (148 words) Cayuta open season nearing end (142 words) Canadian board rejects InterCoastal pipe conversion (223 words) Avoca asks FERC for permission to drill test wells (193 words) CopyrightGAS STORAGE REPORT via NewsNetMAY 1994Injections amounted to bulk of demand in spring     Gas bought for injection into storage in April and May was theonly thing that propped up prices which would have been wellunder $1.50, sources were saying this week.     Storage injections amounted to the only demand out there, saidone producer. Heating degree days from the end of Februarythrough April were far lower than normal, he said, and this Mayhasn't seen any cooling degree days in Texas.     In April, some sources were wondering if the American GasAssn.'s (AGA) estimates showing strong net injections each weekwere accurate because prices weren't soaring above $2.00.  Onetrader said injections were the only thing that kept April prices upnear $1.90.     AGA estimated that net injections for the month of April totaled214 billion cf. That would be a record for April injections, based onhistorical data from the Energy Information Administration (EIA).See table on page 12. The previous high in net injections was inApril 1985, when net injections were 117 billion cf. This April'snet injections should be well above last April, when net injectionswere 112 billion cf.     April storage data compiled by Gas Storage Report supports theAGA estimate, and even indicates that net injections may have beena little higher for the month. Just looking at the 10 largest storageoperators on page 6, net injections total more than 150 billion cf.With strong injections in April, working gas storage levels arecloser to normal now. Gas Storage Report's ballpark estimate ofworking gas in storage at the end of April is about 1,177 billion cf.     May injections have also been strong, but they may not reach therecord set in last May of 462 billion cf, one storage operatorpointed out. However, one analyst countered that May injectionsmay come close because distributors and marketers are likelytaking advantage of May prices, especially since June prices shouldbe higher as demand for air conditioning increases.     A producer that moves gas on Northern Natural Gas said heexpects June prices to rebound. Distributors on Northern don'tstart injecting until June, he said, and that should have an effect onprices on Northern Natural. He also expects gas demand for airconditioning in the Southwest to heat up in June. Another reason hethinks prices are headed up in June is that a number of end-userswere looking to lock up one-year deals in May. " Prices areprobably going to rebound from here."     One buyer for a pipeline said he isn't counting on a hugerebound in prices. He said last year was an anomaly because theLDCs were trying to lock up long-term supplies to back up theirtransportation contracts after the pipelines restructured.Producers were taking spot gas off the market to offer under firmcontracts, and at the same time, large amounts of gas were going intostorage, he said. That all combined to keep prices over $2.00 inApril and May, he added.Back to Headline List CopyrightGAS STORAGE REPORT via NewsNetMAY 1994EIA revises data to reflect NGPL reclassification     The Energy Information Administration (EIA) has revised itsaggregate storage volumes for January through July of 1993 toreflect the changes that Natural Gas Pipeline of America (NGPL)made to its working gas volumes due to reclassification.     In August 1993, NGPL received FERC approval to reclassify aportion of its working gas to base gas for accounting purposes. Thepipeline filed revised FERC Form 8s and EIA Form 191s back toNovember 1992. The reclassifications also reflect the operationallevels of the pipeline's working gas, NGPL said.     EIA's monthly storage table on page 9 shows the changes inworking gas and base gas for 1993. An EIA official explained that1992 doesn't include the changes because the agency had alreadyissued final numbers for 1992.     Most of the changes resulted in a shift of about 215 billion cf ofworking gas into the base gas column. With these revisions, EIA'smonthly numbers for 1994 are more comparable to last year's. Theonly reclassifications that would have to be factored in are forSouthern Natural Gas and KN Interstate Gas.     The agency also revised its January and February 1994 storagefigures, as well as releasing actual data for March. January'sworking gas level of 1,578 billion cf is almost 40 billion cf lessthan what EIA initially reported for January.     With those revisions, the American Gas Assn.'s estimates fromJanuary and February move closer to EIA's actual figures. AGA'sworking gas estimate for the week ending Jan. 28 was 1,624 billioncf. AGA's working gas estimate for the week ending Feb. 25 was1,074 billion cf, compared to EIA's final February working gaslevel of 1,089 billion cf.     While AGA's estimates are still somewhat lower than EIA'snumbers, they are much closer after the EIA revisions than theywere in the winter. One storage tracker said a number of peoplewere questioning the accuracy of AGA's January and Februarynumbers in the winter, but " after all is said and done, they'llprove pretty good."     In fact, this source said, " AGA's estimates are doing what theywere meant to do: Gauging storage activity over a week."  For a lookat AGA's most recent estimates, see the table at right.     Working gas in storage at the end of March was 957 billion cf,the data show, which brings working gas in line with last March'slevels, when the two reclassifications are considered.     March had injections of 105 billion cf and withdrawals of 239billion cf, for net withdrawals of 133 billion cf, EIA said. The netwithdrawals for the month were much lower than past Marchs' netwithdrawals. March 1993 saw heavy net withdrawals of 303 billioncf due to the " storm of the century"  that hit the eastern half of thecountry.     Those heavy withdrawals brought March 1993 working gas to1,028 billion cf, according to the revised data which include'sNGPL's reclassification, the lowest March level in 12 years. Thispast March's working gas would be about the same if theunaccounted-for reclassifications, i.e., Southern Natural and KNInterstate, are factored into the 957 billion cf. Adding SouthernNatural's reclassification of about 21 billion cf and KN's shifting of55 billion cf, working gas would be 1,033 billion cf. That's 5billion cf more than March 1993.Back to Headline List CopyrightGAS STORAGE REPORT via NewsNetMAY 1994American operates unique single complex facility     Behind the WesTex gas storage facility's novel approach tocombined cavern storage, vertical well reservoir storage andhorizontal well reservoir storage is American Gas Storage'sdetermination to provide customers with greater market access andhigh deliverability service.     At the recent American Gas Assn. operations conference, JayEvans, American Oil & Gas' manager of reservoir engineering,described American's planning and construction involved todevelop the first gas storage complex to integrate cavern andreservoir storage.     The WesTex facility, located in Gaines County, Texas, about 60miles southwest of Lubbock, plans to offer section 311 service.American is close to filing a FERC application, said James Lytal,vice president of business development.     WesTex consists of three fields:     %  Salado Gas Storage Project, a bedded salt cavern with 3 billioncf of working gas capacity. This is the first facility in the UnitedStates constructed in bedded salt exclusively for the storage ofnatural gas.     %  Loop Gas Storage, a vertical well reservoir with 9.4 billion cfof working gas.     %  North Felmac Gas Storage, a horizontal well reservoir with 5.6billion cf of working gas.     As integrated into one facility, WesTex will have working gascapacity of 18 billion cf and withdrawal capability of 600 millioncfd and an injection capability of 300 million cfd, Evans said in hispresentation. But Lytal said the working gas capacity may be alittle less depending on the services provided to customers. DirectWesTex pipeline interconnects allow receipts and deliveries withEl Paso Natural Gas, Northern Natural Gas and Red River Pipeline.     Lytal said American expects to offer about 7 billion cf ofworking gas and 200 million cfd of maximum withdrawal capacityunder seasonal storage service; 5 billion cf of working gas and 140million cfd of maximum withdrawal capacity under the firmenhanced seasonal service; and a peaking service from the saltcavern. The first 1 billion cf of working gas in the cavern should bein service in November, he said.     Evans described the capacity of each field and how it wasconverted to storage.     He explained that bedded salt is found throughout much of thePermian Basin of West Texas, and specifically, the Midland sectionof the Permian contains up to 900 feet of gross salt. Evans said thecaverns were constructed in the lower " dirty"  section of thePermian Salado Salt beds. Well tests indicated that salt cavernscould be constructed in the beds as an acceptable container fornatural gas.     " The acreage was presently being used for gas storage in thedepleted Loop Yates reservoir, so the existing injection andwithdrawal facilities would be used to handle surface gasoperations,"  Evans said.     Three cavern wells have been completed and are presently beingsolution mined. The first cavern well was converted to gas storagein November 1993, but was placed back into the solution miningmode in February 1994, Evans said.     American started injections into the first cavern in November1993 at a rate of 60 million cfd. A total of 550 million cf of gas wasinjected up to Dec. 6, 1993. Evans said a ledge fall and subsequentshearing of the tubing string prevented complete fill-up of thecavern. The cavern was used for storage and injections andwithdrawals up to Feb. 12, 1994, and then returned to solutionmining mode in anticipation of total completion in November 1994.     Loop is a converted depleted reservoir in the Yates Sand at 3,350feet. The field produced 12.24 billion cf of gas from a reservoircontaining 13.25 billion cf. The field was converted to storageoperations in 1981 with the addition of six new wells, theworkovers of four existing production wells and compression andmetering facilities, Evans said. The facility exhibited a totalworking gas capacity of 4 billion cf at that time, he said.     American performed a reservoir evaluation of the storage fieldto resolve the discrepancies between what the facility exhibited asexpected storage operations and the past history of primarydepletion performance.     " After numerous simulation runs of the primary and storageperformance operations, a validated working model of the reservoiremerged. It was determined that the storage field actually containedtwo separate reservoirs, which were separated by a four-foot lowpermeability layer,"  Evans reported.     American expanded the facilities in 1991-92 by drilling andcompleting 16 new injection/withdrawal wells and workover of eightoriginal wells. The company added metering and dehydrationfacilities to handle the increased volumes. The facility now has 9.4billion cf of working gas capacity and the withdrawal capability is200 million cf, up from 50 million cfd.     This is a reservoir facility in the depleted Felmac (Yates) field.During primary depletion, the 3,360-feet Yates Sand produced 8.4billion cf of the 9.24 billion cf capacity. Evans said only one of theoriginal producing wells exists. American converted the well to apressure observation well.     American performed a numerical simulation study of the field todetermine the most economic development plan for converting thefield to storage. Both vertical and horizontal well completions wereconsidered while evaluating storage performance, Evans said. Theanalysis determined that the most effective and economicdevelopment of the field was by using horizontal well technology.     Specifically, two in-line horizontal wells with a wellborediameter of 6 and 1/2 inches and an open hole extension of 2,000feet were recommended, Evans said. " It was determined from thenumerical simulation results that the storage reservoir would haveworking gas volume of 5.6 billion cf and a withdrawal capacity of200 million cf,"  he reported.     The company drilled the first horizontal well in October 1993 ata vertical depth of 3,500 feet. The well had a horizontaldisplacement of 500 feet at 90 degrees and it was drilledhorizontally to a total of 2,000 feet. The facility has a withdrawalcapability of 140 million cfd and an injection capacity of 150million cfd. Injection of gas began in March at a rate of 50 millioncfd, Evans said.     American decided to integrate the facilities into a singlecomplex to provide greater market flexibility and access. Thecompany tied in gas piping, measurement, dehydration, control andcompression from each of the subject projects. American alsoconstructed a 22-mile, 20-inch pipeline to the Red River Pipeline.Back to Headline List CopyrightGAS STORAGE REPORT via NewsNetMAY 1994Entre to develop first offshore gas storage field     Independent producer Entre Energy plans to develop the firstunderground natural gas storage facility located entirely inoffshore waters.      Entre filed an application with FERC earlier this month toconvert an existing gas producing reservoir located in theChandeleur area, Block 29, offshore Louisiana, into the Chandeleurstorage facility. The proposed facility will have an initial workingcapacity of about 26 billion cf and injection/withdrawal rates of300 million cfd, Entre said. The company bought the Chandeleurblock from Chevron in early 1993.     The facility could be expanded to an ultimate working gascapacity of 75 billion cf and injection/withdrawal rates of 850million cfd. The field connects to Texas Eastern Transmission'sEast Louisiana (ELA) pipeline system.     One source said Entre's location is a good one, even though theLouisiana storage market is competitive. The source said TexasEastern customers that take no-notice service from the pipelinehave to pay it back within 48 hours at ELA or pay a penalty. In thewinter, this often pushes prices up pretty high in ELA, the sourcesaid. Customers could replace no-notice with a storage service.     Entre has proposed a market-based rate structure in its FERCapplication. The company is presently negotiating agreements withcustomers for long-term contract storage service. Entre will alsohost an open season for available capacity, said Stephen Kelly, vicepresident of Entre.     Kelly said the company plans to form a marketing subsidiary toaggressively market the facility.     The facility should be offering limited service for the 1994-95winter season, assuming FERC approves Entre's application by mid-summer. TCW Asset Management has provided the principalacquisition and conversion financing for the project. Kelly said theoffshore reservoir is no different to convert to a storage reservoirthan one onshore. They both use the same technology to convert.Back to Headline List CopyrightGAS STORAGE REPORT via NewsNetMAY 1994ANR seeks rehearing on market-based rate plan     ANR Pipeline has repackaged its argument that it lacks marketpower in its request for rehearing on FERC's decision to reject thepipeline's market-based pilot programs.     ANR challenges the commission's finding in ANR's rate case thatthe pipeline " failed to file data demonstrating that it lacks marketpower in the relevant markets (GSR 3/94)."  ANR says it haspresented in its rate filing the rationale for its three market-basedrate proposals and the rationale meets the standards fordetermining market power.     The pipeline points out in its rehearing request that it has madethree proposals for market-based rates on three different services." The appropriate evidence for meeting a market power test isdifferent for each ANR proposal and furthermore varies from theevidence that was appropriate in some instances where thecommission has approved market-based pricing,"  ANR says.     The three proposals seeking market-based rates are limited andconditioned, the pipeline says. One proposal is for declinedtransportation capacity, which refers to any firm transportationcontracts that an existing customer declines to renew. ANR wouldpost the available capacity on its electronic bulletin board and if itreceives no bids at the maximum rate, it could then attempt tocharge market-based, negotiated rates.     The second proposal is for any new storage services, whichmeans services that become available after existing contractsexpire. The third proposal is for released transportation capacityand it would allow customers with firm transportation capacity torelease it at market-based rates.     ANR stresses that it hasn't proposed to change its basicunbundled services, and all its open-access services are now, andwill continue to be, cost-based in its tariff. ANR's proposals formarket-based pricing are limited to three " narrowly prescribed"circumstances, in which ANR either lacks market power or wouldprovide protective conditions of service, the pipeline says.     The pipeline also argues that no single test applies to marketpower analyses. ANR contends its three proposals satisfy a relevantthreshold test of lack of market power when the three proposals areconsidered separately, and all definitions and conditions areconsidered. For instance, ANR says it has 0% of the market in itsmarket for new storage services, because there are no customers forthese new services yet, so the customers can't be captive to ANR.ANR adds that plenty of alternatives to its new storage servicesalready exist.     Also in its filing, ANR requested rehearing on the commission'sorder to the pipeline to eliminate its optional repackagedtransportation and gathering service. The pipeline argues that itoffers an unbundled transportation service without embeddedgathering costs and it also offers this repackaged bundledtransportation and gathering service. " By offering both theunbundled and repackaged service options, ANR has satisfied bothcommission policies of unbundling and maximizing shipperoptions,"  ANR says (RP94-43-003).Back to Headline List CopyrightGAS STORAGE REPORT via NewsNetMAY 1994Alberta Energy to expand storage at hub     Alberta Energy plans to expand the AECO-C Hub natural gasstorage facility by 500 million cfd of withdrawal capacity and 25billion cf of reservoir capacity, or 38.5% more than the storage unitcan hold and deliver now.     On completion of the expansion, withdrawal capacity will be 1.8billion cfd, or about 13% of Canadian daily wellhead capacity. Totalworking storage would be 90 billion cf.     Alberta Energy President and CEO Gwyn Morgan said thecompany currently is soliciting expressions of interest frompotential customers. " Because of our low incremental costs, we areable to provide our customers with high-quality service atcompetitive rates,"  he said. " Our studies indicate that dailystorage requirements within Alberta could be as high as 3 billioncf, and AECO-C has further potential to meet those needs."     A portion of the $40 million expansion at the Suffield, Alberta,facility would be available for the upcoming winter season. The fullexpansion will be operational by April 1995. Potential clients arebeing asked to confirm their interest by June 15, 1994.     Morgan said the expansion is part of Alberta Energy's growthstrategy and is consistent with decisions taken by the company toparticipate in the Ten Section Hub in Bakersfield, Calif., throughits Alenco Resources subsidiary and to list AECO-C Hub on theNYMEX trading network.Back to Headline List CopyrightGAS STORAGE REPORT via NewsNetMAY 1994Changing industry means team approach to development is needed     The growing competition in the natural gas storage industry, andthe need for technology transfer to develop facilities, will make theteam approach to storage development a necessity, say two UnionGas officials.     " Competition among utilities and others for additional storagehas resulted in the need to become proactive in pursuingdevelopment alternatives,"  say William Fay, manager of storageprojects for Union Gas, and James Egden, Union's manager ofgeology. Fay presented their paper at the American Gas Assn.'soperations conference in San Francisco earlier this month.     In addition, they say, costs to develop storage have increased asthe better-quality reservoirs have already been developed.Deregulation of the gas industry has also changed the marketplace,and utilities are realizing they need to develop markets external totheir franchise areas, Fay and Egden say. More and more, utilitiesare turning to storage and transportation, they add.     " To meet these changes, multi-disciplinary teams have become anecessity within the new market environment,"  the officials stress.     The concept behind multi-disciplinary teams is for a company toempower workers on the team with the tools to make the necessarydecisions. This eliminates time-consuming meetings wheremanagement officials are filled in on technical details about aproject so they can make decisions. The tools consist of the goals,restrictions and parameters -- especially financial -- of a project.Within this framework, the team can make all of the pertinentdecisions on the project, Fay told Gas Storage Report. " As long asthey are moving toward the goals, there shouldn't be a problem,"  hesaid.     The multi-disciplinary teams that Union has used have grown toinclude external service companies and consultants from theplanning stages through the final project evaluation, Fay said. "Evolution of the team approach has resulted in faster, more costeffective and detailed project completions,"  Fay and Egden say intheir report.     But, they warn, Union's transition to the team approach wasn'tnecessarily a smooth one since changes were being made in " anextremely traditional and conservative environment."     Fay says companies moving to the team approach to projectdevelopment probably can expect some resistance from uppermanagement. That is not unusual, he says, since most organizationshave traditionally operated in a hierarchical-type, filter-downmanner. Senior management may feel they are losing control, Faysays. The key is to ease senior management's concerns by keepingsenior officials in the loop throughout the life of the project, hesays.     " You may need to do a number of projects to convince them thatthis system works,"  Fay says. Once senior officials see that costswere kept under control and less time is spent on meetings anddecisions, they'll consider multi-disciplinary teams a benefit, headds.     Fay says the team approach is still evolving at Union and is farfrom complete. However, he presented case studies that show someimprovements in communication and time using the team approach.For one thing, in the past, two central departments in thedevelopment of storage projects, geology and storage planning,reported to separate vice presidents. " Focus on these two groupswas significantly different resulting in poor communication andconflicting corporate objectives,"  Fay and Egden say.     As the regulatory environment changed, companies wererequired to file reports with regulatory agencies, which also wereholding more formal hearings. Union realized it would need toimprove communication between the geology and storage planningdepartments. The utility restructured so that geology, reservoirservices, storage planning and storage administration all fell underthe storage development department.     " The emergence of the storage development department was anattempt to provide a team environment,"  the authors say. Fromthere, multi-disciplinary teams for individual projects could beformed, they add.     Fay says he sees team development growing in the future sincemost new storage projects will consist of partnerships made up oftwo or more companies. He said the recent announcements of hubdevelopment are examples of partnerships in the development andownership of storage projects.     However, Fay suggests that companies beware of the pitfalls ofteams, or what he calls " the growing pains of moving from atraditional way of operation."  First of all, senior management mayresist. Also, team members may be prone to second-guessingdecisions. Another issue is the need for more training ofemployees. Employees need to be trained both technically and inthe team approach, Fay says, and that can be costly.     Finally, he says, the team approach may not work for allprojects. " If the company doesn't know what its goal is, then that isnot a good place for a team,"  he says.Back to Headline List CopyrightGAS STORAGE REPORT via NewsNetMAY 1994Potential Indiana storage project considers hub     A potential storage project in Indiana is getting noticed lately asits developers have been divulging bits and pieces about it atconferences.     The Blackhawk field in Vigo County, Ind., is an aquifer field thatowner Hamilton Natural Gas has been shopping around as apotential storage facility, sources say. Hamilton officials didn'treturn phone calls by press time.     Indianapolis-based Hamilton bought the field from Texas GasTransmission in 1989 for $300,000, according to papers madeavailable at recent natural gas conferences. Based on early tests byTexas Gas and Hamilton's tests of the Blackhawk field, the companydetermined the field is ready to be developed as a " good storagefield,"  the papers said.     Sources said five or six pipelines are in the vicinity of the field,including Texas Gas, Texas Eastern Transmission and MidwesternGas. The field is located about 13 miles southeast of Terre Haute,Ind. Sources also said they think Hamilton is trying to get a directconnect into Texas Gas.     The papers say total delivered gas from the field will be 5.275billion cf over a 120-day withdrawal cycle. That averages about 44million cfd. The injection cycle will be for 209 days maximum, thehandouts indicate.     Not surprisingly, Hamilton has talked about developingBlackhawk into a hub, a couple of sources said. With its proximityto a handful of pipelines, it can serve the Midwest market area, theysaid. Another source added that the success of Northern IllinoisGas' Chicago Hub may also be contributing to the hub talk.Back to Headline List CopyrightGAS STORAGE REPORT via NewsNetMAY 1994Richfield requests waiver of an EBB standard     Richfield Gas Storage Systems has asked FERC for an exemptionfrom the provision of Order 563 that requires interstate operatorsto provide electronic file downloading (EDI) on their electronicbulletin boards (EBBs).     As part of Order 636, the commission required interstatepipelines to set up EBBs to facilitate the trading of capacity byshippers. Order 563 requires pipelines to provide standardizedinformation about service on their systems. Interstates mustcomply with Order 563 by June 1.     Richfield, a small interstate storage operator in Kansas, pointsout that the commission stated it will allow for small pipelines tobe exempt from portions of 563. Richfield seeks partial exemptionor a waiver of the requirement to provide EDI because it is a smallcompany and its storage field is fully subscribed under long-termcontracts.     Further, Richfield says, it provides transportation only inconjunction with its storage service. Since Richfield's smallpipeline system and storage field are located in Stevens and Mortoncounties, Kansas, they aren't an integral link in the movement ofgas through interstate commerce, the company said.     Richfield says that in its first year of service, it has received nocustomer messages on its EBB and no inquiries on it concerningservice. No customers have offered to release their storage capacity,although it isn't surprising since the market for storage is morelong-term than transportation, Richfield says.     " Computer communication capability is not necessary or evennecessarily desirable on Richfield's small system, especially sinceRichfield's storage service is provided at confidential, market-based negotiated rates,"  the company said in its filing.     Finally, Richfield argues that the cost to comply with EDI is "prohibitively expensive."  The company said its EBB operator hasdetermined that EDI will cost $400 per month in addition to the$200 per month cost to upgrade the EBB as required by Order 563.Richfield said it can't pass these costs on to customers because ithas market-based rates already in place with customers.     The National Registry of Capacity Rights has filed a motion tointervene, asking FERC to grant a 120-waiver while it holds atechnical conference on the issue. The registry would like Richfieldto come up with an alternative to EDI which would allow shippers toreceive capacity release information through files they candownload (RP94-235).Back to Headline List CopyrightGAS STORAGE REPORT via NewsNetMAY 1994SoCal to provide storage to off-system customer     Southern California Gas will provide storage service toWashington Water Power's new peaking power plant in Rathdrum,Idaho.     The California Public Utilities Commission approved the six-year contract, which calls for SoCal to provide firm inventory of480 million cf, with injection on an as-available basis.     Washington Water will pay an intrastate transportation rate of22.5 cents/dth upon injection and no transportation charge uponwithdrawal. Gas withdrawn from storage will be redelivered to theplant in the upper panhandle of Idaho via backhaul on the PacificGas & Electric/Pacific Gas Transmission system.     Washington Water Power isn't new to natural gas storage. It is aco-owner of the Jackson Prairie storage facility in Washington,which is operated by co-owner Washington Natural Gas. NorthwestPipeline is also a part owner of the facility.     The CPUC approval on this contract is consistent with thecommission's ruling on an earlier agreement between SoCal andSouthwest Gas. The commission told SoCal it had to include atransportation rate in its storage service to Southwest since itsoriginal agreement didn't have a transportation charge in it.     For independent storage operators the one-way transportationcharge could prove to be a competitive challenge. Some interstateindependents have complained that pipelines that charge only oncefor gas to and from storage make it difficult for independents tocompete.Back to Headline List CopyrightGAS STORAGE REPORT via NewsNetMAY 1994Officials see storage release market down the road     The storage capacity release market is a huge opportunity forthe industry, said a marketer at the American Gas Assn.'s (AGA)annual operations conference here earlier this month.     Kevin O'Toole, vice president of transportation for marketerCatex/Vitol, said there is a " monstrous market"  for storagecapacity releases and swapping even though only a few deals havebeen done. O'Toole pointed to Northern Illinois Gas' Chicago Hub asan example of where swapping would be effective.     Richard Rushton, general manager of gas storage for NIGas, saidhis company is approaching storage capacity releases cautiously. "We won't be real aggressive,"  he said, because the IllinoisCommerce Commission has determined that ratepayers should sharethe benefits of the hub, but shareholders will assume the risks.     Another speaker on the panel, Steve Schoening, manager of loadand supply for Wisconsin Natural Gas, said Wisconsin Natural isstill looking to lease storage " close enough to home"  so it couldeliminate the need to nominate transportation from storage on apipeline. So far, the LDC has been unsuccessful because the closeststorage is in Illinois or Michigan.     The panel members discussed how the industry operated thiswinter under Order 636 and extreme weather. The panel praised theindustry's successful effort and communication this past winter,but they also said communication needs to improve in order to makesure the natural gas system can meet future challenges.     Distributors need to have a contact at the pipelines to call whocan give them the capacity information they need right away,Rushton said. He explained that NIGas encountered that problemthis past January when it was trying to find out how much capacitywas flowing on the pipelines that service it.     Rushton said it turned out that often there was only one personat the pipeline who could give the distributor capacity informationand by the time that person got back to NIGas, it was midday. Also,he urged pipelines and suppliers to find a better mechanism forsecuring supplies on the weekends. Some of January's coldest daysin NIGas' northern Illinois service area fell right on the weekends.     Schoening agreed, saying LDCs still need to be able to pick upthe phone and talk to someone, no matter how good a pipeline's EBBis. He said pipelines need to understand the problems LDCs havewith nominating a day ahead of time.     John Kelly, director of transmission technical services forPanhandle Eastern Pipe Line, defended pipelines' efforts, pointingout that " communication is a two-way street."  He said there areother elements of the industry that need to keep in touch, not justpipelines and LDCs, but marketers and producers as well. Inaddition, customers need to keep pipelines abreast of what they aredoing with their storage volumes so the pipelines can keep track ofvolumes and supplies.     Kelly added that pipelines' bulletin boards will only improve asthey move toward electronic data interchange and they work closelywith customers. Rushton and Schoening agreed that all the toolsweren't in place this winter and the system still managed to operateeffectively. But the system needs to improve, and communication isthe key, Rushton said.Back to Headline List CopyrightGAS STORAGE REPORT via NewsNetMAY 1994LDC wants gathering line added to Jackson Prairie     Washington Natural Gas has asked FERC to let it amend anearlier application to expand its Jackson Prairie storage facility soit can add a 4,800-foot gathering line.     The company explained that the gathering line is needed torelieve a shortfall in the anticipated delivery capability that theexpansion project was going to add. Washington Natural expectedthat its expansion would bring seasonal working gas to 15.1 billioncf, an increase of 2.3 billion cf. The work would also increase thefirm delivery rate to 450 million cfd. The expansion work wasexpected to cost a total of about $4.4 million.     FERC approved Washington Natural's application in a March1991 order that allows the utility to do well recompletions on sixwells, add two dehydration and two cooling towers and a meteringstation. Washington Natural has determined that the well workoversdidn't result in the projected increase in deliverability that it hadanticipated.     Due to this performance shortfall, the project cannot achieve thecertificated seasonal working gas quantity of 15.1 billion cf, thedistributor said. That leads to a difference between the certificatedcontract demand level and the actual withdrawal rate that can beachieved at the facility.     Washington Natural says it can fix this shortfall and bring theexpansion project's performance up to its certificated capacitylevel by constructing a 4,800-foot, 16-inch gathering line. Theconstruction is expected to cost $655,000 which the three owners ofJackson Prairie will bear. The other owners of the facility areNorthwest Pipeline and Washington Water Power.     The gathering lines will connect some of the existing wells withthe compressor station and will reduce the pressures against whichthe withdrawal wells have to work during the withdrawal cycle. "This arrangement will effectively increase the deliverability of thewithdrawal wells,"  Washington Natural contends (CP94-534).Back to Headline List CopyrightGAS STORAGE REPORT via NewsNetMAY 1994Design problems for existing cavern and bedded salt cavernconstruction     By Michel Dussaud     Gas storage in salt caverns is becoming popular as evidenced bythe fact that many of the new gas storage projects, 16 out of 40, or40%, are in salt caverns. A larger percentage of these new storagecaverns will be converted from existing caverns to storage (40% ofnew projects), and more caverns, about 25% of new projects, will bein bedded salt. This is due to the search for the best location withregard to pipeline interconnects, especially in the market area,where no domal salt is available. Also, competition among storagedevelopers is contributing to the popularity of salt cavernconstruction.     Most of the existing gas storage facilities in salt caverns in theUnited States and Canada are in salt domes, with only 15% of themin bedded salt. A few of the existing gas storage caverns, 20%, areconverted brine or liquid storage caverns. Only one of theseconverted caverns is in bedded salt.     The industry may find it more economically attractive to convertan existing cavern into storage than developing a new cavern.However, the storage industry is facing new problems of design intwo areas:     %  How to convert existing caverns safely and efficiently.     %  How to develop safe and economic gas storage caverns inbedded salt.     Salt caverns may be developed by conventional miningtechniques or by solution mining for the purpose of salt extraction.They also may be developed to store liquids. When considering aconversion project, some problems have to be carefully addressedbecause these caverns were not initially designed for this purpose.     The first problem is the tightness of the wells connecting thecavern with the surface. In the case of conventional salt mine, it iseven more critical. Internal and external (cement bond) tightnessmust be checked and the usual procedure is the MechanicalIntegrity Test (MIT) using nitrogen. An apparent leak rate of 250bbls/year (bottom hole conditions) is generally accepted for gascaverns. However, a more lenient requirement is usually acceptedfor brine production or liquid storage, such as 500-1,000bbls/year.     Second, the problem of roof span and roof protection needs to beaddressed. It is common to develop caverns with a very extendedflat roof when producing brine in order to maximize the extractedsalt, especially when the cavern is developed by using a two- ormulti-well technique. In most cases, the brine producer owns thesurface, and no third party is affected in case of a partial roofcollapse resulting in subsidence or even sinkhole formation. In thecase of bedded salt, salt may be solution mined at the roof of thecavern for the same purpose of maximizing salt extraction, and noprotection is left, leaving the cap rock exposed to the caverncontent.     These two circumstances may be very dangerous for gas storage.If the roof span is too large, more gas will have to be kept in thecavern at the end of withdrawal to maintain cavern stability. If nosalt is left at the roof of the cavern to maintain a barrier and avoidcap rock exposure, then a lower maximum pressure may be requiredto mitigate migration risk.     Communication between caverns or migration out of the cavern isa third problem. This may happen when the solution mining processhas not been very well controlled. Then, dissolution abnormalitiesmay occur, especially at the roof if the blanket material level hasnot been well monitored. This may also result from the presence ofa potash seam, for example, which may be dissolved even with saltsaturated brine. Caverns may then communicate through such achannel which is sometimes very difficult to see by sonar. The samecircumstance can also make the cavern communicate with theoutside of the dome, or with the cap rock in the case of bedded salt.Such risks are sometimes very difficult to identify and quantify.Pressure testing is not, in most cases, sensitive enough to detect asmall leak outside the cavern, especially with large caverns.     Fourth, cavern separation sometimes may not be large enough forgas storage. Again, because the brine producer's objective is toextract as much salt as possible, and because brine caverns aremaintained at a relatively constant pressure resulting from theweight of a brine column, they may use a small separation betweencaverns. When converting these caverns into gas storage, higherminimum pressures may be needed so as not to maintain cavernstability or control creep closure.     Finally, in some instances, when contemplating a bedded saltcavern conversion, the problem is to use the space left between therubble in the cavern, when salt is very impure. Depending on therubble size and nature, dewatering this part of the cavern may notbe feasible.     Designing caverns in bedded salt requires addressing somespecific points as well. The first point is the aspect ratio, definedas the ratio of the cavern height to maximum diameter. It is usuallyacknowledged that an oval-shaped cavern, or one with an arc-shapedroof with an aspect ratio close to one, are the most stable. When thisratio becomes lower than one, the vertical component of stress isreduced at the roof of the cavern. Ultimately, it may becomenegative, which means that the rock above the cavern is thensubjected to vertical tension. However, even weak verticalcompression may endanger cap rock stability. This situation mayoccur with large caverns with extended flat roofs and weak caprock. Then, a higher minimum pressure is required to maintaincavern stability, and more base gas has to be used.     In some bedded salt layers, there are in situ stresses which arenon isotropic. For instance, because of tectonic thrust, thehorizontal component of the stress may be 5-20% more than thevertical component. This must be taken into account when designingthe storage cavern. Usually, a higher minimum pressure will berequired.     Insolubles can be a problem as well. If insoluble content is toohigh, for instance above 20%, this may make cavern constructioninfeasible, because the pile of rubble will take all the spacedeveloped by salt dissolution. If there are massive and thickinsoluble layers within the salt bed to be dissolved, this also canmake the cavern difficult or unfit to construct.     Finally, if no salt is left at the roof of the cavern and the caprock is exposed to gas under pressure, it is very important toevaluate cap rock tightness to gas, and identify potential gas trapsor loss zones in permeable horizons above the cavern.     In conclusion, most of the projects involving cavern conversionor bedded salt cavern construction are probably feasible providedthe relevant problems are carefully addressed during the designstage. Some principles of design for underground excavation havebeen given by Professor Bieniawski from Pennsylvania StateUniversity. Two of these principles are particularly suited tostorage cavern design. The first of these is the principle ofminimum uncertainty. All parameters relevant to the design mustbe properly evaluated. If one can't be assessed properly, such as asmall migration path out of the cavern not seen by sonar and noteasily detected by pressure testing, then the corresponding riskcan't be controlled. The second principle to consider is the state-of-the-art design. If extrapolating beyond the usual way of designis needed for a project, then this move must be evaluated carefullyin order to check if the usual assumptions made are still valid.Back to Headline List CopyrightGAS STORAGE REPORT via NewsNetMAY 1994Amoco Canada adds partners to planned storage hub     TransCanada PipeLines and Alberta Natural Gas have bought intoAmoco Canada Petroleum's storage project as the companies haveteamed up to create a major new natural gas storage hub nearCalgary.     The Amoco storage project is estimated to cost close to $80million and is scheduled to come on line Nov. 1.     TransCanada will take 40% and Alberta Natural will get 20% ofthe project as a result of a joint venture announced by the threeCalgary companies. Amoco retains a 40% share and will continue inits role as operator of the project, which will store 40 billion cf.The companies will set up a separate business to oversee thefacility.     The storage facility is being developed near Amoco's EastCrossfield natural gas plant, about 20 miles north of Calgary. It issituated between TransCanada's mainline east and AlbertaNatural's mainline west. The project is expected to compete withAlberta Energy's AECO-C Hub near Medicine Hat, Alberta.     Although the Amoco storage facility will offer less storagecapacity than Alberta Energy, the project's organizers think it willprovide them with an advantage in the increasingly competitivestorage market. The facility will allow the owners to provide betterservice to their customers, TransCanada said.     TransCanada is also a partner in the Washington 10 storageproject in southeast Michigan. That project is awaiting regulatoryapproval.Back to Headline List CopyrightGAS STORAGE REPORT via NewsNetMAY 1994PG&E storage decision delayed     The California Public Utilities Commission (CPUC) decided at itsMay 4 meeting to hold off on a decision on Pacific Gas & Electric's(PG&E) unbundled storage program until May 25.     The commission is reviewing PG&E's plan and a preliminarydecision from an administrative law judge (ALJ) (GSR 4/94). PG&E'sstorage program proposal unbundles storage capacity into itsseparate functions and it would allow customers to contract for theseparate services.     The ALJ recommended for the 1994-95 season that 150 millioncfd of injection capacity and 32.1 billion cf of inventory beavailable to core customers, just as PG&E requested. The ALJsuggested the utility make available to the core 1,055 million cfd ofwithdrawal capacity, somewhat less than the 1,235 million cfd thatthe utility requested.     Another major issue the CPUC will decide is whether the core ornoncore customers should get expanded capacity at PG&E's mainstorage facility, McDonald Island.     The decision on PG&E's plan also affects the utility's electricfuels department's request for proposals on storage service. Some ofthe proposals, including that by PG&E's gas group, will be affectedby the CPUC decision, an official had said previously.Back to Headline List CopyrightGAS STORAGE REPORT via NewsNetMAY 1994Market molecules     %  Arkla Energy Resources, now NorAm Gas Transmission, toldits shippers earlier this month that it is nearing maximuminjection rates into storage. The pipeline once again remindedshippers to make sure their physical supplies match their markets.Also, the pipeline won't be able to accept any incremental supplieswithout matching physical markets until the system oversupply isresolved.     %  During June, Natural Gas Pipeline of America (NGPL) said itwon't be able to schedule more than 30% of the total firm storagerights, including no-notice rights, from points sourced on theAmarillo system. NGPL anticipates that interruptible storageinjections from Amarillo sources will remain at zero. If June issimilar to May, NGPL expects about 300 million cfd of Amarillo-sourced injections would be unable to be scheduled.     %  Columbia Gas Transmission said until further notice, it can'taccept storage in transit, SIT, injections on weekends or holidays.SIT injections can only be made on weekdays.     %  Williston Basin Interstate Pipeline offers a discountedsummer storage program. The interruptible service allowsinjections from April 1 through Sept. 30, and all gas must be out ofstorage by March 31, 1995. The rate for storage only is 12.5cents/dth and with transportation, the rate is 42 cents. For moreinformation, call John Childers, transportation services manager, at701-221-1254.     %  Northwest Pipeline encouraged shippers to keep imbalances asclose to zero as possible since its balance at the Jackson Prairiestorage facility, of which it is a co-owner, is near its maximumallowable level. Also, the pipeline doesn't have relief at Questar'sClay Basin storage facility, where Northwest leases space, toincrease injections there.     %  NorAm Gas Transmission is the new name of Arkla EnergyResources. The company received FERC approval to change its name.NorAm says the name more accurately reflects the regions itoperates in. The tables on pages 6 and 7 reflect the change.Affiliate Mississippi River Transmission hasn't changed.     %  Natural Gas Pipeline of America (NGPL) is asking FERC forpermission to modify its S-1 rate schedule so it can provideinterruptible no-notice injection rights to balance actual takes atNGPL's delivery points. As S-1 is presently written, S-1 isn'tavailable on a no-notice basis to balance actual takes during theinjection period, May 1 through Oct. 31. NGPL's S-1 shippers saidthey would like to be able to use S-1 and S-2 to inject gas to helpbalance a delivery point when the actual takes at that point are lessthan the confirmed delivery nominations.Back to Headline List CopyrightGAS STORAGE REPORT via NewsNetMAY 1994Enron files for section 311 service     Enron Storage last month filed for FERC approval to providesection 311 service from its Napoleonville storage facility inLouisiana.     Enron also requested market-based rates for the section 311service, which allows the company to move gas from storage out ofthe state of Louisiana.     Napoleonville is a salt dome facility in Ascension Parish, La.,with a working gas capacity of 4 billion cf and a maximumwithdrawal rate of 400 million cfd. Enron plans a second phase atthe cavern and it will add 3 billion cf of working gas.     FERC hasn't yet set a date for hearing on Enron's request for 311service and market-based rates.Back to Headline List CopyrightGAS STORAGE REPORT via NewsNetMAY 1994RG&E releases storage on CNG     Rochester Gas & Electric (RG&E) has released more storagecapacity on CNG Transmission, but not nearly as much as itreleased earlier this spring.     The utility released 720 million cf of storage on CNG at awithdrawal rate of 12 million cfd. Public Service of North Carolinapicked up all of the capacity for a one-year term from April 1through March 31, 1995. The demand rate for the transaction is$1.95/mcf.     In March, RG&E released a total of 3 billion cf of storagecapacity on CNG Transmission (GSR 4/94). Three companies took thecapacity: Virginia Natural Gas, Washington Gas Light and CNGServices.     RG&E said it has released storage capacity because it has takentransportation capacity on Empire Pipeline, which came on line lastyear. This has freed up some of the utility's storage andtransportation capacity which it has released on electronic bulletinboards.Back to Headline List CopyrightGAS STORAGE REPORT via NewsNetMAY 1994Cayuta open season nearing end     The Cayuta Natural Gas Storage project has a few days left in itsopen season for available capacity and deliverability from itsplanned salt cavern facility in upstate New York.     The open season closes May 31 on Cayuta, the second project bythe partners of the nearby Avoca Natural Gas Storage. Cayuta isexpected to have a working gas capacity of 2 billion cf in its firstphase and 320 million cfd of withdrawal capability. The second andthird phases will have 2 billion cf and 1 billion cf of capacityrespectively.     Avoca is willing to negotiate bids and enter into preliminaryagreements with any party interested in the 3 billion cf of capacitythat will be available in the second and third phases.     For more information, call James Driscoll of J. Makowski,developing partner of both projects, at 617-720-7678.Back to Headline List CopyrightGAS STORAGE REPORT via NewsNetMAY 1994Canadian board rejects InterCoastal pipe conversion     ANR Pipeline won't soon be connecting its system to InterCoastalPipe Line's at the Canadian border nor will ANR tie in withConsumer Gas' Tecumseh storage project.     The National Energy Board denied InterCoastal Pipe Line'sapplication to convert a Canadian oil pipeline to gas, which wouldhave had the capacity to move 133 million cfd of gas to markets ineastern Canada and the northeast United States.     ANR Pipeline planned to build almost 12 miles of new pipe toconnect InterCoastal with its system at the border, as well as toOntario utility Consumers' Tecumseh Gas Storage project nearSarnia. Another 12-mile lateral would have extended from theborder to ANR's existing system in Michigan. ANR has anapplication for construction of this pipeline at FERC.     The board said safety concerns prompted its decision. While itwas satisfied with many aspects of InterCoastal's proposal, " theboard had reservations about several features of the detaileddesign. These include the integrity of the existing pipe, localizeddepth of cover problems, minimum design temperature, hazardassessment and setback requirements."     InterCoastal, jointly owned by Interprovincial Pipe Line (IPL)and ANR, planned to convert about 130 miles of existing crude oilpipeline owned by IPL, which extends from IPL's Sarnia, Ontario,terminal to a point near Toronto. InterCoastal had signed ConsumersGas as the project's anchoring customer.Back to Headline List CopyrightGAS STORAGE REPORT via NewsNetMAY 1994Avoca asks FERC for permission to drill test wells     Avoca Natural Gas Storage has asked FERC for an exemption fromthe temporary certificate requirements so the company can installand test three production and five monitoring wells withoutdelaying its project.     The company explained to FERC in its filing that theSusquehanna River Basin Commission (SRBC), which has jurisdictionover the withdrawal of water from the river, is requiring Avoca toprovide actual production well data to support its application forwater withdrawal. The Susquehanna commission won't consider testdata, even though Avoca has included the test data in itsapplication to SRBC, Avoca said.     Since Avoca isn't authorized to develop and construct productionwells prior to receiving FERC approval on its application, thecompany can't drill the wells, it said. This threatens the January1996 in-service date that Avoca has told customers duringnegotiations, especially since the SRBC meets every other month,Avoca said.     Avoca has requested the commission grant it an exemption fromthe temporary certificate requirements to allow it to construct therequired production wells. The company said it has offered proofthat no additional permanent environmental damage will resultfrom the construction of the wells (CP94-161).Back to Headline List WT02-B35-19IA086-000616-B011-71http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/ey17.html 205.156.212.5 19970121235752 text/html 26918HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Tuesday, 21-Jan-97 23:55:57 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:40:58 GMTContent-length: 26733Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ey17.html Sample Issue Copyright GAS TRANSACTIONS REPORT via NewsNet April 22, 1994 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES FRONT PAGE NEWS SUPPLY ARRANGEMENTS DISCLOSED FOR OREGON POWER PROJECT (663 words) NEW CANADIAN-GAS CONTRACTS (104 words) NO CHANGES DETECTED IN INDUSTRY'S USE OF DERIVATIVES (584 words) PRICE MMS SENDS FEDERAL ROYALTY PAYERS SCALED-DOWN INFORMATION REQUEST (339 words) WEEKLY SNAPSHOT OF CASH PRICES AT HENRY HUB, LA. (66 words) STRATEGY STANDARD CONTRACT HAS ALTERNATIVES FOR SITUATIONS OF NON-PERFORMANCE (1889 words) BACK PAGE NEWS--NEWS BRIEFS GRANDS LACS MARKET CENTER WILL BE DEVELOPED IN S.E. MICHIGAN (84 words) HNG STORAGE ACQUIRES NORTH DAYTON GAS STORAGE FACILITY (87 words) CopyrightGAS TRANSACTIONS REPORT via NewsNetApril 22, 1994SUPPLY ARRANGEMENTS DISCLOSED FOR OREGON POWER PROJECT     The gas-supply arrangements for a planned cogeneration facilityin Oregon were among several new transactions disclosed in export-license applications just filed with the Canadian National EnergyBoard.     Two producer-marketers, Chevron U.S.A. Inc. and Canstates GasMarketing, separately requested Canadian government approval to exporta combined total of 35,000 MMBtu/day for use in the HermistonGenerating Co. L.P. combined-cycle plant to be constructed atHermiston, Ore. Chevron U.S.A.'s supply would be acquired from ChevronCanada Resources Ltd., its north-of-the-border affiliate. Canstateswould buy its gas at wholesale from Home Oil Co. Ltd.     In other developments, Renaissance Energy Ltd. of Calgary filedfor authorization to sell and export gas to Bay State Gas Co. and BayState's parent company, Northern Utilities Inc. of Westborough, Mass.Also, Western Gas Marketing Ltd. disclosed that it has scored a newtransborder deal with the Michigan Gas Utilities unit of UtiliCorpUnited Inc.     Officials with Hermiston Generating did not respond to requestsfor information. However, a project description submitted to the NEBsays it consists of two side-by-side combustion turbines that willutilize gas as their primary fuel.Big new plant     The plant's nominal primary output will be 300 Mw, dividedequally between the two combustion units. Hermiston submitted a copyof a long-term agreement to sell electric power produced by the plantto PacifiCorp, an electric utility based in Portland, Ore.     A source familiar with the project says as of now, it is notintended to be a "qualifying facility" cogenerator for purposes of thePublic Utility Regulatory Policy Act; however, the source says, alocal agricultural-products company will purchase waste energy fromthe plant.     The Feb. 28 contract between Chevron and Hermiston specifies amaximum volume of 20,000 MMBtu over a 15-year period commencing in thesummer of 1996. Transportation to the international border will becarried out by NOVA Corp. of Alberta and Alberta Natural Gas Co. Ltd.Carriage downstream of the border will be by a combination of PacificGas Transmission Co. and Cascade Natural Gas Corp. The latter mustconstruct a delivery tap to serve the power plant.     The gas price is a netback formula set to start at (U.S.)$1.61/MMBtu at the wellhead, with annual 5.5% escalators every Nov. 1.     The April 7 contract between Canstates and Hermiston calls for15,000 MMBtu/day over the same term as that of the Chevron contract.Canstates will buy the gas from Home Oil at a point on ANG's system.Pricing is similar to the terms of the Chevron agreement.     A Canstates official reports that Canstates's biggest existingexport business is a long-term relationship with Transco Gas MarketingCo. under which TGMC receives about 120,000 Mcf/day at the NiagaraFalls border interchange. Canstates, which is controlled by ANG,inherited most of the TGMC supply deal from Sulpetro Ltd., theofficial adds.Other proposed exports     Renaissance is proposing to deliver 6,423 MMBtu/day to Bay Stateunder a 10-year contract commencing Jan. 1, 1995. The delivery pointwould be Niagara Falls or upstream on the system of TransCanadaPipeLines Ltd., depending on which entity's firm capacity is used.     NU would get 990 MMBtu/day over a 10-year term commencing Nov. 1,1995.     In both contracts, the gas price would consist of monthly demand,reservation and transportation charges on TransCanada and NOVA plus acommodity charge for gas based on an index of price reports in threeindustry newsletters.     According to its NEB filing, Western Gas wants to sell a maximumof 7,241Mcf/day to MGU at two locations under a 10-year contract retroactiveto Nov. 1, 1993. The contract price would consist of a demand charge,inventory charge and commodity charge based on a published index.(Hermiston Generating, 415-291-6417; Canstates, 403-264-1134; WesternGas Marketing, 403-269-4535; Renaissance Energy, 403-750-1338;Chevron, 403-234-5643)Back to Headline List CopyrightGAS TRANSACTIONS REPORT via NewsNetApril 22, 1994NEW CANADIAN-GAS CONTRACTSBUYER: Bay State Gas Co. (Northern Utilities)SELLER: Renaissance Energy Ltd.START DATE: January 1995TERM (years): 10VOLUME: 6,423 MMBtu/dayBUYER: Hermiston Generating Co.SELLER: Chevron U.S.A./Chevron Canada ResourcesSTART DATE: July 1996TERM (years): 15VOLUME: 20,000 MMBtu/dayBUYER: Hermiston Generating Co.SELLER: Canstates Gas Marketing/Home Oil Co.START DATE: July 1996TERM (years): 15VOLUME: 15,000 MMBtu/dayBUYER: Northern UtilitiesSELLER: Renaissance EnergySTART DATE: January 1995TERM (years): 10VOLUME: 990 MMBtu/dayBUYER: Michigan Gas UtilitiesSELLER: Western Gas Marketing Ltd.START DATE: January 1993TERM (years): 10VOLUME: 7,241 Mcf/dayBack to Headline List CopyrightGAS TRANSACTIONS REPORT via NewsNetApril 22, 1994NO CHANGES DETECTED IN INDUSTRY'S USE OF DERIVATIVES     There has been no significant slowdown in the use of derivativefinancial products by gas marketers, judging by the comments ofofficials contacted by GAS TRANSACTIONS REPORT.     Of four major marketers contacted, two, Tenneco Gas Trading Co.and Coastal Gas Marketing Co., say they have taken no recent actionsto limit or restrict derivatives usage. Officials with the other twocompanies, who declined to speak for attribution by name or company,also say they haven't put any new trading policies in effect.     The reason for official reticence is what one source described as"political concerns" stemming from Congressional and administrativescrutiny of derivatives usage. In a related event, the FinancialAccounting Standards Board on April 14 issued a proposed rulerequiring more complete disclosure of a company's use of derivatives.Gas business `a major beneficiary'     Brian McLaughlin, director of Tenneco Gas Trading, is adamantabout the benefits of derivatives in the gas business and bullish onthe growth outlook for derivatives such as swaps, options, futures andmore exotic hedging instruments. "In a word, no," was his responsewhen asked whether the company has reined in its hedging practices orderivatives employment.     ***********************************************************     WHAT'S A `DERIVATIVE' DERIVED FROM?          Derivatives "are complex financial securities whose     values are derived from other underlying securities," says     Richard George, a Charlottesville, Va., portfolio manager     and editor of a newsletter on derivative risk. He divides     derivatives into three broad types: exchange-listed, over-     the-counter and structured/hybrid. Exchange-listed deriva-     tives include futures and options tied to futures, stock and     currency exchanges. Examples of OTC derivatives are swaps,     options and forwards. Structured/hybrid derivatives include     mortgage securities, bonds with warrants, "convertibles" and     many more newly emerging instruments.          To date, gas marketers have relied primarily on     exchange-listed and OTC derivatives. Industry insiders say     the use of more-exotic hybrids and custom-structured     derivatives has been limited so far to a small group of the     industry's most sophisticated traders.     ***********************************************************     McLaughlin would not comment about the losses from derivativetrading reported by companies outside of the gas industry. But hethinks that derivatives -- based on standard agreements "with slightmodifications and negotiations among counterparties" -- are just whatthe gas market needs to keep growing and avoid the distortions of thepast.     "The gas business has been a major beneficiary of the use offutures and other derivatives," he says. "We see the operations of thefinancial side of the industry as a benchmark for the physical side,"especially by pointing the way toward greater precision in terminologyand standardization of procedures.     He concedes that derivatives bring greater risk -- and the risk isgrowing as traders attempt to make ever-longer derivative-basedtransactions. The key to avoiding fiascos of the type that recentlybefell MG Corp., Procter & Gamble Co., Marion Merrill Dow Inc. andothers is to cover all foreseeable risks with appropriate hedges, hesays, and if none are available, "don't be in there half-covered."CGM likes ERMA     Venita Ferguson, Coastal Gas Marketing's risk manager, reportsthat her company is continuing its practice of hedging priceuncertainties with  offsetting derivative products. CGM makes frequentuse of a modified version of the Energy Risk Management Association'smaster energy price swap agreement, she says.     CGM has put no new restrictions on derivatives usage in recentweeks, Ferguson says. That part of the company's business is growingwith its portfolio of long-term sales, she adds. (FASB, 203-847-0700;Tenneco Gas Trading, 713-757-2131; Coastal Gas Marketing, 713-877-1400)Back to Headline List CopyrightGAS TRANSACTIONS REPORT via NewsNetApril 22, 1994MMS SENDS FEDERAL ROYALTY PAYERS SCALED-DOWN INFORMATION REQUEST     The Minerals Management Service this month sent a scaled-downorder for gas-contract settlement information to holders of federaloil and gas leases. The action carries out MMS's side of an agreementmade earlier this year with the Independent Petroleum Association ofAmerica and other industry groups.     The industry groups had challenged MMS's interpretation of theapplication of royalty regulations to contract-settlement payments.Last June, MMS ordered all federal lessees to submit detailedinformation about payments they had received in settlement of gas-contract disputes. The order came as a wave of take-or-pay settlementsresulting from industry restructuring was winding down.     IPAA, in conjunction with the American Petroleum Institute, suedMMS over the June order and sought a preliminary injunction in federalcourt against the data collection effort. It agreed to drop therequest for injunction upon issuance by MMS of the revised order.     The main difference between last year's order and this year's isthat MMS no longer requires lessees to list the federal or Indianleases involved in each settlement or the proportion of the settlementattributable to those leases. MMS continues to require that thefederal royalty payers list all settlements taking place after Dec.31, 1979.Still may go to court     As did the old order, the new order requires royalty payers togive the date of settlement, the producer's name, the purchaser'sname, the amount of the settlement and the date the settlement paymentwas received. MMS defines a settlement as "including, but not limitedto... take-or-pay, price deficiencies, buy out or buy down payments,etc."     Under terms of the agreement, the associations will not challengethe latest MMS order. In the near future, MMS will select up to 10responses for which it will issue an "order to pay." Those cases willthen enter the Interior Dept.'s administrative review process, and MMSsays it expects they will be litigated to determine whether thegovernment is owed royalties based on the settlement payments. (MMS,202-208-3983)Back to Headline List CopyrightGAS TRANSACTIONS REPORT via NewsNetApril 22, 1994WEEKLY SNAPSHOT OF CASH PRICES AT HENRY HUB, LA.(per MMBtu)Feb.18  Feb.25  Mar.4  Mar.11  Mar.18  Mar.25  Apr.4*  Apr.8  Apr.15------  ------  -----  ------  ------  ------  ------  -----  ------$2.36   $2.43   $2.24  $2.08   $2.03   $1.94   $1.97   $1.99  $2.08*Survey conducted on Monday because insufficient reports wereavailable on Friday, April 1.Prices are median for reported short-term sales of 5,000 MMBtupackages on the date shown.     Source: telephone survey by Gas Transactions Report staff.Back to Headline List CopyrightGAS TRANSACTIONS REPORT via NewsNetApril 22, 1994STANDARD CONTRACT HAS ALTERNATIVES FOR SITUATIONS OF NON-PERFORMANCE     As it does with force majeure, a standard gas contract drafted bya committee of marketing and legal executives provides alternativeclauses for situations in which one party fails to live up to the deal.     The standard EFP contract offers two alternatives for the articletitled "Failure to Perform," Article 10. The "A" set places the burdenof dispute resolution on both contract parties by calling on them to"cooperate" to resolve non-performance issues. The "A" set alsoprovides for more severe penalties for non-performance.Alternative A: cooperative dispute resolutionARTICLE XFailure to Perform10A.1 Subject to the tolerances set forth in Transporter's tariff,Seller is obligated daily to Schedule, or cause to be Scheduled, andto deliver to the Transporter which is delivering Gas to the DeliveryPoint, and Buyer is obligated daily to Schedule, or cause to beScheduled, and to receive, from the Transporter receiving the Gas atthe Delivery Point, the Daily Contract Quantity of Gas at the DeliveryPoint agreed to for the Period of Delivery. Both parties hereto shallalso promptly notify each other as soon as possible of anynotification by a Transporter of any imbalances which are occurring orwhich have occurred, and they shall cooperate to eliminate suchimbalances including the use of any make-up or balancing rights whicheither party may have.[The requirement to notify the other party of an imbalance situationcould be accomplished by telephone; that possibility, along with theparties' mutual obligation to "cooperate" on the elimination of animbalance, adds up to a fairly broad imbalance remedy.]10A.2 If either party fails to Schedule the Daily Contract Quantity,as provided in Section 10.1, that party shall be liable for thefollowing damages:(1) If the amount Buyer Scheduled on any day is less than theapplicable Daily Contract Quantity and the Sales Price, as defined inSection 10.2(3) hereunder, is less than the Contract Price, then Buyershall be liable for and shall pay to Seller (a) a dollar amount equalto any demand charges which Seller has incurred on the Transporterimmediately upstream of the Delivery Point for firm transportation ofGas which Buyer failed to Schedule and (b) a dollar amount equal tothe sum of the product of (i) the difference between the ContractPrice and the Sales Price the Seller receives, multiplied by (ii) thedifference between the Daily Contract Quantity and the quantitiesScheduled by Buyer for each such day during the Period of Delivery.Receipt of full payment hereunder by Seller shall act to reduce theContract Quantity by a quantity equal to the difference between theoriginal Contract Quantity and the total quantity Scheduled for thePeriod of Delivery.[For example, if the buyer takes 2,000 MMBtu less than the DCQ and theseller is forced to sell the gas for 10 cents/MMBtu below the contractprice, the buyer must pay the seller $200 per each day it under-takesplus the pipeline demand charges paid by the seller for firmtransportation.](2) If the amount Seller Scheduled on any day is less than theapplicable Daily Contract Quantity and the Replacement Price, asdefined in Section 10.2(3) hereunder, is greater than the ContractPrice, then Seller shall be liable for and shall pay to Buyer (a) adollar amount equal to any demand charges which Buyer has incurred onthe Transporter immediately downstream of the Delivery Point for firmtransportation of Gas which Seller failed to Schedule and (b) a dollaramount equal to the sum of the product of (i) the difference betweenthe Replacement Price and the Contract Price multiplied by (ii) thedifference between the Daily Contract Quantity and the quantitiesScheduled by Seller for each such day during the Period of Delivery.Receipt of full payment hereunder by Buyer shall act to reduce theoriginal Contract Quantity by the difference between the originalContract Quantity and the total quantity Scheduled by Seller for thePeriod of Delivery.[For example, if the seller delivers 2,000 MMBtu less than the DCQ andthe buyer is forced to buy replacement gas for 5 cents/MMBtu more thanthe contract price, the seller must pay the buyer $100 for each day itunder-delivers plus the pipeline demand charges paid by the buyer forfirm service.](3) The "Sales Price" shall be the price at which Seller is able,acting in good faith, to make comparable sales at the highestreasonable price. The "Replacement Price" shall be the price at whichBuyer is able, acting in good faith, to obtain comparable supplies atthe lowest reasonable price. In the event Seller is not able to find amarket for the quantity of Gas within the Contract Quantity not takenby the Buyer, the Sales Price shall be deemed to be the fair marketprice for the Gas not taken, as agreed to by the parties, minus anamount equal to fifteen percent (15%) of the Contract Price.[To reach a valid sales price, the parties can resort to some index --such as closing prices on the New York Mercantile Exchange or spotprices published in newsletters.]In the event Buyer is not able to find replacement gas for thequantity of Gas within the Contract Quantity not delivered by Seller,the Replacement Price shall be deemed to be the fair market price forthe Gas not delivered, as agreed to by the parties, plus an amountequal to fifteen percent (15%) of the Contract Price.[As was the case with the Sales Price determination, it is left to thebuyers to identify an index for the Replacement Price determination.]10A.3 If by failing to receive or deliver quantities equal to theContract Quantity or by failing to confirm Scheduled quantities,either party hereto creates an imbalance on a Transporter, such partyshall be solely liable for correcting such imbalance(s), so long asthe parties cooperate to correct the imbalance as provided in Section10.1. If any such imbalance is not corrected, and charges or penaltiesare assessed by a Transporter, the party which caused such imbalanceshall be responsible for any and all such charges or penalties.Alternative B: independent action     The second alternative for failure to perform makes each partyprimarily responsible for finding a suitable commercial outlet in theevent of non-performance by the other party. In so doing, itestablishes the time limits of that substitute outlet and restrictsthe damages that can be collected in the event of non-performance.ARTICLE XFailure to Perform[The following section requires each party to find alternative supplyor buyers in the event of non-performance by the other party, and itpermits the alternative arrangement to continue until the end of themonth it which it was entered into.]10B.1 If for any reason other than an event of force majeure eitherparty fails, in whole or in part, to perform its respective obligationto deliver or take Gas under this Agreement, the other party shall useits best efforts, acting in a commercially reasonable manner, tomitigate the effect of such failure, which includes attempting tosecure an alternate interruptible supply, or interruptible market, asthe case may be, which allows the defaulting party to resume itsobligation when the defaulting party becomes capable of doing so. Ifin so doing, Buyer secures an alternate source of supply and Sellersubsequently regains its ability to deliver Scheduled volumes, Buyershall not be required to accept Gas, and Buyer may, without prejudiceto its rights to collect damages from the Seller in accordance withSection 10B.2 hereof, through the last day of the month in whichSeller's failure to deliver Gas occurs, rely upon the alternate supplyarrangements. If in acting to mitigate its damages Seller securesalternate markets therefor and Buyer subsequently regains its abilityto accept delivery of Scheduled volumes, Seller shall not be requiredto deliver the volumes that the Buyer was previously unable to acceptfor delivery, and, Seller may, without prejudice to its rights tocollect damages from the Buyer in accordance with Section 10B.3hereof, through the last day of the month in which Buyer's failure totake Gas occurs, continue to deliver to the alternate markets thenominated volumes of gas that it would have otherwise have beenobligated to deliver hereunder.[The following section details and limits the damages to which a partyis entitled in the event of non-performance by the other party.]10B.2 If Seller fails, in whole or in part, to Schedule volumes or tomake Scheduled volumes available to Buyer in accordance with thisAgreement and such failure is not excused by an event of force majeureor some other provision of the Agreement, the Buyer's right to recoverdamages for such failure shall be limited to the following:(1) If Buyer obtains alternate supplies of Gas, a daily amount equalto (a) the shortfall in delivery from the Scheduled amount ("DeliveryShortfall") times the difference between (b) the Contract Price and,(c) the price Buyer paid for the Gas obtained from an alternatesource. In no event, however, shall the amount of such damages exceedthe amount that would have been payable by the Buyer had the Sellerdelivered the Scheduled volumes.(2) If Buyer does not obtain alternate supplies of Gas, a daily amountequal to the Seller's Delivery Shortfall times the Contract Price.Seller agrees to pay Buyer any damages to which Buyer is entitledhereunder on or before the 15th day after the Seller receives awritten calculation of the amount of such damages from the Buyer.10B.3 If Buyer fails to Schedule volumes or to take on any day all orany part of the volumes Scheduled by Buyer hereunder and such failureis not excused by an event of force majeure or some other provision ofthis Agreement, the Seller's right to recover damages for such failureshall be limited to the following:(1) If the Seller is able to obtain alternate markets for the Gas theBuyer fails to take, a daily amount equal to the difference between(a) the Scheduled volumes for such day and (b) the volumes taken onsuch day by the Buyer ("Take Shortfall") times the difference between(i) the price received by the Seller from the alternate buyer(s) and(ii) the Contract Price.(2) If the Seller is not able to obtain alternate markets for the Gasthe Buyer fails to take, a daily amount equal to the Take Shortfall onsuch days times the Contract Price. Buyer agrees to pay Seller anydamages to which Seller is entitled in accordance with the aboveprovisions on or before the 15th day after the Buyer receives awritten calculation of the amount of such damages from the Seller.      The force majeure aspects of the standard EFP agreement, whichwas developed to govern transactions incorporating the exchange offutures for physicals, were covered in article in the previous GASTRANSACTIONS REPORT (4/8 GTR, p. 3). Copies of the standard EFPagreement can be obtained by calling Shelley Hurley, vice presidentfor risk management at Equitable Resources Marketing Co. (EquitableResources, 214-361-3202)Back to Headline List CopyrightGAS TRANSACTIONS REPORT via NewsNetApril 22, 1994GRANDS LACS MARKET CENTER WILL BE DEVELOPED IN S.E. MICHIGAN     The Grands Lacs Market Center will be developed in southeasternMichigan to leverage that location's access to U.S. and Canadianpipelines, Midwestern and Canadian gas markets and nearby bedded-saltstorage sites, the project sponsors announced. The project includes a25-mile pipeline interconnecting the systems of Consumers Power Co.,Dearborn, Mich., and Union Gas Ltd. of Chatham, Ontario. Projectsponsors are affiliates of CMS Energy Corp., Union Gas, Tejas PowerCorp., Houston, and Enron Gas Services Corp., Houston. (CMS, 313-438-9253)Back to Headline List CopyrightGAS TRANSACTIONS REPORT via NewsNetApril 22, 1994HNG STORAGE ACQUIRES  NORTH DAYTON GAS STORAGE FACILITY     HNG Storage Co. acquired the North Dayton Gas Storage Facility, asalt-cavern structure with a working capacity of 3 Bcf, from Lone StarEnergy Storage Inc. HNG Storage also negotiated modifications to aservice contract for the facility with Houston Lighting & Power Co. aswell as an extension of that contract to 20 years, reports an officialwith the acquiring company. The official adds that there are "activeplans" to add capacity and pipeline connections to the North Daytonfacility (HNG Storage, 713-589-9840)Back to Headline List WT02-B35-20IA086-000616-B011-92http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/ey07.html 205.156.212.5 19970121235805 text/html 10963HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Tuesday, 21-Jan-97 23:56:14 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:41:01 GMTContent-length: 10778Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ey07.html Sample Issue Copyright GAS TRANSPORTATION REPORT via NewsNet NOVEMBER 2, 1994 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES Active aftermarket and capacity glut predicted (547 words) Northern Border plans expansion into Indiana (317 words) Pipelines go easy on scheduled November maintenance (185 words) Market (195 words) Futures (34 words) Storage (160 words) CopyrightGAS TRANSPORTATION REPORT via NewsNetNOVEMBER 2, 1994Active aftermarket and capacity glut predicted      Unseasonably mild weather in the Northeast has created a lullin the capacity market after a busy bid week, and sources arepredicting an active aftermarket for capacity in November if themild weather keeps up.      Replacement shippers held about 10 billion cfd in released firmcapacity on Oct. 28, down about 1.5 billion cfd from Sept. 28.Storage capacity releases were done on CNG Transmission and TexasEastern Transmission.      The aftermarket for capacity should be active now thatpipelines aren't discounting transportation as deeply and if theweather stays mild, said Ben Hadden with Appalachian Gas Sales.      He said there have been more release deals done this bid weekthan during prior bid weeks, partly because bottlenecks haven'tshown up yet on the long-haul pipelines out of the Gulf Coast. Inpast years capacity restraints usually had caused some problemsby now, but pipelines aren't anticipating allocating supply in thenear future, he added.      "The market is pretty dead right now," said an official with aNortheastern distributor. But look out if the weather suddenlyturns cold, he said. "If the weather all of a sudden heads south,markets in the Northeast will catch fire."      The distributor official said his company held on to itsTennessee capacity in case the weather turns and its Texas Easterncapacity so far wasn't selling very well.      He said there is no demand on CNG, but demand on Columbia Gaspicked up a bit with its recallable capacity going for about a 5cents/mcf daily demand rate. On Columbia Gulf, the official said hegot a 9 cents/mcf rate for capacity to Leach, Ky.      The Lebanon, Ohio, interconnect was "really hot" during bidweek for gas sales and capacity releases, according to Hadden.      On Texas Gas Transmission, Dayton Power & Light releasedcapacity in about 13 November release deals into Lebanon for dailydemand rates ranging from 5 cents/mcf to CMS Gas Marketing to17.5 cents/mcf to Tenneco Gas Marketing.      Term deals for the winter and beyond and storage releases arestarting to pop up on electronic bulletin boards. On CNG, theHarriman Utility Board released 26 million cf of various storagecapacity on the pipeline to CNG Gas Services for an injection rate of2.6 cents/mcf and a withdrawal rate of 2.8 cents/mcf. Boston Gaspicked up storage capacity on Texas Eastern from Dartmouth Powerand Bristol & Warren.      Texas-Ohio Gas picked up about 16 million cf from Yankee Gasin three term deals on Texas Eastern for about a 13 cents/mcf dailydemand rate in the field and a 21 cents/mcf rate into zone three.All three deals run through March 1995.      One source said if shippers start pulling the high-priced gasthey bought last April out of Northeastern storage there willprobably be plenty of capacity coming out of the Gulf Coast accessareas in November.      Another source said he also expects an active aftermarket aslong as the weather stays mild. He said he's been getting a lot ofcalls from customers willing to pay maximum rate into theNortheast.      Recallable deals on Tennessee into zone five were going for adaily demand rate in the low-30 cents/mcf range, according to thesource.Back to Headline List CopyrightGAS TRANSPORTATION REPORT via NewsNetNOVEMBER 2, 1994Northern Border plans expansion into Indiana      Northern Border Pipeline is seeking customers for a proposedcapacity expansion of its existing system and a pipeline extensioninto Northern Indiana.      The proposed capacity expansion involves increasing receiptcapacity by at least 60 million cfd between the Monchy receiptpoint at the U.S./Canadian border and the Glen Ullin, N.D., receiptpoint on the 42-inch system.      The 30-inch system between Ventura and Harper, Iowa, ismarked for a 260 million cfd capacity expansion. Both expansionswill be accomplished through the addition of compression.      The proposed extension into Northern Indiana involves threelegs that start with 163 miles of 30-inch pipeline from Harper,Iowa, to Northern Illinois Gas' (NIGas) Troy Grove storage field inIllinois.      Along this segment, Northern Border proposes to connect withInterstate Power at Prophetstown, Ill. The pipeline plans 2,200 hpof compression for this leg with a maximum capacity of 260 millioncfd.      From Troy Grove, Northern Border plans to build 69 miles of26-inch pipeline without compression to Manhattan, Ill., where itwill connect with Peoples Gas Light & Coke in the area of Joliet, Ill.Maximum capacity on this leg will also be 260 million cfd.      The proposed extension then continues eastward 35 miles with20-inch pipe into Northern Indiana to connect with NorthernIndiana Public Service (NIPSCO) at Griffith, Ind. Maximum capacityon this segment will be 175 million cfd.      Northern Border has not sought FERC approval for the projectyet. The pipeline has targeted Nov. 1, 1997, as the in-service datefor the expansion. The window for bidding on this potentialcapacity opened Oct. 24 and will close Nov. 18, 1994. NorthernBorder will do a final allocation of bids for the capacity and postthem on its electronic bulletin board by Dec. 16, 1994.      For more information about the expansion, contact Bill Fondawith Northern Border at 402-398-7756.Back to Headline List CopyrightGAS TRANSPORTATION REPORT via NewsNetNOVEMBER 2, 1994Pipelines go easy on scheduled November maintenance      Few disruptions in capacity are expected during November asscheduled maintenance continues to remain light on pipelinesacross the United States.      Starting Nov. 2, ANR Pipeline will be lowering a line at a streamcrossing upstream of the Eakley compressor station. Themaintenance work is scheduled to last about three days. Receiptpoints in line segments SW2H, SW2I and SW2J will be shut induring the work.      On Oct. 31, Tennessee Gas Pipeline was at capacity throughstation 219 in Mercer, Pa., and near capacity on the Sullivan Citylateral in Hidalgo, Texas. The pipeline said it may restrict servicesstarting Nov. 2.      Texas Eastern Transmission was at capacity for interruptibletransportation on the 24-inch system through station 16 at Berne,Ohio, and into the suction of Berne, Ohio, from the 24-inch systemon Nov. 1. The Wilcox, Willow Springs and Monroe laterals were alsoat capacity.      On Transcontinental Gas Pipe Line, flow through station 40 atSour Lake, Texas, was being allocated on Nov. 1. Also on Transco,interruptible capacity was limited to 100 million cfd from station180 in Virginia eastward.Back to Headline List CopyrightGAS TRANSPORTATION REPORT via NewsNetNOVEMBER 2, 1994Market      A marketer in New England said Monday about gas prices, "Ithink they'll come off a little bit." And a buyer in Houstonexpected much the same, pointing to this week's December futuresclose at almost a nickel off last week.      In other trading, an eastern LDC was fishing for baseload gasinto Transcontinental Gas Pipe Line at station 65 at $1.74 butcouldn't find any baseload sellers under $1.78. Swing sellers wereoffering deals at $1.72.      At Parkway, Ontario, into the Union Gas system, buyers wantedprices in the mid-$1.90s yesterday, while sellers wanted $2.05-15for their gas.      A West Coast marketer bought some Permian gas on El Paso at$1.62, a healthy jump from the mid- to high-$1.50s at the end oflast week. He thought the price increase, which some sources saidhad reached $1.68 by late yesterday afternoon, might be inanticipation of some colder weather moving down from theNorthwest. He was hoping to sell it in the mid-$1.60s.      Prices at AECO-C ranged from C$1.70-$1.80/gj for day-to-daytrading, and at Sumas into Northwest and at Kingsgate into PGTprices hovered around $1.50.Back to Headline List CopyrightGAS TRANSPORTATION REPORT via NewsNetNOVEMBER 2, 1994Futures      December futures will find technical support at around $1.93,with short covering expecting at that level, said an analyst.However, the contract is expected to find its ceiling at $1.87 andthen trade lower.Back to Headline List CopyrightGAS TRANSPORTATION REPORT via NewsNetNOVEMBER 2, 1994Storage      With withdrawal season right around the corner, net injectionsinto storage jumped to 8.6 billion cfd, more than double theprevious week's, according to the American Gas Assn.'s (AGA)survey for the week ending Oct. 21.      This turnaround at the end of the injection season pushedworking gas in storage to 3,081 billion cf, after passing 3 trillion cfthe previous week, according to AGA's survey. Storage facilitiesnationwide are now 96% full, using AGA's estimated full level of3,206 billion cf.      Sources said the big increase in injections was probably due tostorage users trying to top off their storage capacity in the last fewweeks of injection season.      Net injections were 60 billion cf, up 36 billion cf, or 5.1 billioncfd, from last week's estimate.      Storage facilities in the east hit 97% full, compared to 95% thepreceding week. The producing region appears to have completed itsinjections, with net injections of only 1 billion cf.Back to Headline List WT02-B35-21IA086-000616-B011-116http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/ey63.html 205.156.212.5 19970121235843 text/html 22140HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Tuesday, 21-Jan-97 23:56:24 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:40:51 GMTContent-length: 21955Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ey63.html Sample Issue Copyright WORLDWIDE ENERGY via NewsNet January 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES MITCHELL DIRECTORS DECLARE DIVIDENDS (64 words) WISCONSIN PSC MODIFIES EXISTING ELECTRIC SERVICE EXTENSION RULES BY EXTENDING THE REFUND PERIOD (182 words) CHEVRON GETS GO-AHEAD TO EXPLORE 1.77-MILLION-ACRE TRACT IN PERU (217 words) MITCHELL'S REMAINING INTEREST IN THE WOODLANDS COMMUNICATIONS NETWORK FOR $17 MILLION (218 words) SPECIAL CHARGES REDUCE CHEVRON'S THIRD QUARTER NET INCOME TO $282 ON OPERATING EARNINGS OF $504 MILLION UP 24 PERCENT (1321 words) ENERGY WEEK '96 FOCUSES ON TECHNOLOGICAL ADVANCEMENTS (129 words) MITCHELL REPORTS LOWER THIRD-QUARTER EARNINGS (424 words) MURPHY OIL REORTS ON THIRD QUARTER (408 words) CopyrightWORLDWIDE ENERGY via NewsNetJanuary 1996MITCHELL DIRECTORS DECLARE DIVIDENDSDirectors of Mitchell Energy & Development Corp. (NYSE: MND A,MND B), The Woodlands, TX, have declared regular quarterlycash dividends of 12 cents per share on the company's Class Acommon stock and 13.25 cents per share on its Class B commonstock. The dividends are payable Jan. 4, 1996, to stockholdersof record at the close of business on Dec. 21, 1995.Back to Headline List CopyrightWORLDWIDE ENERGY via NewsNetJanuary 1996WISCONSIN PSC MODIFIES EXISTING ELECTRIC SERVICEEXTENSION RULES BY EXTENDING THE REFUND PERIODThe Public Service Commission of Wisconsin (commission) hasdecided to modify its current set of electric serviceextension rules to lessen the financial impact upon customerswho wish to extend service to previously undeveloped areas.The Commission indicated that a wholesale change in thecurrent rules was not appropriate because it would likelycontribute to urban sprawl, but it was reasonable to extendthe refund period for those customers.Extension rules determine who pays for the cost incurred inextending electric utility service to a previously unservedarea. When a customer applies for an extension with a utilitywhere existing distribution lines are far from the dwelling,the utility has to extend a distribution line all the way into the new location. The customer is responsible for the costof the distribution line in advance.Under the current extension rules the customer is entitled toa small credit based on the depreciated cost of thedistribution system. The customer is also eligible forrefunds when other customers attach to the same distributionline that he or she paid for.Back to Headline List CopyrightWORLDWIDE ENERGY via NewsNetJanuary 1996CHEVRON GETS GO-AHEAD TO EXPLORE1.77-MILLION-ACRE TRACT IN PERUChevron Overseas Petroleum (Peru) Limited has signed a licensecontract with PeruPetro S.A. to explore more than 1.77 millionacres on Block 52 in the Peruvian highlands.Chevron's exploration program will include a seismic programand other geologic studies, and is anticipated to startimmediately. Following acquisition and interpretation of thegeologic and seismic data, determinations regarding drillingwill be made.Block 52 is located 250 miles east of the capital city ofLima and is adjacent to the giant Camisea gas/condensatediscoveries. It comprises 718,928 hectares (more than 1.77million acres), and has had no previous exploration activity."We are delighted to be returning to Peru," said RichardMatzke, president of Chevron Overseas Petroleum, "and we areeager to begin exploration in such an exciting area. We feelBlock 52 offers excellent potential due to its geologicsimilarities with and geographic proximity to the prolificCamisea fields," he added.Chevron's history in Peru dates back to the 1930s when thecompany conducted geological exploration in the foothills ofthe Andes. In addition, Chevron operated a refinery inConchan, Peru, until 1972.The Peruvian government's newly revised hydrocarbon laws andnoted that they have enhanced the appeal of operating in Peruby offering favorable terms and encouraging foreign investmentin the country.Back to Headline List CopyrightWORLDWIDE ENERGY via NewsNetJanuary 1996MITCHELL'S REMAINING INTEREST IN THE WOODLANDSCOMMUNICATIONS NETWORK FOR $17 MILLIONMitchell Energy & Development Corp., The Woodlands, TX, hassold its remaining 50 percent interest in The WoodlandsCommunications Network to TCI Communications, Inc., for $17million, making TCI Communications the sole owner.This business was started by Mitchell to serve The Woodlandswhen it opened in October 1974 and provides cable television,home security and advertising services. In April 1987,Mitchell sold a. half interest to United Artists Cable.  Tele-Communications, Inc. (TCI) acquired United Artists' cablesystems in 1991, including its half interest in The WoodlandsCommunications Network.Chairman and Chief Executive Officer George P. Mitchell saidthe sale of the remaining interest in The WoodlandsCommunications Network is part of the company's continuingefforts to enhance profitability by selling non-core assets,including those that have a greater value to others. Thecompany has sold more than $200 million in assets during thelast 18 months, Mitchell added.Mitchell Energy & Development Corp. is among the nation'slargest independent producers of natural gas and natural gasliquids. The company, through its subsidiary, The WoodlandsCorporation, also is the developer of a 25,000-acremaster-planned community 27 miles north of Houston. Mitchell'sshares are traded on the New York and Pacific stock exchangesunder the symbols MND A (voting) and MND B (non-voting).Back to Headline List CopyrightWORLDWIDE ENERGY via NewsNetJanuary 1996SPECIAL CHARGES REDUCE CHEVRON'S THIRD QUARTER NET INCOMETO $282 ON OPERATING EARNINGS OF $504 MILLION UP 24 PERCENTChevron Corporation has reported that special charges reducedthird quarter net income 34 percent to $282 million, or $.44per share, from $425 million ($.65 per share) reported for thethird quarter of 1994.Excluding special charges, 1995 third quarter results were$504 million, a 24 percent increase from adjusted earnings of$407 million for the prior year quarter. Special chargestotaled $222 million and included a $168 million provisionrelated to the company's recently announced decision todispose of its real estate development operations.Commenting on third quarter results, Chairman and CEO KenDerr said, "We're pleased to report another quarter withoperating profit that exceeded half a billion dollars.Despite flat crude oil and lower natural gas prices comparedwith the third quarter of last year, our operating earningsincreased' nearly $100 million, reflecting ongoing strengthin our chemicals and international upstream businesses and ourcontinued emphasis on reducing costs."Derr continued, "Our increased profitability this yeartranslates to a return on capital employed, adjusted forspecial items, of 10.2 percent for the 12 months ended Sept.30. This compares with a return of 8.6 percent for thecalendar year 1994, and demonstrates good progress toward our12.0 percent goal."Adjusted for special items, earnings for the first ninemonths of 1995 were $1.511 billion, up 38 percent from $1.093billion for the 1994 nine months. Net income for the 1995nine months was $1.348 billion, or $2.07 per share, includingspecial charges totaling $163 million; net income for thecomparable prior year period was $1.070 billion, or $1.64 pershare, and included $23 million of special charges."We have a major turnaround currently under way at ourRichmond, Calif., refinery," said Derr. The refinery isexpected to be down for about six weeks to prepare for theintroduction of California-mandated reformulated gasolinesearly next year. When the turnaround is complete, we will bepositioned to be the largest producer of these new gasolines.However, the shutdown will have an effect on our fourthquarter operations."Total revenues in the third quarter were $9.3 billion, down 2percent from $9.5 billion in the year earlier quarter. Totalrevenues for the first nine months of 1995 were $27.9billion, a 5 percent increase from $26.6 billion reported forthe 1994 nine-month period.Included in third quarter net income were foreign exchangelosses of $26 million in 1995 and $30 million in 1994. For thefirst nine months, foreign exchange losses were $20 millionin 1995 and $51 million in 1994.U.S. exploration and production third quarter net earningswere $131 million compared with $63 million in the 1994 thirdquarter. However, current quarter earnings included a netbenefit of $19 million from special items, whereas 1994earnings were reduced $61 million for environmentalremediation and litigation provisions. In the 1995 quarter, a$27 million gain resulting from a refund of federal offshorelease costs was partially offset by environmental remediationprovisions.Excluding special items in both quarters, 1995 earnings of$112 million declined from year-ago earnings of $124 million,primarily because of lower production volumes and lowernatural gas prices. The company's average U.S. liquidsrealization of $14.91 per barrel was little changed from the$15.03 realized in last year's third quarter; however,average natural gas realizations of $1.40 per thousand cubicfeet in the 1995 third quarter were down 14 percent from$1.62 last year. Net liquids production declined to 346,000barrels per day from 371,000, and net natural gas productionvolumes of 1.8 billion cubic feet per day were down 10 percentfrom 2.0 billion in last year's third quarter. The lowerproduction levels were due to normal field declines and anatural gas field unitization adjustment.Depreciation expense declined in line with lower production;exploration expense also declined due to lower wellwrite-offs.International exploration and production third quarter netearnings were $140 million compared with $131 million in the1994 third quarter. The 1995 quarter included special chargesof $22 million for prior year tax adjustments, mostly due toa statutory tax rate increase in Australia.Earnings benefited from higher crude oil sales volumes, dueto the timing of vessel loadings, and a lower effective incometax rate due to the earnings mix. Crude oil and natural gasrealizations were about flat with the prior year quarter.Exploration expenses increased due to higher well write-offs.International net liquids production volumes increasedslightly to 644,000 barrels per day from 640,000 in the 1994third quarter. Net natural gas production volumes declinedabout 6 percent, primarily in Canada, to 539 million cubicfeet per day.U.S. refining and marketing net earnings were $98 millioncompared with a loss of $110 million in the year-ago quarter;however, when special charges in both periods forenvironmental remediation are excluded, earnings werebasically flat at $109 million for the current year quarterand $108 million for the 1994 quarter.Refined product sales margins improved in the 1995 quarter onslightly higher prices. Sales volumes declined 13 percent to1.2 million barrels per day, as a result of the sales of thecompany's Philadelphia refinery in August 1994 and PortArthur, Texas, refinery in February 1995. The volume declineoccurred in lower margin unbranded bulk sales; brandedgasoline sales through the company's marketing systemincreased 2 percent.International refining and marketing net earnings declinedslightly to $53 million from $55 million because of specialcharges of $15 million in the 1995 third quarter related torestructurings in certain Caltex areas and in the company'sUnited Kingdom operations.Excluding the special charges, earnings increased $13 millionas improved operations in Canada and the United Kingdom morethan offset a decline in Caltex earnings, where sales marginsremain depressed in some of that affiliate's operating areas.International sales volumes decreased 4 percent to 894,000barrels per day, largely due to declines in U.K. marketingsales and in the company's international trading operations.Caltex sales volumes decreased 1 percent.Chemicals net earnings increased to $127 million in the 1995third quarter from $68 million in the comparable 1994 quarter.Adjusting for special charges in both periods, mostlyenvironmentally related, earnings of $148 million in the 1995third quarter were more than double the $72 million earned inthe third quarter of 1994.The higher 1995 earnings reflect higher product prices andsales volumes compared with the prior year quarter, consistentwith the improved state of the petrochemicals industry.However, prices for the company's major products began tosoften in the third quarter, and results declined from therecord $175 million earned in the second quarter. Althoughstill much stronger than a year ago, prices have weakened formajor products such as styrene and polyethylene.Corporate and other net charges were $277 million in thecurrent year quarter compared with income of $212 million inthe 1994 third quarter. Both quarter's results were distortedby special items. The 1995 quarter included special chargestotaling $172 million, almost all related to the write-down ofthe company's investment in the real estate developmentbusiness. Results in the 1994 quarter included the reversal of$301 million of previously established tax and relatedinterest reserves resulting from a global settlement with theInternal Revenue Service covering several open tax years.Excluding the special items in both periods, corporate andother charges were $105 million in the 1995 third quarter and$89 million in the year-ago quarter. The 1995 increase was dueto consolidating income tax adjustments.Capital and exploratory expenditures, including the company'sshare of affiliate expenditures, were $1.144 billion in thethird quarter, compared with $1.042 billion spent in lastyear's third quarter. Total expenditures for the first ninemonths of 1995 were $3.292 billion, up 4 percent from $3.174billion spent in the same period in 1994.Back to Headline List CopyrightWORLDWIDE ENERGY via NewsNetJanuary 1996ENERGY WEEK '96 FOCUSES ON TECHNOLOGICAL ADVANCEMENTSRapid changes within the energy industry - oil, gas,alternative fuels, and petrochemicals -- are having a majorimpact both technologically and geographically. The ENERGYWEEK'96 Conference & Exhibition, the world's largest event tofocus on current and future technologies for these industries,attests to the significant advances underway around the globe.It will also explore CAD/CAM/CIM technologies as applied toenergy industries. It will be held January 29-February 2,1996, at the George R.  Brown Convention Center in Houston,Texas.This year, for the first time, the event is being sponsoredjointly by three major organizations -- the American Societyof Mechanical Engineers (ASME International), the AmericanPetroleum Institute (API), and PennWell Conferences andExhibitions (a division of PennWell Publishing Company).For more information, call (212)705-8157.Back to Headline List CopyrightWORLDWIDE ENERGY via NewsNetJanuary 1996MITCHELL REPORTS LOWER THIRD-QUARTER EARNINGSMitchell Energy & Development Corp., The Woodlands, TX,has reported that its net earnings for the three months endedOct. 31, 1995, declined to $11.3 million, or 21 cents a share,from $15 million, or 28 cents a share, in the same period ayear earlier.Excluding unusual gains and charges in both years, earningswere $15 million, versus $10.6 million in the prior-yearperiod. Current-quarter results were adversely affected byseveral factors: significantly lower natural gas prices inNorth Texas due to the termination of the premium-priced gassales contract covering this production in July 1995; weakspot market prices; a 23-day curtailment in October of gasand natural gas liquids production in North Texas resultingfrom maintenance on the interstate pipeline that transportsMitchell's gas from this area to Midwest markets; and a47-day shutdown of the company's one-third-owned MTBE gasolineadditive plant to increase capacity. These factors were morethan offset by profits totaling $19.4 million ($12.6 millionafter tax)Real estate operating earnings increased to $28.9 million,from $6.3 million during the prior year's third quarter. Muchof the improvement results from the previously discussed $19.4million cable TV gain. Current-period earnings alsobenefitted from an increase in residential lot sales in TheWoodlands at prices 8 percent higher per square foot thanthose realized in the prior-year period, improved occupancyat The Woodlands Executive Conference Center and Resort, andearnings from The Woodlands Mall, which opened in October1994.During the first nine months of the current fiscal year, thecompany had net earnings of $13.6 million, or 26 cents pershare, compared with $36.8 million, or 70 cents per share, inthe same period last year. Excluding unusual items in bothyears, earnings during the current period were $41.1 million,versus $28.1 million during the prior-year period.Year-to-date results benefitted from higher natural gasliquids margins, profits from the MTBE plant, the gain fromthe cable system sale, increased earnings from residential andcommercial activities in The Woodlands and lower staff andinterest expenses. These factors were partially offset bylower gas prices resulting from the buyout of the North Texasgas sales contract and weak spot market prices.Mitchell Energy & Development Corp. is a large independentenergy producer and through its subsidiary, The WoodlandsCorporation, is the developer of a 25,000-acre master-plannedcommunity located 27 miles north of downtown Houston. Itsshares are listed on the Now York and Pacific stock exchangesunder the symbols MND A (voting) and MND B (non-voting).Back to Headline List CopyrightWORLDWIDE ENERGY via NewsNetJanuary 1996MURPHY OIL REORTS ON THIRD QUARTERMurphy Oil's president and CEO, Claiborne P.  Deming,announced today that net income for the third quarter of 1995totaled $7.6 million, $.17 a share, compared to $37.3 million,$.83 a share, earned in the third quarter a year ago.  Thecurrent quarter included a bensfit of $8.1 million, $.18 ashare, resulting from settlement of tax matters in the U.S.and U.K., while the third quarter of 1994 included a benefitof $13.9 million, $.31 a share, from settlement of a U.S.Department of Energ Proposed Remedial Order. Net cash fromoperating activities excluding changes in noncash workingcapital items totaled $84.2 million in the third quarter of1995, down six percent from a year ago.In commenting on the results for the current quarter, Mr.Deming said, "Excluding the unusual item, operating resultsreflected a loss of $.5 million that included a $13.6 millionafter-tax charge for a previously announced unsuccessful wellin Mobile Block 908. In total, exploration and productionoperations lost $5 million in the third quarter of 1995compared to earning $9.8 million a year ago.In addition to the Mobile Block 908 well, the current quarterwas adversely affected by generally lower crude oil salesprices, lower U.S. and Canadian natural gas sales prices, andan increase in international exploration activity. Partialoffsets were provided by a 12-percent increase in crude oiland gas liquids production and a 10-percent increase innatural gas production. Posted price for West TexasIntermediate crude oil fluctuated between $15.00 a barrel and$17.25 a barrel in the third quarter of 1995, and closed thequarter at $15.75."Barnings from our worldwide downstream segment totaled $4.2million in the current quarter compared to $11.9 million ayear ago. U.S. operations accounted for most of the decline asa result of lower unit margins and a decline in salso ofrefined products."Earnings from farm, timber, and real estate totaled $1.3million, a decreases of 58 percent compared to the thirdquarter of 1994. Timber operations accounted for most of thedecline."Exploration and production operations in the U.S., whichincluded the $13.6 million after-tax charge for the MobileBlock 908 well, lost $8.9 million compared to earning $.7million in the third quarter of 1994. Operations in Canadaearned $6.3 million in the current quarter, up from $6.2million a year ago, and U.K. operations earned $.9 millioncompared to $1 million.Back to Headline List WT02-B35-22IA086-000616-B011-135http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/ey11.html 205.156.212.5 19970121235858 text/html 36339HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Tuesday, 21-Jan-97 23:57:04 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:41:00 GMTContent-length: 36154Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ey11.html Sample Issue Copyright IMPROVED RECOVERY WEEK via NewsNet JUNE 21, 1993 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES Injection program to up yield at Norway's Snorre field (776 words) DOE funds seven reservoir projects (472 words) IPAA reports drilling cost uptick in 1992 (464 words) Two Kern fields revise reserves downward (403 words) '92 Okla. oil yield down; gas up slightly (277 words) AOSTRA reports on IOR, heavy oil (363 words) Petroleum Abstracts (243 words) New IOR patents (399 words) Texas extends IOR incentives (157 words) Horizontal well ups reserves (277 words) Pa. coalgas plans on tap (111 words) Imperial revs up heavy oil output (144 words) Horizontal scores in Sask. (250 words) Calendar (733 words) CopyrightIMPROVED RECOVERY WEEK via NewsNetJUNE 21, 1993Injection program to up yield at Norway's Snorre field     Norway's Petroleum Directorate says estimated total reserves from theSnorre field in that country's sector of the North Sea could soon beupgraded by 20% to 1 billion barrels.     That's possible because of a pilot project involving the alternateinjection of water and natural gas to increase exploitation yields.     The field, discovered in 1979, is in blocks 34/4 and 34/7 about 125miles west of the coastal community of Floro. Norway's Saga Petroleum isoperator of the field -- with Esso Norway as co-operation partner -- forDeminex, Idemitsu, Norsk Hydro, Elf Petroleum Norge, Amerada Hess,Enterprise Oil and DNO.     The Snorre project is one of the most challenging of its kind. It is indeep water, and the reservoir is extensive and complex. Explorationdrilling delineated the field during most of the 1980s, but sustained low oilprices added to slow development.     Original estimates put Snorre recoverable reserves at 77 million barrelsof oil, 247 bcf of gas and 1.8 bcf of natural gas liquids, with a field lifeexpectancy of 20-25 years. At its peak, original estimates were that field'sliquid output would average 190,000 b/d.     Located in 985' of water, the field is the first truly deepwaterdevelopment in the North Sea. It consists of the largest tension legplatform (TLP) yet installed, with 40 well slots, and a large, 20-well slot,remote subsea production system. Wells drilled from the TLP went onproduction in August 1992, more than a month ahead of schedule andunder the original budget.     The field, whose oil-bearing sandstone reservoir layers are found in twoformations (Statfjord and Lunde, averaging 7,500'-8,500' below the oceanbottom), with pay ranging from nearly 2,790' to 330' in thickness, will bedeveloped in two stages. The operations in Phase 1 will account for all therecoverable reserves in the Statfjord formation and some 30% of theestimated recoverable reserves from the Lunde formation. The decision onPhase 2 development will be based on experience with Phase 1 productionbut likely will involve either relocation of the TLP to the northern part ofthe field or installation of two new subsea production systems.     Tests of wells drilled from the TLP to the Lunde formation have provenSnorre to be richer than first believed. Based on this, the field's lifeexpectancy has been extended beyond 2015. Snorre production is about120,000 b/d currently.     Oil and gas production is partially processed on the Snorre TLP andthen exported in two 17-mile pipelines to the Statfjord A platform, wherethe final processing takes place. The processed oil is then loaded intotankers through the Statfjord buoy loading system, while the gas istransported to shore through a Statpipe system.     However, field output from Snorre likely will not be increased for sometime since the Statfjord platform can handle only 140,000 b/d from Snorre.     Production from the Snorre reservoirs requires a concept calling fornearly 100 wells, half of which will be used for water injection and naturalgas reinjection.     The Snorre subsea production system is the world's largest.  Thesystem's wells are drilled from a floating drilling unit. The system has adouble set of well slots (10 x 10). The inner row of wells is intended to bedrilled first. They will come on stream one by one. The system's manifolddesign allows each well slot to be used for either production or injectionpurposes. The 10 outer wells become operational when the inner wellshave ceased production and have been plugged. The 10 x 10 arrangementallows the manifold and control system, as well as all pipelines and subseatrees, to be used twice, helping to cut costs beyond those for drilling andcompletion.     Large amounts of electricity are required on the TLP for drillingoperations, water injection and processing. The platform has its ownpower station consisting of four gas-powered generators giving a totalcapacity of 60 MW.     Water, pumped into the reservoir to raise formation pressure andthereby increase production, is pumped from the sea and filtered in theTLP's water injection system before it reaches the reservoir.     In addition to 20 wells drilled for oil production, 40 wells will bedrilled from the Snorre TLP, most of the remaining well slots being usedfor injection wells.     To ensure optimum exploitation of the reservoir, the wells will bedrilled horizontally away from both the TLP and the subsea productionsystem. On the average, wells will be drilled some 1.5 miles below theseabed, and their horizontal distance from the platform may be as much as2.5 miles. Total measured depth of wells could reach nearly four miles.Back to Headline List CopyrightIMPROVED RECOVERY WEEK via NewsNetJUNE 21, 1993DOE funds seven reservoir projects     DOE hopes a new initiative will result in more effective productionmethods that could keep many aged U.S. oil fields in operation,particularly for independent producers.     Under the initiative, DOE has made more than $5 million available tosix leading petroleum-oriented universities and one state geological surveyto help develop more accurate methods for depicting the geologicalmakeup of oil and gas reservoirs.     The seven projects were selected during DOE's 1993 petroleumgeoscience competition. Some 63 proposals were received in response to aDOE solicitation issued last October.     In total, the seven projects will cost more than $8 million, with theadditional $3 million to be funded by the winning teams. In most cases,says DOE, the sponsors will team with major and independent producers,service companies and oilfield consultants to carry out the work.     All of the projects will apply advanced geoscience and reservoirengineering concepts to provide operators with a better picture of areservoir's characteristics. In some cases, says DOE, the projects will resultin smaller independent producers having access to new and sophisticatedtechniques that have been available to and used by major producers buthave not yet trickled down to the independent sector.     The selected projects, whose quoted costs are estimates and maychange during negotiations, will take place during a three-year period, andwork will be monitored by DOE's Bartlesville, Okla., Project Office.     The seven selected projects -- with contacts for companies interested inparticipating -- are:     ** Visual Display of Reservoir Parameters Affecting Enhanced OilRecovery -- Proposer: Michigan Technological University at Houghton(contact J.R. Wood, phone 906-487-2894). Total estimated cost: $994,000.Private cost share: 20%.     ** Application of Artificial Intelligence to Reservoir Characterization-- Proposer: University of Tulsa (contact B.G. Kelker, phone 918-631-3036). Total estimated cost: $979,000. Private cost share: 22%.     ** Geoscience/Engineering Characterization of the Inter-WellEnvironment in Carbonate Reservoirs Based on Outcrop Analysis --Proposer: University of Texas at Austin (contact Charles Kerans, phone512-471-7721). Private cost share: 20%.     ** Integration of Advanced Geoscience & Engineering Techniques toQuantify Inter-Well Heterogeneity in Reservoir Models -- Proposer: NewMexico Institute of Mining & Technology at Socorro (contact F.D. Martin,phone 505-835-5142). Private cost share: 60%.     ** Interdisciplinary Study of Reservoir Compartments andHeterogeneity -- Proposer: Colorado School of Mines at Golden (contactC. W. Van Kirk, phone 303-273-3749). Private cost share: 20%.     ** Geological and Petrophysical Characterization of the FerronSandstone for 3-D Simulation of a Fluvial Deltaic Reservoir -- Proposer:Utah Geological Survey at Salt Lake City (contact M. Lee Allison/T.A.Ryer, phone 801-467-7970). Private cost share: 56%.     ** Anisotrophy and Spatial Variation of Relative Permeability andLithologic Character of Tensleep Sandstone Reservoirs in Wyoming --Proposer: University of Wyoming at Laramie (contact R.C. Surdam/T.L.Dunn, phone 307-766-4200). Private cost share: 20%.Back to Headline List CopyrightIMPROVED RECOVERY WEEK via NewsNetJUNE 21, 1993IPAA reports drilling cost uptick in 1992     The Independent Petroleum Assn. of America says domestic oil and gaswells are getting deeper, and operators are returning to existing wells withimproved recovery technology.     Yet, in 1992, this trend failed to reflect in higher drilling costs. To thecontrary, the IPAA report observes that the average cost-per-well last yearexhibited a decline of nearly 4%.     The report adds that much of this decline was precipitated by heavydiscounting by service and supply companies .     Overall, however, the cost of drilling and completing domestic wellslast year increased by slightly more than 1% from 1991, because wells onaverage are deeper than ever.     Scott Espenshade, who prepared the report, says record low drilling in1992 forced service and supply companies to offer discounts in order toget more business. He added that the industry should expect to see suchdeep discounts through the remainder of 1993.     He said an estimate of an average dollar amount for drilling costswould not prove valid, since the cost varies greatly from well to well.Instead, the report uses 1989 data to provide a median for comparison forthe 1992 figures.     Since 1989, the report observes, the cost-per-foot drilling average hasfallen by more than 6% and the cost per well has risen almost 2%. Thisshould be good news to independents, it adds, since the per-well rise ismodest while wells continue to be drilled deeper.     Since 1989, U.S. well depth has increased an average of 12%,Espenshade writes. One cause of this, he adds, is that producers arelooking at deeper pay zones. Also, they are going back to old wells withimproved recovery technology.     Purchased items accounted for 69% of the cost of drilling andequipping wells in 1992. And the remaining 31% involved payments todrilling contractors. This portion of the drilling cost has fallen by about20% from 1990 levels, IPAA notes. The decline was anticipated becausethe industry's average rig count for 1992 -- 721 -- was an all-time low.     Although overall drilling costs have increased slightly so far in 1993,says Gene Ames, IPAA chairman, "there is no better time to drill fornatural gas and oil here at home with drilling costs down and the use ofadvanced technology on the upswing."     The drilling cost report will be published quarterly, says Espenshade.He says he hopes the quarterly report will be beneficial to independents.Instead of basing their findings on information gathered on a "typical"U.S. well, he noted, future reports will be broken down by region to reflectthe differences between drilling areas.     Producers also can take heart from a report just released by Houston-based Baker Hughes Inc., which estimated the average rig count for 1993will be about 760 working units.Back to Headline List CopyrightIMPROVED RECOVERY WEEK via NewsNetJUNE 21, 1993Two Kern fields revise reserves downward     Downward additions outnumber by a margin of 2-to-1 upwardadditions to estimated reserves in four of California's Kern County oilfields, where improved recovery projects play a role in production.     The state Oil, Gas and Geothermal Resources Div. in its annual look athow much recoverable oil is left in the state's fields singles out the Cymricand Yowlumne fields for upward revisions totaling 24 million barrels;however, the gains are not enough to make up for downward revisionstotaling 55 million barrels in the McKittrick and Poso Creek fields.     The Cymric field's Reef Ridge-Antelope pool in the Welport area of thefield is credited with addition of 15.2 million barrels, boosting estimatedreserves to 78.7 million barrels as of the first of this year. Cumulativeproduction is 191.4 million barrels. Production last year averaged 2,000b/d. In January, production from 82 wells was 2,750 b/d. Steam plays animportant role here, with Chevron Corp. injecting about 7,000 b/d in cyclicsteaming of some 50 wells.     The Yowlumne field's Stevens pay picked up 8.8 million barrels,boosting estimated reserves to 19.1 million barrels. Cumulative productionis 95.9 million barrels. Fifty-six Stevens wells were on line in January,producing 6,720 b/d. Waterflooding plays an important role at Yowlumne.Arco Oil & Gas Co., the field operator, puts away 40,000 b/d in 29injection wells.     On the debit side, the main area of the McKittrick field wasdowngraded 34.5 million barrels, reducing estimated reserves to 4.2million barrels. In January, 350 wells produced 2,900 b/d. Steamfloodinghas been reduced to a minor role in the field, which was on production asearly as 1896 with actual discovery date unknown. In January, only fourinjectors were active, with steam injection at a rate of 511 b/d. Onehundred nineteen injection wells were shut in.     The Poso Creek field, a 1920 discovery, took hits in the Premier area,where reserves dropped 15.5 million barrels, reducing year-end estimatedreserves to 2 million barrels; and the McVan area, where the drop was 5million barrels, leaving estimated reserves of 300,000 barrels. Cumulativeproduction from Premier is 72.5 million barrels. In January, 62 wellsproduced 300 b/d. Steamflooding was down to 12 injectors and a rate of540 b/d with 10 injection wells shut in. At McVan, cumulative productionis 7.2 million barrels. In January, 53 wells produced 146 b/d. Fivesteamflood injection wells were shut in.Back to Headline List CopyrightIMPROVED RECOVERY WEEK via NewsNetJUNE 21, 1993'92 Okla. oil yield down; gas up slightly     Oil production in Oklahoma during 1992 declined 5.6% from 1991totals, while natural gas production increased by 1.4%, says a recent reportfrom the Oklahoma Corporation Commission.     Crude oil and condensate production totaled 101.8 million barrels,down 6 million barrels from 1991's 107.8 million barrels. Daily averageproduction was 278,234 barrels, compared with 295,457 b/d in 1991.     Natural and casinghead gas production last year totaled 1.962 tcf,compared with 1.935 tcf a year earlier. Daily average production was5.362 bcf compared with 5.302 bcf/d a year earlier.     Monthly production figures indicate the decline continued into early1993, the report notes. For February 1993, oil production totaled 7,006,551barrels of crude oil and condensate for a daily average of 250,234 barrels.This was an 8.9% decline from that reported for February 1992.     Natural gas production also showed a dip for February, with a total of100.4 bcf, for a daily average of nearly 3.6 bcf. This was a 7.7% declinefrom February 1992 figures.     Oklahoma oil production has declined annually from 1984 productionof 168.6 million barrels. Oil production in 1992 was the state's lowestsince 1919 when production totaled 86.9 million barrels.     The average price paid for Oklahoma oil in 1992 was $18.99/barrel,compared with an average price of $19.72 in 1991. The average price forOklahoma natural gas was $1.63/mcf, compared with $1.57/mcf a yearearlier.     Of Oklahoma's 77 counties, 66 produced oil and 69 produced gas in1992. Five counties produced neither during the year.     Carter County, in Southcentral Oklahoma, led in oil production with13.6 million barrels. Latimer County in Southeastern Oklahoma, led innatural gas production with 212.8 bcf.Back to Headline List CopyrightIMPROVED RECOVERY WEEK via NewsNetJUNE 21, 1993AOSTRA reports on IOR, heavy oil     The Alberta Oil Sands Technology and Research Authority makes thefollowing IOR and heavy oil research reports and technical papersavailable to interested parties. Copies may be ordered by calling AOSTRAin Edmonton at 403-427-8382 or in Calgary at 403-297-3631:     From Oil Sands: Our Petroleum Future Conference (AOSTRA, AlbertaChamber of Resources, Energy Mines and Resources Canada) Edmonton,Alta., Canada, April 4-7, 1993:     A Eureka Technique for Processing Vacuum Residue from ChinaCrudes, by R.Z. Chen.     Synthetic Crude Oil Production from Retorted Mined Oil Sands:Economic Facts and Misconceptions, by R. Padamsey, R. Kiszarycz, R.W.Luhning, and R.M. Ritcey.     High Conversion Soaker Cracking Process: Commercial Experienceand Recent Development, by K. Washimi, and M. Hamamura.     The CANMET Hydrocracking Process: Recent Developments, by B.B.Pruden, G. Muir, and M. Skripek.     Update of the HDH Process, a Commercial Hydrocracking Technologyfor Extra-Heavy Crude Upgrading, by I. Lopez, R. Marzin, L. Zacarias, P.Pereire, and J. Guitian.     MICROCAT RC: a Resid Conversion Technology Contender, by R.F.Bauman, C.L. Aldridge, R. Bearden Jr., F.X. Mayer, and G.F. Stuntz.     Comparative Economics of Petrochemicals from Alberta Bitumen --Revisited, by R.A.S. Brown, S.S. Wong, and S.P. Singh.     De-Bottlenecking the Suncor Upgrader, by D. Hawthorne, and V.Leung.     Towards More Economical Upgrading, by T.J. McCann.     Startup of the Bi-Provincial Upgrader, by D. Howell, S. Chase, and D.Mitchell.     Managing Cold Flow Production at Cold Lake, by M.F. Adamson, andK.C. Yeung.     In Situ Recovery Technology at Cold Lake, by P.R. Kry.     The Evolution of a Successful Recovery Scheme for the Peace RiverOil Sands, by L.M. Goobie, and H.L. Chang.     Development of a Top-Down Combustion Process, by J. Ivory, S.Lorimer, D. Redford, and B Nzekwu.     HAS Drive Pilot Performance at the AOSTRA Underground TestFacility, by J.H. Duerkisen, D.J. Anderson, D.J. McCallum, and J.C.Suggett.     AOSTRA Underground Test Facility (UTF) Phase B. Implications forCommercialization, by D.P. Komery, J.C. O'Rourke, and J.I. Chambers.     Evaluation of Alternative Technologies for SO2 Reduction, by P.W.Smith, and M. Johnstone.Back to Headline List CopyrightIMPROVED RECOVERY WEEK via NewsNetJUNE 21, 1993Petroleum Abstracts     Following is a summary of a technical article published in a petroleumindustry publication. It is available from Petroleum Abstracts, a service ofthe University of Tulsa. Write to McFarlin Library, University of Tulsa,600 S. College, Tulsa, Okla. 74104. Call 800-247-8678 for details, plusprices, giving the title and specific abstract number. The fax number is918-631-3823.     Improving Matrix Acidizing with Nitrogen and Heat In SituGeneration, by C.N. Khalil and Z. de Almeida of Petroleo Brasiliero SA.From the 4th SPE, Et Al, Latin American Petroleum EngineeringConference, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, Oct. 14-19, 1990:     In matrix acidizing operations in sandstone formations, special caremust be taken to prevent the formation of undesirable precipitatesgenerated by secondary reactions and by cooling of the surroundingwellbore. The fast and thorough recovery of the spent acid fluid isdesirable. Based on studies conducted at the Petrobras R&D Center, achemical process that uses a mixture of saturated solutions of nitrogenatedsalts to simultaneously generate nitrogen and heat was applied. Theintercalated cushions of acid fluid and a mixture of the above solutionsresults in the in situ generation of nitrogen and heat. The increase information temperature associated with the generation of gas increases theradial penetration of the acid fluid, at the same time prevents the formationof insoluble compounds and water blockage, and in general  eases therecovery of the spent fluid (Abstract No. 545283).Back to Headline List CopyrightIMPROVED RECOVERY WEEK via NewsNetJUNE 21, 1993New IOR patents     S.F. Chien, C.L. Redus and P.L. Sigwardt of Texaco DevelopmentCorp. have patented a method of determining flowline steam quality whichuses flow restriction devices with water addition at a known rate betweenrestrictions. Another object of the invention is to provide for certain fieldapplications where high-quality steam is mixed with water to achieve aspecific low-quality steam. In such case, the quality of the resulting low-quality steam may be accurately determined (Canadian Patent No.1,301,481).     W.J. Clarke of Geochemical Corp. has patented a method of groutingporous gas- and petroleum-bearing formations with a cementitiousmaterial comprising ultra-fine ground slag that is useful for primary andremedial cementing of a wellbore. A composition is provided whichcomprises water, a dispersant, slag and an accelerator to activate the slag(U.S. Patent No. 5,106,423).     P.I. Day of Union Oil Co. of California has patented a method used fordetermining true in situ resistivity of a thin layer within a formation fromdual induction log data. The method first corrects resistivity data read fromthe dual induction log. A representative shoulder bed resistivity is firstdetermined from average deep resistivity data near the shoulder bed. Apaired estimate of layer resistivity and thickness is then computed basedon the determined shoulder bed resistivity, dip angle, and both deep andmedium resistivity data related to the thin bed. The method does notrequire thickness data to be input, and in fact, outputs this information, ifneeded (U.S. Patent No. 5,142,472).     W. Sneed has patented a wireline delivery tool for an underground wellhaving a pipe, a surface seal for the pipe, and a wireline extending fromthe surface into the pipe. The wireline delivery tool includes a body,having a diameter of less than the interior diameter of the pipe, and a cupextending from the body to create a seal with the interior of the pipe. Alongitudinal bore within at least a portion of the body has a port throughthe body on each side of the cup, so that the ports are in communicationwith the interior of the pipe. A pressure valve within the bore normally isin the closed position. Pressure supplied into the pipe between the surfaceseal and the cup will move the delivery tool within the pipe (U.S. PatentNo. 5,180,009).Back to Headline List CopyrightIMPROVED RECOVERY WEEK via NewsNetJUNE 21, 1993Texas extends IOR incentives     Texas Gov. Ann Richards signed into law a bill (S.B. 466) that extendsby four years the opportunity for operators to qualify for existing taxincentives for new and expanded IOR projects.     The bill extends the 50% severance tax break for IOR projects through1998 on projects begun on or after Jan. 1, 1994. The credit will beavailable after Jan. 1, 1996.     Richards praised the measure's incentives. "The estimates I've seen forthe additional recovery of Texas oil surpass 650 million barrels for theperiod extending to 1998," Richards said.     The benefits of the legislation include additional investment in oilproduction infrastructure and greater operating efficiency due to the longeroperational life of projects subject to the tax credit, she said.     State Sen. Bill Sims, D-San Angelo, the bill's sponsor, said the bill was"the single most important piece of legislation to help the oil and gasindustry passed in the 73rd Texas legislative session."Back to Headline List CopyrightIMPROVED RECOVERY WEEK via NewsNetJUNE 21, 1993Horizontal well ups reserves     Pogo Producing Co. is developing a 21-year-old oil and gas field in theGulf of Mexico, adding additional proven reserves with the aid ofhorizontal drilling technology.     Pogo, as operator, recently completed two wells in the Eugene IslandBlock 330 field, one of which was the first horizontal well to be drilled inthe field's prolific reservoir.     Pogo Chairman Paul Van Wagenen said first results from the horizontalwell, the C-7ST Well No. 2, indicated 535' of net pay section from twolobes of the GA-2 horizon. The well was drilled from Platform C, one ofseveral fixed drilling/production platforms in the field.     Due to the successful completion of the horizontal well, an additionalassignment of proven reserves in the field is anticipated, Van Wagenensaid.     The horizontal well followed by about a week successful completion ofa conventional development well, the C-10ST No. 2, which is nowproducing at a rate of 710 b/d of oil on a 20/64" choke, with flowingtubing pressure of 620 psi. That well encountered 80' of net oil sand and isproducing from the HB sand horizons.     Pogo, with 35% working interest, is the largest owner in the field,which was discovered in 1972 and already has produced more than 600bcf of gas and more than 100 million barrels of oil.     Van Wagenen said Pogo's approved $60 million 1993 capitalexpenditures budget includes a minimum of four development wells andtwo recompletions in this very prolific block. The group expects to begindrilling the third development well within a few weeks, following up withfurther drilling and workover activity during the remainder of the year.Back to Headline List CopyrightIMPROVED RECOVERY WEEK via NewsNetJUNE 21, 1993Pa. coalgas plans on tap     The Independent Oil & Gas Assn. of Pennsylvania will participate in adiscussion June 25 of issues and potential directions for development of acomprehensive coalbed methane program for that state.     The state Environmental Resources Dept. will meet with IOGA andrepresentatives of other associations in Harrisburg.     The meeting was called in response to a published notice regarding asection of the federal Energy Policy Act of 1992, which includesPennsylvania on a list of affected states with large coal reserves.     IOGA says ownership, access and discharge issues will be discussed atthe meeting.     For more information, phone Barry Cosey, IOGA executive director, at717-232-0137; fax 717-232-3035.Back to Headline List CopyrightIMPROVED RECOVERY WEEK via NewsNetJUNE 21, 1993Imperial revs up heavy oil output     Imperial Oil Ltd., Calgary, Alberta, is working to find ways to speedheavy oil production at its Cold Lake project.     A company senior vice president, Douglas Baldwin, said the companywill bring phases 7 and 8 of its Cold Lake program onstream later thisyear, and the company is investigating ways to accelerate phases 9 and 10,with steam injection scheduled to begin by mid-1994, adding 25,000 b/d toproduction. That will bring total Cold Lake production to about 125,000b/d, he added.     Once completed, the four-phase expansion will have cost about C$100million, Baldwin said.     He said boilers and central processing facilities needed for theexpansion are in place, with the drilling of injection wells and producingwells remaining to be completed.     Drilling in Western Canada is at an all-time high, with shortages ofdrilling equipment developing in some areas.Back to Headline List CopyrightIMPROVED RECOVERY WEEK via NewsNetJUNE 21, 1993Horizontal scores in Sask.     Incentives offered by Western Canadian provincial governments tooperators that drill horizontal wells or re-complete horizontally in verticalwells are keeping the number of such wells high in recent months.     An example is Petrolantic Ltd., which announced last week it hadcompleted a horizontal producer in the Battle Creek field in WesternSaskatchewan.     The well, No. 2-27-3-26 W3M, was drilled to 6,750' total depth  andcut 1,886' of the Shaunovan formation pay with the horizontal section.Petrolantic described the main pay zone, some 915' in length, as excellentoil-saturated, porous (18%-24% porosity) and permeable rock.     Completed open hole, the well tested at rates of 150-260 b/d. It wasequipped with pumps and rods and is producing into on-site productiontanks.     The well will be flow-lined to the battery to test production rates at fullcapacity, the company said, adding it expects this rate to reach about 500b/d. It is anticipated that the oil cut will stabilize at the 60% range.Maximum projected flow rates achievable with existing facilities andequipment is 800 b/d of fluid, the company added.     If four-month production results meet projections, up to two additionalhorizontal wells may be drilled in the Battle Creek area prior to year-end,the company said.     Petrolantic, with headquarters in Calgary, Alberta, says it holds a32.4% before-payout interest and a 29.3% after-payout interest in theBattle Creek project. Laval, Quebec-based Granisko Resources Inc. holdsa 29% working interest.Back to Headline List CopyrightIMPROVED RECOVERY WEEK via NewsNetJUNE 21, 1993Calendar     The National Energy Summit, June 28-29, National Press Club,Washington, D.C. (National Energy Summit, 919 18th St. N.W., Suite450, Washington, D.C. 20006; phone 202-457-0001).     SPE Gas Technology Symposium, June 28-30, Calgary, Alberta,Canada (SPE Conference Programming Dept., P.O. Box 83836,Richardson, Texas 75083-3836; phone 214-952-9393; fax 214-952-9435).     8th Petroleum Computer Conference, July 11-14, New Orleans, La.(Lois Woods, SPE Meetings Dept., P.O. Box 833836, Richardson, Texas75083-3836; 214-952-9393; fax 214-952-9435).     SPE Forum Series in North America, July 11-14, New Orleans (LoisWoods, SPE Meetings Dept., P.O. Box 833836, Richardson, Texas 75083-3836; 214-952-9393; fax 214-952-9435).     AAPG School on Fractured Reservoir Analysis July 19-23, Great Falls,Mont. (AAPG Education Dept., P.O. Box 979, Tulsa, Okla. 74101; phone918-584-2555).     39th Annual Rocky Mountain Mineral Law Institute, July 22-24,Radisson Resort Vail, Vail, Colo. (The institute, Porter AdministrationBldg., 7039 E. 18th Ave., Denver, Colo. 80220; 303-321-8100).     AAPG Fracture Analysis Workshop: With Problem Set to IdentifyFractured Exploration Targets, Aug. 23-27, Hagerstown, Md. (AAPGEducation Dept., P.O. Box 979, Tulsa, Okla. 74101; phone 918-584-2555).     SPE Offshore Europe, Sept. 7-10, Aberdeen, Scotland (Lois Woods,SPE Meetings Dept., P.O. Box 833836, Richardson, Texas 75083-3836;214-952-9393; fax 214-952-9435).     SPE Forum Series in Europe, Sept. 12-Oct. 1, Seefeld, Austria (LoisWoods, SPE Meetings Dept., P.O. Box 833836, Richardson, Texas 75083-3836; 214-952-9393; fax 214-952-9435).     IADC Annual Meeting, Sept. 19-21, Westin Oaks Hotel, Houston,Texas (Kathy Glass, IADC, 15810 Park 10 Place, Suite 242, Houston,Texas 77084-5134; phone 713-578-7171; fax 713-578-0589).     Eastern Coalbed Methane Forum, Sept. 21, Bryant Conference Center,University of Alabama, Tuscaloosa, Ala. (Dan Thompson, College ofContinuing Studies, U. of Alabama, 226 Martha Parham Bldg., P.O. Box870388, Tuscaloosa, Ala. 35487-0388; phone 205-348-8687).     SPE Annual Technical Conference and Exhibition, Oct. 3-6, Houston,Texas (Lois Woods, SPE Meetings Dept., P.O. Box 833836, Richardson,Texas 75083-3836; 214-952-9393; fax 214-952-9435).     First Kazakhstan Int'l. Oil & Gas Exhibition '93, Oct. 5-8, VDNKh Int'l.Exhibition Centre, Alma Ata, Kazakhstan (Mark Webber, in London,England; phone 44 (71) 286-9720; fax: 44 (71) 286-0177).     Fifth Saskatchewan Petroleum Conference: 'Prosperity ThroughTechnology', Oct. 18-20, Regina, Saskatchewan, Canada (Saskoil, P.O.Box 1550, 1777 Victoria Ave., Regina, Sask. S4P 3C4 Canada; Gen.Chairman, Rich Kerr, phone 306-781-8392).     AAPG International Conference and Exhibition, Oct. 17-20, TheHague, The Netherlands (Roelof J. Murris, Nieuwe Parklaan 26B, 2597LD, The Hague, The Neth.; 31-70-3500052; fax: 31-15-617988).     GRI Short Course: Recompletion Strategies for Coalbed MethaneWells, [location to be announced], (Charles M. Boyer, AdvancedResources Interantional, Inc. 1110 N. Glebe Rd., Suite 600, Arlington,Va.22201-4714; phone 703-528-8420).     AAPG School on Development Geology: Appraisal, Delineation,Enhanced Recovery, Nov. 1-4, Houston, Texas (AAPG Education Dept.,P.O. Box 979, Tulsa, Okla. 74101; phone 918-584-2555).     Deep Offshore Technology Conference and Exhibition, Nov. 8-10,Monte Carlo Convention Center, Monte Carlo, Monaco (DOT '93, TourAlbert ler, 65, avenue de Colmar, 92507 Rueil-Malmaison Cedex, France;phone 33 (1) 4714-1659; fax: 33 (1) 4752-9044).     1993 Eastern Oil Shale Symposium, Nov. 17-19, Lexington, Ky.(Geaunita Caylor, coordinator, University of Kentucky/OISTL, 645Maxwelton Court, Lexington, Ky. 40506-0350; phone 606-257-2820; fax606-258-1049).      SPE Forum Series in the Middle East, Dec. 4-9, Dubai, UAE(Lois Woods, SPE Meetings Dept., P.O. Box 833836, Richardson, Texas75083-3836; 214-952-9393; fax 214-952-9435).     IADC/SPE Drilling Conference, Feb. 15-18, 1994, Dallas (Ken Fischer,IADC Document Service, 15810 Park 10 Place, Suite 242, Houston, Texas77084-5134; 713-578-7171, ext. 210, or Lois Woods, SPE Meetings Dept.,P.O. Box 833836, Richardson, Texas 75083-3836; 214-952-9393; fax 214-952-9435).     14th World Petroleum Congress, May 29, June 1, 1994, Stavanger,Norway (WPC 94, Congress Secretariat, c/o Statoil, P.O. Box 300, 4001Stavanger, Norway; 47-4-80-61-41; fax 47-4-80-60-20).     AAPG Annual Meeting, June 12-15, 1994, Denver, Colo. (RobbieGries, 1660 Lincoln St., Suite 1640, Denver, Colo. 80203; 303-861-1006).Back to Headline List WT02-B35-23IA086-000616-B011-173http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/ey67.html 205.156.212.5 19970121235918 text/html 85989HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Tuesday, 21-Jan-97 23:57:17 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:40:50 GMTContent-length: 85804Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ey67.html Sample Issue Copyright INDEPENDENT POWER REPORT via NewsNet January 12, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES TAIWAN SELECTS ENSERCH, INTERGEN, SCEPTRE IN SECOND ROUND OF IPP BIDS (382 words) S&P DOWNGRADES SOME PROJECT DEBT DUE TO NIMO PRESSURE ON NUG PACTS (552 words) FORMOSA PLASTICS DEVELOPING TWO PROJECTS TOTALING 5,900 MW IN CHINA (238 words) FINANCE EDF, ITALY'S EDISON AND FINEL CLOSE ON 600-MW ITALIAN GENERATING FIRM (210 words) ENTERGY CLOSES $1.2-BILLION PURCHASE OF AUSTRALIAN DISTRIBUTOR CITIPOWER (274 words) FIRST GAS IN TALKS FOR FINANCING 880-MW GAS PROJECT IN PHILIPPINES (199 words) PHILIPPINE DEVELOPER TO FLOAT BONDS VALUED AT $85-MILLION IN U.S. MARKETS (155 words) COMPANIES UTILICORP, AIR PRODUCTS FORM LINK FOR GAS-FIRED PROJECTS IN MIDWEST (404 words) IDAHO POWER CONSIDERS RENEWABLES SUBSIDIARY; INDONESIA FIRST TARGET (301 words) CORDELL HULL, ERIC ZAUSNER ESTABLISH FIRM FOR INTERNATIONAL ENERGY ASSETS (132 words) TENNECO BUYS 10% OF AUSTRALIAN GAS, POWER DEVELOPMENT COMPANY (270 words) THAILAND'S EGCO EYES PLANTS IN LAOS CHINA, VIETNAM, INDONESIA, MYANMAR (529 words) ASIA/PACIFIC RIM MAHARASHSTRA OKAYS AMENDED PLAN FOR DABHOL PROJECT, NOW 2,450 MW (951 words) CHINA FORMS NEW AGENCY TO SEPARATE GOVERNMENT, PRIVATE ELECTRIC SECTORS (435 words) LAOS MAY ALLOW CHINA-THAI LINE IN COUNTRY FOR 1,500-MW PROJECT (409 words) SCEPTRE, PARTNERS TO REPOWER TWO SMALL PLANTS IN CHINA; MORE PLANNED (341 words) KEY PHILIPPINE SENATOR WANTS PROBE OF LINE DELAYS AFFECTING CEPA PLANT (259 words) PHILIPPINES' NAPOCOR MAY SELL TWO WESTINGHOUSE TURBINES TO TEXACO (202 words) PHILIPPINE INVESTMENT BOARD GRANTS INCENTIVES FOR TWO PROJECTS, 160 MW (213 words) SOUTH KOREA LIFTS 750-MW SIZE CAP; 1,600-MW RFP NOW SEEN IN FEBRUARY (399 words) QUEENSLAND, AUSTRALIA, ENCOURAGING BAGASSE PLANTS UNDER NEW PROGRAM (235 words) EUROPE/MIDDLE EAST NATIONAL POWER, POWERGEN MAY FACE MORE AGENCY-ORDERED PLANT SELL-OFFS (348 words) UKRAINE GETS $1.8-BILLION WESTERN AID FOR POWER; BIG ABB PROJECT DEAD (441 words) U.K.'S NATIONAL POWER PLANS 60-MW PROJECT IN UNITED ARAB EMIRATES (307 words) NORTH AMERICA MET-ED MAY PAY UP TO $35-MILLION TO KILL 227-MW AIR PRODUCTS PACT (478 words) PANDA TO REFILE LAWSUIT CHARGING FLA. POWER BLOCKED 115-MW PROJECT (426 words) ENERGY INITIATIVES BEATS FLA. POWER IN COURT ON RATES FOR 112-MW PLANT (498 words) NIMO: PURPA PREEMPTS NEW YORK LAW REQUIRING TAX REIMBURSEMENT TO QFS (303 words) N.Y. JUDGE SEES ISO AS KEY IN MOVE TO WHOLESALE COMPETITION, ACCESS (341 words) PACIFIC GENERATION BUYS 25% INTEREST IN 100-MW ONTARIO PLANT FROM DESTEC (298 words) MISSION FORMALLY EXITS 400-MW PROJECT AT WEYERHAEUSER MILL IN WASH. STATE (211 words) LATIN AMERICA AES, ONTARIO HYDRO UNIT IN TALKS TO BUY 2,700-MW ARGENTINE PLANT (279 words) TAIWAN FIRM PROPOSES 1,010-MW BOT HYDRO PROJECT IN HONDURAS (270 words) SPAIN'S ENDESA SELLS 9.7% OF EDENOR IN ARGENTINA FOR ABOUT $76-MILLION (145 words) CopyrightINDEPENDENT POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   TAIWAN SELECTS ENSERCH, INTERGEN, SCEPTRE IN SECOND ROUND OF IPP BIDSEnserch Development Corp., International Generating Co. (Intergen) andSceptre Power are members of four consortia proposing a total of 3,750 MWthat were selected by the government of Taiwan in the country's secondindependent power solicitation, originally for 1,800 MW.   The four consortia were among 18 bidders proposing 19 separate projectsrepresenting 10,050 MW of new capacity for the solicitation.   Recently, Taiwan's Ministry of Economic Affairs (MOEA) selected from thefirst round of proposals seven consortia to build a total of 7,110 MW (IPR,28 July '95, 1). In that bidding, developers proposed 23 projectsrepresenting more than 30,300 MW.   Many of the projects selected in the first round have stalled due to thelack of development experience among the local sponsors (IPR, 20 Oct '95,1).   In the latest round, Enserch Development of Dallas said it is part of aconsortium that will build, own and operate a 500-MW, oil-fired, project inthe northern city of Hualien.   Enserch officials said the company will hold a 30% equity stake in theproject, while 70% will be held by two domestic partners, the Fubon Groupand the Ambassador Group.   The consortium will spend the rest of 1996 on preliminary developmentand expects to begin construction sometime in 1997. Commercial operationwill begin after 1999.   Boston-based Intergen, a joint venture of Bechtel Group and Pacific Gas& Electric affiliates, was selected to develop a private power project ofbetween 1,200 MW and 1,500 MW in a location known as Lizhe. Intergendeclined to release details of the project, but it will be in a jointventure with a local Taiwanese company.   Sceptre Power officials declined to release project details, but saidthe company is actively developing a project in Taiwan. Reportedly, Sceptrewill have a partner, perhaps Taiwan Sakura Co., in a 1,224-MW, oil-firedproject in Suao.   A fourth award, to a joint venture of Taiwan's Cheng-Chou Electronicsand ESC of Germany, was for a 600-MW to 700-MW project in Hsin-Chu, thoughthis could not be confirmed at presstime.   All four projects are expected to be in commercial operation by 2000 or2001.   The government said power rates offered by developers were verycompetitive, but did not offer details. The developers now must focus onobtaining environmental approvals.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINDEPENDENT POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   S&P DOWNGRADES SOME PROJECT DEBT DUE TO NIMO PRESSURE ON NUG PACTS   Standard & Poor's has downgraded two non-utility generation debt issuesbecause of their reliance on payments by Niagara Mohawk Power, which ismoving aggressively to restructure contracts.   In its ``Power Choice'' proposal, submitted to the New York PublicService Commission last fall, NiMo offered to open up its service territoryto retail competition, but only if it could restructure the above-marketcontracts, which it blames for much of its high rates (IPR, 20 Oct '95,1).   If it cannot restructure those pacts, NiMo said, it will seek to takeover projects through its power of eminent domain, then auction them off toparties that would sell at market prices.   In addition, NiMo raised the prospect that it might seek Chapter 11protection under federal bankruptcy laws, which would most likely reducepayments to NUGs.   In response, S&P set a BBB- rating for the first mortgage bonds ofSelkirk Cogen Funding Corp., and affirmed that rating on Jan. 5, addingthat the rating outlook is now negative.   The $392-million debt issue relates to the 332-MW Selkirk cogenerationproject, developed by Cogen Technologies, with a 79% stake, along withEnergy Initiatives, Tomen Power, and U.S. Generating.   S&P fears the cash flows supporting the debt could be eroded if NiMoforces a renegotiation of the power-sales contract, or pursues a Chapter 11filing, it stated. The ratings agency reached that conclusion despite thefact that the Selkirk project sells only 20% of its power to NiMo, withmost of the output going to Consolidated Edison.   However, because of the minor reliance on NiMo, ``the project has theflexibility to potentially absorb a partial loss of Niagara Mohawkrevenues, through contract renegotiation or otherwise, at the BBB- ratinglevel.'' Cogen Technologies could not be reached for comment by presstime.   Also on Jan. 5, S&P lowered the ratings from BB to BBB- on seniorsecured debt of Energy Investors Fund Funding Corp., and listed the outlookas negative. Part of the downgrade for the $125-million issue stems fromNiMo's proposals, S&P said.   Mark Tarini, treasurer of Boston-based Energy Investors Corp. (EIF),told Independent Power Report the downgrade was not unexpected, since S&Pput the issue on ``CreditWatch'' after the NiMo proposal in October.However, ``we were surprised they knocked us down two levels.''   Tarini said the fund in question involves five projects connected withNiMo: the High Falls and South Glens Falls projects, operated by AdirondackHydro, totaling 49 MW; a 58-MW hydro project operated by InternationalPaper; the Indeck/Olean Energy Center, an 80-MW gas-fired project owned andoperated by Indeck Energy Services in Olean, N.Y.; and the Salt City EnergyVenture, an 80-MW coal project in Solvay, N.Y., developed by CMS Generationand other partners.   In downgrading the EIF debt, S&P also cited the fund's investment in 71MW of wind projects in California, which are owned and operated byfinancially troubled Kenetech Corp. Kenetech has suffered financialproblems and a number of key executives including its CEO recently resigned(IPR, 29 Dec '95, 3; 1 Dec '95, 1).   If Kenetech recovers and NiMo does not pursue its threats, EIF plans tolobby for an upgrading of the debt, Tarini said. However, he noted that``downgrades are like gravity--once ratings go down, its hard to get out ofthat hole.''Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINDEPENDENT POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   FORMOSA PLASTICS DEVELOPING TWO PROJECTS TOTALING 5,900 MW IN CHINA   Formosa Plastics Co. of Taiwan said its Formosa Plastics Group (FPG)will develop two coal-fired independent power plants totaling 5,900 MW inthe city of Zhangzhou in southern mainland China.   The 3,500-MW and 2,400-MW plants will cost a total of $7-billion.   Zhangzhou will provide a number of incentives, including 132-hectares ofland at no charge for five years and reduced charges for the following fiveyears.   Formosa Plastics said it expected to bring in at least one equitypartner from the U.S. into the project.   The company is also building an electric car battery manufacturingfacility in Zhangzhou in a joint venture with American Royal Co. Formosawill produce the car batteries in mainland China and assemble the cars inTaiwan.   Formosa officials said the company is attempting to capitalize on theexperience it is gaining in Taiwan, where it is one of seven companiesselected in that country's first private power solicitation, and to takeadvantage of the ``economic liberalization'' underway in China (IPR, 15 Dec'95, 20).   Under the name Mailiao Cogeneration Co., Formosa is developing a1,350-MW, coal-fired plant on a Formosa site at Mailiao in Yunlin County,Taiwan. The project is expected to be expanded to about 2,400 MW in theyears ahead. Formosa plans for the first phase to reach commercialoperation in 1999.   Over the longer-term, FPG is also evaluating power project opportunitiesin the Philippines.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINDEPENDENT POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   EDF, ITALY'S EDISON AND FINEL CLOSE ON 600-MW ITALIAN GENERATING FIRM   A joint venture of Italy's Edison SpA, Finel and Electricite de Francehave completed the purchase of a 75% equity stake in the 600-MW IlvaServizi Energie (ISE), the power generation arm of Italy's state-ownedsteel company Ilva.   The 75% stake in ISE cost the two companies $220-million, which it paidout of cash reserves without financing.   ISE includes a 500-MW, gas-fired, cogeneration plant at Taranto and a100-MW, gas-fired, cogeneration plant at Piombino in Tuscany. An additional500-MW, combined-cycle unit is under construction at Taranto and a 170-MW,combined-cycle unit is planned for Piombino.   The Taranto plant supplies power and steam to the state-owned plasticscompany, Ilva Laminati Piani.   The additional generating units under construction will cost thepartners about $550-million to complete. Part of the those funds will comefrom cash reserves and the remainder from traditional project financing,which is currently being arranged with an undisclosed European bank.   In early-1995, Edison and EdF were selected by the government over bidsby British Gas; Endesa of Spain; Mission Energy of the U.S. with Sondel ofItaly; Foster Wheeler Corp. of the U.S. and partners; and Waste ManagementInternational (IPR, 27 Jan '95, 13).   Edison is owned by Italian holding company Montedison SpA.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINDEPENDENT POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   ENTERGY CLOSES $1.2-BILLION PURCHASE OF AUSTRALIAN DISTRIBUTOR CITIPOWER   Entergy Corp. has reached financial closure on its (U.S.) $1.2-billionacquisition of CitiPower Ltd., the Melbourne, Australia-based electricpower distributor (IPR, 1 Dec '95, 11).   Entergy acquired CitiPower, its largest international investment todate, through a solicitation released by the government of Victoria,Australia.   Entergy said Bank of America NT&SA, a subsidiary of BankAmerica Corp.,was the loan arranger for the $914-million of debt financing used toacquire CitiPower. Lead underwriters were ABN AMRO Australia Ltd., Bank ofAmerica and Commonwealth Bank of Australia. Entergy contributed$286-million of equity.   Commonwealth Bank served as the facility agent.   Entergy also noted co-lead underwriter was Credit Suisse, andsub-underwriters were Australian & New Zealand Banking Group Ltd. and IBJAustralia Bank Ltd.   Syndication of the $914-million was scheduled to begin within the firstweeks of January.   CitiPower, with a customer base of some 233,000 customers, servesMelbourne and its surrounding suburbs.   Entergy vice president and general manager for Australian activities,Larry Folks, said, ``It is our intention to work closely with CitiPower'smanagement team over the coming months to continue establishing bestpractices targets and marketing strategies.''   The Victorian government's deregulation of the electricity industrymeans electricity prices will continue to fall, in real terms, at leastuntil 2000, said Folks.   Tom Wright, previously vice president, transmission and distributionsystems for Entergy, was appointed CitiPower chief executive officer,replacing former CitiPower CEO Shane Breheny, who became a transitionadvisor.   CitiPower represents Entergy's first investment in Australia and itsfirst major international investment it is making alone. In joint ventureswith others, Entergy is active in Argentina, Chile, China, Pakistan andPeru.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINDEPENDENT POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   FIRST GAS IN TALKS FOR FINANCING 880-MW GAS PROJECT IN PHILIPPINES   First Gas Holdings Corp., a joint venture of First Philippine Holdingsof Manila and British Gas, is holding talks with Export Risk Guarantee ofSwitzerland, KfW of Germany, Hermes of Germany and the Export-Import Bankof the U.S., for financing an 880-MW gas-fired project in Sta Rita,Batangas province, south of Manila.   The project, expected to cost $600-million, was recently doubled in sizefrom 440 MW (IPR, 1 Dec '95, 5).   Gas will come from the offshore Camago-Malampaya field, the Philippines'biggest oil and gas find, which will be developed by the Philippine unitsof the Royal Dutch/Shell Group and Occidental Petroleum of the U.S.   Meanwhile, three firms have been qualified to submit a final bid tobuild the plant--Asea Brown Boveri, Siemens, and Raytheon Engineers &Constructors, said Ernesto Pantangco, an official of First PhilippineHoldings Corp.   The three pre-qualified firms have been asked to submit a final bid onJan. 26, with the winner to be announced in March, he said.   The plant, expected to enter service in 1998, could be built as a single880-MW facility or with two, 440-MW units, depending on the plan submittedby the winning bidder.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINDEPENDENT POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   PHILIPPINE DEVELOPER TO FLOAT BONDS VALUED AT $85-MILLION IN U.S. MARKETS   First Private Power Corp., a unit of First Philippine Holdings, is setto float $85-million worth of 12-year bonds in major cities in the UnitedStates next month, a company official said Tuesday.   Proceeds of the flotation will be used to refinance the short-termforeign currency depository unit loans FPPC incurred to build the 215-MWdiesel power plant in Bauangtown in La Union Province, which enteredservice last year.   Money from the refinancing scheme will also be used as a partial equitycontribution for a 880-MW gas-fired facility, which is being built jointlywith British Gas (see story above; IPR, 1 Dec '95, 5).   FPPC chief operating officer Ernesto Pantangco said the lead manager ofthe flotation will be Salomon Brothers.   The coupon rates will be pegged at between 325 and 375 basis pointsabove the seven-year U.S. Treasury bills. The bonds will have a maturity of12 years.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINDEPENDENT POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   UTILICORP, AIR PRODUCTS FORM LINK FOR GAS-FIRED PROJECTS IN MIDWEST   UtiliCorp United has joined with Air Products & Chemicals to developgas-fired independent power projects in the Midwest. The partnership maylater expand its activities to other parts of the U.S. and overseas,according to a UtiliCorp spokesman.   UtiliCorp, based in Kansas City, Mo., operates Missouri Public Serviceand WestPlains Energy divisions in Kansas and Colorado, along with some gasutilities. It will pursue the joint projects through its unregulated UtilCoGroup subsidiary.   Both companies have projects in operation and development, and havealready built two plants together: a 120-MW gas-fired cogeneration projectin Orlando, Fla., which began operating in 1993, selling power to FloridaPower and the Reedy Creek Improvement District; and a 49.9-MW coal-firedcogeneration plant in Stockton, Calif., in service since 1988 and sellingelectricity to Pacific Gas & Electric.   The companies will focus on the Midwest because they have identified aneed for gas-fired capacity in the region, according to the UtiliCorpspokesman. He added UtiliCorp brings a knowledge of the Midwest servicearea, the regulatory environment and of other utilities in the region.   Frank Costanza, UtiliCorp vice president of power services, toldIndependent Power Report the partners may consider building uncommitted``merchant plant'' components into some projects. However, until regulatoryuncertainties are resolved, the companies would want to secure purchasersfor most of the output.   As competitive markets emerge, they may consider a purely merchantapproach--where plants are built without long-term contracts for theoutput.   Altogether, UtilCo Group has 319 MW of equity in 17 operating plantstotaling 800 MW from gas, coal waste and hydro sources, all in the U.S. Inaddition, the company is developing a 60-MW plant in Jamaica.   Air Products & Chemicals has 176 MW of equity in six operating plantstotaling more than 300 MW, including three in-house projects at itsindustrial gas and chemical facilities.   The company also has four projects in development, representing 650 to725 MW, including a plant in the Czech Republic that is on hold pending thecountry's restructuring efforts.   Except for the Orlando project with UtilCo Group, all of Air Products'plants involve coal or coal waste.   Recently, Metropolitan Edison asked Air Products to restructure a 227-MWcoal project to gas in order to lower the capacity payments, but theparties could not agree on terms, and Met-Ed agreed to buy out the contractfor up to $35-million (see story, page 10).Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINDEPENDENT POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   IDAHO POWER CONSIDERS RENEWABLES SUBSIDIARY; INDONESIA FIRST TARGET   Idaho Power said it will decide by late spring whether to establish anindependent power subsidiary or energy services company to developphotovoltaic systems and other renewable energy projects in internationalmarkets.   Indonesia is an immediate target because the government has begun aTransmigration Program to encourage its citizens to relocate to outlyingregions, including some of the country's hundreds of islands. Indonesia hasthe world's fourth largest population, with most people living in the majorcities.   The government has earmarked $100-million for the electrificationcomponent of its Transmigration Program. But rather than build a largepower plant on each island, which would be cost prohibitive, the governmentis studying the possibility of small hydro and photovoltaics (PV).   ``Our involvement in the preliminary stages of this project could be thefirst step in a broad effort to expand our growth opportunities beyond whathas been considered typical for this company,'' said Joe Marshall, chiefexecutive officer.   Idaho Power has been developing PV experience since 1993. In its firsttwo years, it installed sites in Idaho totaling 3 kW. In 1995 alone, itinstalled 86 kW and sources said 1996 will be a pivotal year to decide itsstrategy for the future.   PV systems convert sunlight directly into electricity and can be used toprovide electricity to power water pumps, lighting or refrigeration.   Idaho Power's engineers have traveled to Indonesia with Community PowerCorp., based in Virginia, to assess the potential for PV in that country.Idaho Power also is interested in building small hydro, tapping itsconsiderable experience in the U.S.   ``Developing PV systems could be a good niche for us internationally,''said Larry Crowley, Idaho Power's senior manager of strategic planning.``Our utility has developed a reputation for being a leader in PVsystems.''Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINDEPENDENT POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   CORDELL HULL, ERIC ZAUSNER ESTABLISH FIRM FOR INTERNATIONAL ENERGY ASSETS   Cordell Hull, recently retired as executive vice president of Bechtel,and Eric Zausner, a deputy administrator of the Dept. of Energy in the FordAdministration, have formed Energy Asset Management LLC to develop andacquire international energy infrastructure assets.   Hull is chairman of the new company, based in San Francisco, and Zausneris president. Zausner said it was too early to say more about the company,which is just getting organized.   One of Energy Asset Management's first projects is assisting LosAngeles-based Pacific Enterprises International in acquiring a 12.5%interest in two Argentine natural gas utility holding companies. LosAngeles-based PEI, an affiliate of Southern California Gas, announced onJan. 2 that discussions and due diligence were proceeding with SodigasPampana SA and Sodigas Sur SA.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINDEPENDENT POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   TENNECO BUYS 10% OF AUSTRALIAN GAS, POWER DEVELOPMENT COMPANY   Tenneco Power of Houston is taking a 10% equity stake in independentpower developer Energy Equity Corp. Ltd. (EEC) of Perth, Australia, whichhas several projects underway (IPR, 3 Nov '95, 6).   Tenneco Power, a unit of Tenneco Gas, will also take a seat on EEC'sboard of directors. EEC's stock is traded on the Australian StockExchange.   In addition, Tenneco will take a 50% equity stake in EEC's 135-MW,gas-fired Sulawesi independent power plant that will sell electricity toIndonesia's state-owned electric utility, Perusahaan Listrik Negara (PLN).   Tenneco is also taking an equity stake in EEC's Indonesian Sengkangonshore natural gas field, estimated to have proven and probable reservesof 500-billion cubic feet.   Tenneco is expected to pay about (U.S.) $21-million for the equity inboth projects.   Financial close on the power project and pipeline is expected inearly-1996.   As part of its agreement with EEC, Tenneco said it will arrangefinancing for the projects.   Construction of the Sulawesi power plant began in November, withcommercial operation scheduled for early-1997. Tenneco said thepower-purchase agreement with PLN is for a term of 20 years and wasconcluded after negotiations between EEC and PLN.   EEC also holds a 21-year, take-or-pay power-purchase agreement with theQueensland Electricity Commission for a 37-MW, gas-fired power project. EECclosed financing for the project with Barclays Bank Australia Ltd. and theBank of Western Australia Ltd.   Separately, Tenneco plans possible power projects from the 470-mile,16-inch, Moomba-Adelaide pipeline gas pipeline in Australia, which thecompany recently purchased.   Tenneco has separate interests in power projects in Brazil, Chile andTaiwan.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINDEPENDENT POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   THAILAND'S EGCO EYES PLANTS IN LAOS CHINA, VIETNAM, INDONESIA, MYANMAR   One year after becoming a publicly traded company, the ElectricityGenerating Public Co. (Egco) of Thailand, a spinoff of the government powerauthority, is moving across Thai borders in search of new investments inChina, Myanmar, Indonesia, Vietnam and Laos.   The company's initial impetus to build plants across the border in Laosto fuel Thailand's growing demand has evolved into expansion for the sakeof investment, said Siwanan Na Nakorn, Egco executive director and deputymanaging director for new business ventures.   In China, the company is exploring a joint venture with Huaneng PowerInternational, to build a 300-MW coal-fired plant in Shanghai.   Huaneng would hold 70% of the equity and 30% would be owned by Egco.Siwanan said Egco is working with Thai partners in the venture but declinedto disclose their identities.   In Myanmar, Egco, in a consortium with the Petroleum Authority ofThailand and British Gas, is likely to bid on a project that includes a gaspipeline, a first-stage 200-MW power unit and fertilizer plant.   In Vietnam, Egco plans to build a 200-MW combined-cycle plant at theAmata City Bien Hoa industrial park, now under construction outside of HoChi Min City. Egco's equity stake is still under negotiation.   The Vietnamese government recently asked Egco to increase the initialcapacity of the plant, from 30 MW to 60 MW, to supply areas surrounding theindustrial park.   Vietnam is also asking Egco to move up the starting date, from late-1997to late-1996. But Egco and the Vietnamese have not arrived on the price ofthe increased power and the company is seeking relief from a tax on dieselfuel, since the gas pipeline to supply the plant will not be in place until1998 or 1999.   The project is a joint venture with Bangpakong Industrial Park ofThailand.   Egco is also negotiating with a mine concession holder in Indonesia tobuild a mine-mouth coal-fired plant--or simply a mine--in Sumatra orKalimantan.   In Laos, the company has been negotiating with Thai Lao Lignite Corp., aconcession holder, to build a lignite-fired plant in Hong Sa near theThai-Lao border. The plant, which would come on-line at 600 MW andultimately reach 1,200 MW, would supply Thailand. Siwanan said thosediscussions are on hold because of differences over price.   At home, Egco plans to bid on the next 1,000-MW independent powersolicitation held by the Electricity Generating Authority of Thailand (IPR,15 Dec '95, 8). EGAT is expected to announce a second 1,000-MW round in1996, though many bidders in the 1995 request also bid for the secondround.   Siwanan said the newly-privatized company sat out the first round toavoid charges that it would receive preferential treatment from EGAT. As aresult of its first listing on the Stock Exchange of Thailand in November1994, Egco is 50% publicly held, 48% controlled by EGAT and 2% is owned bythe Crown Property Bureau.   The company's second public offering will be held in February or Marchof 1996, and Siwanan said the sale would likely decrease EGAT's holdings to40%. Eventually, EGAT's holdings are expected to decline to 25% or 30%, hesaid.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINDEPENDENT POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   MAHARASHSTRA OKAYS AMENDED PLAN FOR DABHOL PROJECT, NOW 2,450 MW   The Maharashtra state administration on Jan. 8 approved a reformulatedversion of Enron Development's Dabhol Power project, which is now plannedas a 2,450-MW plant.   Maharashtra officials canceled Dabhol in August on charges of a lack oftransparency in the negotiation process and excessively high costs (IPR, 11Aug '95, 13). Other project partners are General Electric and InternationalGenerating Co. The state administration is calling for the MaharashtraState Electricity Board to take a 30% stake.   An earlier meeting on Jan. 6 convened expressly to decide on the Dabholplant and two other private power projects was rendered inconclusive after``hardliners'' in the cabinet insisted the government ``beat down'' evenfurther recommendations made by a panel of experts appointed by the state.   A panel's recommendations, submitted in November, had modified theDabhol project profile to reduce the tariff and costs of the project (IPR,3 Nov '95, 6). The cabinet on Jan. 8 ``unanimously accepted most of them''and has further modified others, state officials said.   At the same meeting, the cabinet also approved two other private-sectorpower projects, the 410-MW Patalganga project sponsored by India's RelianceGroup and the 595-MW, coal-fired Bhadravati project sponsored by the IspatGroup.   One of the key alterations to the panel's recommendations has been theproject's power tariff. The Maharashtra state administration has fixed thepower tariff for the Dabhol project at 5.45 cents/kWh, state officialssaid. The expert panel had recommended a tariff of 5.5 cents/kWh.   Chief Minister Manohar Joshi and his Shiv Sena party chief Bal Thackerayhad called for a tariff of 5.3 cents/kWh. Enron officials last weekindicated to the administration that the project would be commerciallyunviable, if the tariff was reduced beyond 5.5 cents/kWh.   Joshi also indicated that Dabhol Power Co., the project company, and theMaharashtra State Electricity Board, the state-owned power utility, wouldhave to sign a new power-purchase agreement before work could resume at thesite of the stalled project.   Similarly, the administration decided to accept ``in toto'' thestate-appointed expert panel's recommendation that while the project'stotal power-generating capacity should be increased from 2,015 MW to2,450-MW, project costs should be reduced from the originally approved$1.3-million/MW to $800,000/MW, amounting to a total reduction of nearly$300-million in fixed costs.   This, state power officials pointed out, was lower than that of mostsimilar power projects being set up elsewhere in India, and the lowestamong those approved in Maharashtra state.   In addition, the project's internal rate of return would be pegged at21%, the level recommended by the panel, instead of the earlier 25%,officials said.   Joshi said the cabinet also approved the use of naphtha instead ofdistillate oil for the first phase of the project, and liquefied naturalgas for the second phase, as in the original plan.   The cabinet, he added, would expect Enron to take measures to ensurethat ``the environment isn't affected whatever the fuel deployed.''   It also directed the Maharashtra administration not to allow work tobegin again on the first phase until ``all the necessary approvals,'' bothtechnical and environmental, have been obtained from the federal governmentfor both the first and second phases. This is expected to delay theresumption of work at the project site even further.   Joshi indicated the administration would not compensate Dabhol Power``in any way'' for the delays that the project has so far incurred. Thefirst, 695-MW phase of the project was already under construction when thenewly elected state administration issued a work stoppage notice to DabholPower on Aug. 4, 1995.   Its subsequent revival was also delayed by nearly a month after thestate administration failed to meet its own self-imposed deadline of Dec.10 to finalize its decision on the expert panel's recommendations (IPR, 29Dec '95, 18).   Dabhol Power had estimated that delays were resulting in cost overrunsof $250,000 a day, and had proposed that they should be shared equally bythe developers and the state administration.   Chief Minister Joshi indicated on Jan. 8 that the Maharashtra StateElectricity Board would hold 30% of the equity of the Dabhol project.   This, state officials said, would help MSEB have a say in the crucialmanagerial decisions of the project, including the use of indigenous ratherthan imported naphtha in order to cut costs, as well as in the case of gasfor the second phase, and project equipment for both phases.   The equity share for MSEB was among the expert panel's recommendationsfor the modified project. However, power industry analysts estimate thatthe ``anomalous'' decision by the cabinet to insist on a 30% stake for MSEBat a time when the federal trend suggests increasing privatization of thepower sector, is expected to cost the state about half of its projectedannual outlays, which could force the state to bring in a private Indiancompany as a partner in the deal.   Joshi said both the state and Enron would ``immediately take theinitiative'' to withdraw arbitration proceedings ongoing in a London court(IPR, 1 Dec '95, 7). The next hearing had been scheduled for Jan. 15.   Enron officials would not comment on the arbitration decision, pointingout that the company had yet to receive a formal notice of the cabinetapproval.   ``While it would be inappropriate for us to speculate on any conditionsuntil they are reviewed and considered in their entirety and the extent towhich they compare to the recommendations of the state-appointed expertcommittee, we are certainly willing to consider recommendations thatprovide for a mutually satisfactory project,'' said Enron officials quotingfrom a prepared statement by Kenneth Lay, chairman and chief executiveofficer of Enron Corp.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINDEPENDENT POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   CHINA FORMS NEW AGENCY TO SEPARATE GOVERNMENT, PRIVATE ELECTRIC SECTORS   China is creating an independent entity, National Power Corp. (NPC), toseparate the functions of government and the private electric sector.   The Ministry of Power, which will be eliminated as it now functions whenNPC is up and running early this year, said NPC will allow China to step-upits encouragement of foreign investment in the power sector, particularlyin the electricity-starved Shanxi, Shaanxi, Henan, Yunnan and Guizhouprovinces and the autonomous regions of Inner Mongolia and Ningxia Hui.   NPC is the first step in a multi-phased program to restructure theChinese power industry from central planning to a market economy forelectricity.   Following completion of the national changes, the same restructuringwill be adopted for regional and provincial power administrations.   All existing national electric power assets will be placed under theauthority of the Chinese State Council. As it is now known, the Ministry ofPower Industry will be dissolved, with its functions transferred to statecommissions, NPC and the China Electricity Council.   Independently, the Federation of Chinese Power Enterprises willcoordinate work within the private sector.   Also, the Chinese note that the new Electric Power Law is before membersof the ongoing 17th session of the Standing Committee of the EighthNational People's Congress, China's top legislative body, for expectedapproval in 1996.   The new electric power laws are designed to encourage more domestic andinternational investors in the power industry and correct``insufficiencies'' in existing Chinese power policy.   The new laws are intended to make sure all of China's resources beutilized to produce electricity and encourage investors to use newtechnology and equipment to build plants, especially cogeneration units.Also, provisions call for protecting the rights of all investors, tradersand end-users.   Use of the new laws will gradually unify the cost of electric poweracross China.   The government has also proposed development of a national 6,000-mile,high-voltage transmission grid. The grid will expand, connect and controlthe movement of electricity between the existing inter-provincial andregional power grid networks.   The grid is expected to eventually triple the current Chinesetransmission capacity of about 220,000 MW over a total of 106,000-miles andwill be centered around the Three Gorges hydro project on the YangtzeRiver. Distribution networks in 35 key cities will be renovated. Thegovernment wants the national grid in-place and operating by 2003.   A new national grid company will operate the grid, dictating how excessgeneration in one area is moved to areas lacking electricity. Developmentof the grid is being handled by the China Electric Power Technology & TradeCorp. of Beijing.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINDEPENDENT POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   LAOS MAY ALLOW CHINA-THAI LINE IN COUNTRY FOR 1,500-MW PROJECT   The Laotian government has indicated it may allow a transmission linelinking a 1,500-MW hydro project in China's Yunnan province with Thailand,to be built on Laotian territory.   Securing a third-country route for the transmission line is critical forthe project, which is now in the feasibility study stage, since China andThailand have no common land border and the project is envisioned to supplyThailand. Thai officials have expressed concern that building the linethrough Myanmar carries too many risks.   In exchange for opening its territory to the line, Laos, which seeks tobe a major supplier of Thailand's booming energy market, has asked thatsome of the power be used to supply Laotian towns and villages near theline.   During a meeting of Chinese, Laotian and Thai officials last month atthe ``Electric Power Forum,'' an Asian Development Bank-sponsored event,Laotian officials agreed in principle to a study on constructing the powertransmission line through Laotian territory.   Somboune Manolom, deputy director of the Laos Electricity Dept., saidLaos has no objection to the transmission line study, and suggested theproject could boost subregional cooperation.   The feasibility study for the hydro plant is being conducted under ajoint venture by MDX Power of Bangkok, Thailand, and the Yunnan ElectricPower Bureau, which hold 48% and 52%, respectively. The plant study isexpected to be completed in late-1997.   The Electricity Generating Authority of Thailand has not yet committedto purchase power from the project.   One EGAT source said it is too early to know if the project will beattractive. And a another EGAT official questioned whether the projectwould offer energy at a competitive price, given the cost of transportingpower 185 miles from the northern Thai border. EGAT has no existingagreements to buy power from China.   But an MDX source said the company is pursuing the effort on the``fairly strong belief that the project will be economically feasible andmutually beneficial for the two countries.'' The transmission line isunlikely to make up a major share of the project cost, he said.   While MDX and Thai officials say that a Myanmar route for thetransmission line remains an option, Piyasvasti Amranand, head ofThailand's National Energy Policy Office said it is ``too risky for us''because the line would go through areas controlled by rebel groups. Also,he said, some international lenders are reluctant to finance projects inMyanmar.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINDEPENDENT POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   SCEPTRE, PARTNERS TO REPOWER TWO SMALL PLANTS IN CHINA; MORE PLANNED   Sceptre Power Co. of Santa Anna, Calif., has launched a joint venture torepower two existing units totaling 42 MW in Jiangsu Province, China, withhopes of repowering much larger plants in the future.   With project partners New China Hong Kong Group Ltd. of Hong Kong andHorizon Energy Development Inc., a unit of National Fuel Gas Co. ofBuffalo, N.Y., the 27-MW, coal-fired Wuxian Leekou plant will be expandedto 39 MW and the 15-MW, coal-fired Jiangyin Sanfangxiang plant will beincreased to 24 MW. Combined costs of both projects are put at$35.5-million.   NCHK will hold about 50% of the project, while Sceptre Power and HorizonEnergy will hold the other 50%.   Sceptre vice president for Asian project development L.W. Ken Kinniesaid both projects are scheduled to reach financial close during the firstquarter of this year and be complete by year-end.   ``These projects are just to get our feet wet in China,'' Kinnie said.Sceptre's goal in China is to undertake 10 to 15 similar repoweringprojects--although the later ones will be larger--then list the entireportfolio on the stock exchange of either Hong Kong or China.   The company expects to have partners in each of the Chineseundertakings.   Sceptre began as an affiliate of Canada's Sceptre Resources, butrecently became independent. The company holds several agreements in Chinafor projects similar to those in Jiangsu Province, but Kinnie said detailswill not be released until the project development process is moreadvanced.   The company is searching for other joint venture partners, Kinnie said.   In a separate joint venture in Pakistan, Sceptre Power is nearingfinancial close on a 157-MW, gas-fired project in Lahore (IPR, 29 Dec '95,5). Partners in that project include Pakistan's Fauji Foundation and Intragof Wellesley, Mass.   Other projects are sought in Brazil, Peru and elsewhere in SouthAmerica.   Contact: Sceptre Power Co., L.W. Ken Kinnie, vice president-Asianproject development, Suite 1200, 6 Hutton Center Dr., Santa Anna, Calif.,92707; phone, (714) 546-1800; fax, (714) 546-1801.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINDEPENDENT POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   KEY PHILIPPINE SENATOR WANTS PROBE OF LINE DELAYS AFFECTING CEPA PLANT   The president of the Philippine Senate said Monday he wants a probe onwhy state-run National Power Corp. (Napocor) failed to provide neededtransmission lines, leading to delays in operation of two completed powerplants, including one built by Consolidated Electric Power Asia (CEPA) ofHong Kong, a unit of Hopewell Holdings.   The plants involved are the 700-MW, coal-fired Pagbilao facility builtby CEPA, and the 300-MW Calaca coal plant owned by Napocor, both completedin 1995.   Senate President Neptali Gonzalez said the government has so farincurred losses of $891.69-million due to the continued non-operation ofthe two coal-fired facilities.   Gonzalez filed a Senate resolution calling for an investigation on``whether or not there is gross negligence or incompetence on the part ofthe National Power Corporation...due to the delay in the construction ofthe transmission lines and substations.''   The two power plants ``were installed and commissioned as scheduled butremain idle and inoperational due to unavailable transmission lines andsubstations,'' Gonzalez said.   However, Napocor vice president for projects management Antonio Corpuzpreviously said that under a contract signed with CEPA, the transmissionlines needed for the Pagbilao plant should be ready by March 1996, at thelatest.   Corpuz also said then that Napocor will not pay a single cent of the$26.34-million being claimed by CEPA as an early completion bonus ofPagbilao (IPR, 1 Dec '95, 5).   A CEPA source said the ``misunderstanding'' with Napocor is beingdiscussed by both sides, and that the issue will be resolved ``verysoon.''Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINDEPENDENT POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   PHILIPPINES' NAPOCOR MAY SELL TWO WESTINGHOUSE TURBINES TO TEXACO   The Philippines' National Power Corp. (Napocor) said Monday it may sellto Texaco Inc. the two gas turbines totaling 320 MW to be delivered byWestinghouse in 1997 as part of a package that settled a nuclear plantdispute (IPR, 29 Dec '95, 18; 15 Dec '95, 10).   The two new 501F combustion turbines worth $30-million each could beused by Texaco for a 300-MW cogeneration plant planned in Batangasprovince, south of Manila, said Napocor spokeswoman Jane Subang.   Texaco officials were unavailable for comment.   Westinghouse had been accused of bribing former president FerdinandMarcos in the early-1980s to secure the contract to build the allegedlyfaulty nuclear plant in Bataan province, west of Manila.   Westinghouse equipment and technology were banned in 1993 after talks ona settlement failed. A $100-million out-of-court settlement that includedthe delivery of the two gas turbines was reached recently paving the wayfor the lifting of the ban.   The sale of the gas turbines to Texaco has not yet been finalized,Subang said. It is also possible the two turbines could be made part of theplanned bidding for a 1,200-MW gas-fired plant, she said (IPR, 15 Dec '95,10).Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINDEPENDENT POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   PHILIPPINE INVESTMENT BOARD GRANTS INCENTIVES FOR TWO PROJECTS, 160 MW   The Philippine government investment board has granted tax incentives totwo proposed geothermal projects totaling 160 MW that state-run PhilippineNational Oil Co. plans to turn over to the private sector.   The incentives, which include tax holidays and low duties on importedequipment, were granted to draw the attention of private investors in theproposed projects, the investment board said.   The projects are the 120-MW Mount Labo geothermal plant in Camarines Surprovince, south of Manila, and the 40-MW Negros Geothermal Project in thecentral province of Negros Occidental, said PNOC spokeswoman DebbieDiokno.   PNOC has not yet decided whether to offer the two projects to investorson a build-operate-transfer or build-own-operate basis, she said.   It is also eyeing the Japanese government's Overseas EconomicCooperation Fund as a source of funding for both projects, Diokno said.   The Mount Labo project will be implemented in two phases: a 20-MWfacility scheduled for operation by June 1998, and a 100-MW unit by March2000.   The Negros power plant is scheduled for commissioning by August 1998.   The government's investment board gave ``pioneer status'' to bothprojects, entitling their proponents to a six-year income tax holiday, a 3%duty on imported capital equipment and tax credits on local purchases ofmachinery.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINDEPENDENT POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   SOUTH KOREA LIFTS 750-MW SIZE CAP; 1,600-MW RFP NOW SEEN IN FEBRUARY   South Korea's Ministry of Trade, Industry & Energy (MOTIE) has liftedits earlier 750-MW private power project size limit, effective immediately(IPR, 6 Oct '95, 12).   The timing of the change coincides with the release of an often-delayedinternational solicitation to be issued by Korea Electric Power Corp.(KEPCO) in February for two 800-MW thermal projects, Younghungdong units 1and 2, which will be developed on a build-own-operate basis.   The formal request for proposals was expected before the end of 1995,but was delayed. The RFP was originally scheduled to be released in June1995. All delays were blamed on personnel changes at the top of MOTIE.   The cost of each 800 MW is placed between $650-million and$700-million.   The policy change means the only restriction faced by private powerdevelopers is a 50% limitation on foreign ownership. Also, nuclear projectsare barred.   According to a tentative schedule, MOTIE will receive and evaluateproposals in early-1996 with selection of developers set for July 1996.Power-purchase agreements will be signed in August 1996, followingnegotiations. Development of selected projects will begin in September1996.   Those dates could slip into the future.   Virtually all private companies will be able to compete for theprojects, if the ratio of their net worth to capital during the previousthree years is at least 20% and they have some technical capacity for powerprojects.   KEPCO may not bid for the projects, but will buy the power under along-term, power-purchase agreement. Power-purchase negotiations will bebetween the selected bidders and KEPCO, which is warning prospectivebidders it will not pay a tariff higher than the cost of power from theutility's comparable existing plants.   Successful bidders will be guaranteed returns of 11%, compared to the 9%guaranteed to KEPCO.   Separate successful bidders will be selected for each project, and thesame company will not be allowed to participate in both generating plants.South Korea's largest and most powerful industrial groups are expected tooffer strong competition for the projects.   Further solicitations after the two 800-MW plants are almost certainbecause electricity demand in South Korea is projected to average 5.5%between 1996 and 2006.   Currently, installed capacity in South Korea is about 31,810 MW, with30,188 MW generated by KEPCO. About 62% is fueled by oil, coal or naturalgas, 28.7% is nuclear power and 9.3% is hydroelectric.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINDEPENDENT POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   QUEENSLAND, AUSTRALIA, ENCOURAGING BAGASSE PLANTS UNDER NEW PROGRAM   Queensland, Australia, is promoting bagasse-fired, waste-to-energycogeneration plants among the state's sugar mills and is encouragingdomestic and international joint venture partners.   Under the just-created Queensland Sugar Power Pool Agreement, powerproduced by using the waste products of making sugar will be purchased atspecial tariffs under a long-term agreement by the Queensland Transmission& Supply Corp. (QT&SC) starting January 1998.   Up to 95 MW will be purchased by (QT&SC) when the program begins, but by2002, the limit will increase to 200 MW, said Queensland energy ministerTony McGrady.   The mills will make use of the thermal energy created by thecogeneration units, but only a very small portion of the electricgeneration.   The program is an effort by the government to explore ``all avenues ofenvironmentally friendly generation options,'' McGrady said.   The effort is expected to generate worldwide interest, the governmentsaid, and various private sector companies are welcome to participate, ifthey can strike a deal with one of the sugar mills agreeing to providefuel.   So far, sugar mills participating in the project include the three CSRLtd. mills located at Invicta, Kalamia and Inkerman and the mills of SouthJohnstone and Maryborough. The mills are the initial members of theQueensland Sugar Power Pool Agreement, but others are expected to join.   Bagasse is the part of the cane stalk remaining after the millingprocess.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINDEPENDENT POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   NATIONAL POWER, POWERGEN MAY FACE MORE AGENCY-ORDERED PLANT SELL-OFFS   U.K. generation companies National Power and PowerGen may be forced tosell additional plants beyond the already-required 6,000 MW, if theirpending acquisitions of regional electric companies (RECs) are cleared.   PowerGen has bid to acquire Midlands Electricity (IPR, 22 Sept '95, 1)and National Power has proposed buying Southern Electric (IPR, 6 Oct '95,13). Both bids, accepted by the RECs, have been referred to the Monopolies& Mergers Commission (IPR, 1 Dec '95, 17). A decision is expected by March22.   London Electricity is pressing industry regulator Stephen Littlechild,director of the Office of Electricity Regulation (OFFER), for a reductionin the generating capacity of PowerGen and National Power.   According to a London Electricity spokesman, there is considerableconcern at the size and potential market share of the vertically integratedgroups. ``We are not against vertical integration,'' he said, ``but it mustnot be at the expense of stifling other suppliers. We would like to seemore generators and suppliers rather than less, which may happen if thesemergers go ahead.''   PowerGen is already disposing of 2,000 MW of capacity to the EasternGroup, while National Power is evaluating bids from Enron, AES Corp.,Eastern Group and Mission Energy for the 2,000-MW plant at West Burton inNottinghamshire and two, 1,000-MW plants at Ironbridge in Shropsire andRugeley in Staffordshire (IPR, 22 Sept '95, 8; 6 Oct '95, 1).   National Power forecasts its transaction will be complete by March 31.All four bidders want to acquire the three plants, but it is possible theywill be sold separately to individual bidders.   However, London Electricity said further sales are necessary to enablemore players to enter the market, although the two generators point totheir decline in market share since privatization and insist that furthersales are unnecessary.   The RECs are also concerned about the possible effects on the powerpool. Southeast distributor Seeboard said the workings of the pool shouldbe scrutinized along with other commercial issues and the voting structureto ensure that bigger groups do not dominate the market.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINDEPENDENT POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   UKRAINE GETS $1.8-BILLION WESTERN AID FOR POWER; BIG ABB PROJECT DEAD   A protocol signed by the Ukraine and the ``G-7'' Western industrialnations in Ottawa commits the West to provide $1.8-billion in loans forpower plant construction and rehabilitation projects in the Ukraine inreturn for closure of 3,000 MW of remaining nuclear capacity at theChernobyl site by 2000.   The west will also contribute $498-million towards Chernobyl cleanup anddecommissioning costs.   The protocol calls for much of the replacement power funding to be spenton completion of two 1,000-MW reactors at Khmelnitsky and Rovno and therest to go into thermal and hydro plant rehabilitation, pumped-storageprojects and energy conservation.   The agreement to fund the nuclear plants officially ends chances forconstruction at this time of a 2,300-MW, gas-fired combustion turbineproject near the Chernobyl site that was proposed in May 1995 by aconsortium led by Asea Brown Boveri (IPR, 16 June '95, 18).   The ABB group also included CMS Generation, Kawasaki, Skanska AB ofSweden, Mannesmananlangebau of Germany and Danish Power as well as localUkranian groups.   The group proposed a crash construction schedule, which would allow theproject to start generating power within 24 months of construction startand be fully completed within 36 months. They said this would be the bestway to insure new power supplies in time for the closure deadline of 2000.   However, the project met stiff resistance inside the Ukraine fromsupporters of nuclear power and the national utility Minenergo. Criticsargued the country could not afford the cost of gas from Russia that wouldbe needed to fuel the plant. The Ukraine has had chronic problems payingRussia for both gas and power supplies in recent years.   The gas project also was based on initial estimates the west wouldprovide up to $4-billion for the Chernobyl cleanup and replacement powerprojects. However, as talks continued during 1995, it became clear the westwas not willing to commit to such a large sum.   An ABB spokesman in Zurich said the gas project clearly now had a ``lowpriority'' in Ukrainian planning and that his company was looking atparticipation in various plant rehabilitation projects. Siemens of Germanyhas already been active in promoting such projects and it is possible ABBwill team with Siemens.   The European Community has already funded a study by Electricite deFrance, Tractebel Engineering and IVO of Finland on what will be needed tocomplete work on the two nuclear plants.   The Dec. 20, 1995, protocol also contains language committing theUkraine to continue developing a ``financially sound electric power marketwith market-based pricing'' that will encourage energy conservation andattract international investment.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINDEPENDENT POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   U.K.'S NATIONAL POWER PLANS 60-MW PROJECT IN UNITED ARAB EMIRATES   The U.K.'s National Power has signed a memorandum of understanding withAjman, a sheikdom operating as part of the federation of United ArabEmirates (UAE), to build, own and operate a $120-million, 50-MW to 60-MW,desalination and power plant.   National Power will hold a 49% equity stake in the project, while adomestic partner, Bin Sofan Trading Co., is expected to hold 51%.   When complete, the project will also produce about 5-million gallons/dayof desalinated sea water.   The project is considered the first private power plant in the UAE andthe first power project in Ajman.   National Power is holding power-purchase agreement negotiations with theUAE's Ministry of Electricity & Water. The agency is responsible forelectricity supplies in some of the UAE's northern emirates, includingAjman, Fujairah, Ras al-Khaimah and Umm al-Quwain.   Within the UAE, the Abu Dhabi Dept. of Water & Electricity, the DubaiElectricity & Water Authority, and the Sharjah Water & ElectricityDepartment supply power to their respective areas.   UAE power demand is projected to increase to 6,900 MW by 1999, based onload growth of about 20% annually. Current installed capacity is about4,350 MW, produced by six gas-fired power stations and seven smallgenerating units.   About 1,440 MW of government-owned projects are in some stage ofconstruction. Many of the planned projects are associated with desalinationplants.   Also, the Ministry of Electricity & Water and the Dubai Electricity &Water Authority are separately evaluating prospects for several moreprojects, totaling about 710 MW.   Within the UAE, the government is planning a large expansion ofliquefied natural gas production and transportation facilities. Theexpansion, estimated to cost about $3-billion, will be undertaken by theAbu Dhabi Gas Liquefaction Co..   The United Arab Emirates is a federation of seven small semi-autonomousprincipalities located on the Persian Gulf.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINDEPENDENT POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   MET-ED MAY PAY UP TO $35-MILLION TO KILL 227-MW AIR PRODUCTS PACT   Air Products & Chemicals of Allentown, Pa., has ended talks withMetropolitan Edison aimed at restructuring the contract for a planned227-MW coal project (IPR, 6 Oct '95, 7).   After three months, the companies could not agree on new terms and willnow negotiate a buyout that could reach $35-million to cover Air Products'development costs.   To replace the capacity and 100 MW from another recent buyout, Met-Edmay seek new supplies, a spokesman said.   Air Products was pursuing the project strictly as a developer, and wouldhave operated it at the site of the P.H. Glatfelter paper company in YorkCounty, selling steam to the mill and power to Met-Ed, a unit of GeneralPublic Utilities.   Although Air Products worked alone, the project was being developedunder the name York County Energy Partners L.P., because it planned to seeklimited partners once the plant was operational.   According to Brad Hahn, Air Products director of business development,the company completed all of the design work and had received an air permitfrom the Pennsylvania Dept. of Environmental Protection, as well as afavorable environmental impact statement (EIS) from the U.S. EnvironmentalProtection Agency.   He could not estimate how much the company spent on development costs,but said it would be covered by the final buyout figure.   When the parties began talking in September, Met-Ed estimated theexisting contract would cost $940-million above market rates during its25-year term. It proposed that Air Products switch its design from coal togas, since that would reduce capacity rates.   The utility also offered to let the developer participate in GPU's newgas pool, which was developed for utility peakers, but is being madeavailable to non-utility generators who agree to renegotiate contracts.   However, ``it became clear that we would not be able to agree,'' Hahntold Independent Power Report. The main sticking point was contract length,since Met-Ed wanted only eight to 10 years, while Air Products preferred aterm closer to the original 25 years. Other details also blocked theagreement, he added.   A Met-Ed spokesman said the utility will begin considering alternativesto replace the 227 MW, as well as the 100 MW it lost when it bought out theCrown/Vista coal contact from partners Mission Energy, Ahlstrom Developmentand Entergy Power Development for $30-million (IPR, 8 Sept '95, 5).   Met-Ed agreed to that buyout because it saw the contract costing$298-million over market rates during its 20-year life.   The spokesman did not say whether Met-Ed would seek bids for newsupplies.   Air Products & Chemicals has equity stakes of 176 MW in seven operatingplants that produce 303 MW, including three in-house projects. The firmalso has four projects in development, representing about 650 MW to 725 MW,including a coal gasification plant in the Czech Republic that is currentlyon hold.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINDEPENDENT POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   PANDA TO REFILE LAWSUIT CHARGING FLA. POWER BLOCKED 115-MW PROJECT   Panda Energy, after voluntarily withdrawing its $345-million federalsuit against Florida Power without prejudice in mid-December, said it willfile the suit again (Case No. 95-992-CIV-T-24 C) (IPR, 11 Aug '95, 1).   The suit alleged the utility unfairly interfered with construction of a115-MW cogeneration plant in Polk County, which was to supply Florida Powerwith 74.9 MW of firm power under a standard-offer contract.   Florida Power has since filed a countersuit against Panda in the samecourt, U.S. District Court, Middle District of Florida, Tampa Division(Case No. 95-2145-CIV-T-25-B). In addition, the state Public ServiceCommission denied two requests made by Panda in a related action.   Panda's general counsel Bill Nordlund said the withdrawal was astrategic move, ``and we still plan to prosecute this matter and moveforward on it. I can't comment on when or what court. We don't want to givean advance of our intentions to the other side.''   The countersuit filed by Florida Power at the end of December soughtdeclaratory judgments against the facts alleged in Panda's suit, which wasa safeguard in case Panda refiled the case, according to Florida Powerattorney James Fama.   Florida Power asked the court to issue declaratory judgments rulingthat:   Panda did not have a superior legal right to negotiate for a natural gastransmission contract with the city of Lakeland, and that the utility didnot interfere with Panda's rights with the city;   Panda was not entitled to a standard-offer contract if it builds a unitlarger than 75 MW, the largest allowed under PSC rules;   Panda was not entitled to rates under a standard-offer contract beyondDecember 2016, rather than 2026 as Panda sought;   Panda breached its contract by failing to begin construction on theunit, which was scheduled to go on line in January 1997;   The utility also asked the court to declare remedies to Florida Powerfrom Panda's breach, plus additional relief.   On Jan. 3, the PSC refused to reconsider a decision the PSC made on Dec.5, which said the PSC had jurisdiction over standard-offer contracts andthe Florida Power/Panda dispute. It also refused to grant Panda a 90-dayextension beyond Jan. 5 to file testimony in that case (Docket No.950110-EI).   As a result, a hearing at the PSC was scheduled for Feb. 19, a staffrecommendation was due April 18, and the commission was scheduled to voteon April 30.   Nordlund said Panda made the deadline for filing testimony Jan. 5, andadded, ``We think Florida Power's suit is ludicrous.''Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINDEPENDENT POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   ENERGY INITIATIVES BEATS FLA. POWER IN COURT ON RATES FOR 112-MW PLANT   Energy Initiatives Inc. won a partial summary judgment Jan. 4 in a caseagainst Florida Power concerning rates for the developer's 112-MWcogeneration plant in Umatilla, Fla.   The project company, Lake Cogen, said the utility was paying it on anas-available basis at times when it should have been paying for firmcapacity and energy.   Florida Power attorney James Fama confirmed two other non-utilitygenerators, Pasco Cogen, also 112 MW and owned by Energy Initiatives, andthe 120-MW Orlando Cogen, developed by Air Products & Chemicals, havesimilar court actions pending.   The Lake Cogen case, filed in state circuit court in Lake County, willdetermine whether firm capacity payments should be made based on a modelused by Florida Power, or a separate method Lake Cogen said was called forin the contract (Case No. 94354 CA-01, Division 8).   Florida Power pays NUGs both capacity and energy payments when thetheoretically avoided generating unit would operate, but only as-availableor energy payments if the avoided unit would have been off line.   Florida Power claimed a theoretically avoided 500-MW pulverized coalplant equipped with a scrubber, which was used to determine capacity andenergy payments, would be used by the utility based on four criteria todetermine when the plant would be dispatched on an economic basis.   The four parameters were the cost of variable operations andmaintenance, the price of coal, the heat rate of the unit, and a fuelmultiplier of 1, the last of which Fama said was not a significant factor.   In its motion, Lake Cogen contended other factors, such as environmentalcompliance, should be used in determining economic dispatchability of agenerating unit. It said an actual, operating plant should be used forcomparison, which would be Florida Power's coal-fired Crystal River units 1and 2.   Judge Don Briggs ruled the parameters for dispatchability should bebased on a real unit and not only the four Florida Power was using. Heordered a more accurate model be developed, which would be used todetermine how much Lake Cogen should be paid.   That cost information will be compared to actual payments, which couldbe used to determine an award at a later date, assuming the model showsLake Cogen was underpaid. A schedule for further proceedings was not set.   Kelly Tomblin, legal director for Energy Initiatives, a unit of GeneralPublic Utilities, said Florida Power changed the method of payment inAugust 1994. Although the developer receives payments for firm capacity andas-available sales, firm capacity payments ``have been very limitedrecently,'' she said.   ``We believe Florida Power always believed it would be based on a realoperating unit and the judge agreed,'' Tomblin said. ``We think it is goodfor cogenerators and good for us in Florida.''   Tomblin said it would be very difficult to estimate the amount ofdamages Florida Power might have to pay until after the judge approves thefinal modeling and makes a ruling.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINDEPENDENT POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   NIMO: PURPA PREEMPTS NEW YORK LAW REQUIRING TAX REIMBURSEMENT TO QFS   Niagara Mohawk Power has asked the Federal Energy Regulatory Commissionto act against a New York State law that requires NiMo to pay natural gastax reimbursements to qualifying facilities.   NiMo has paid almost $18-million in reimbursements since the law waspassed in 1991, it said.   The company wants FERC to bring an enforcement action against the NewYork Public Service Commission to bar it from implementing the law, whichdirects the PSC to order utilities to reimburse QFs for natural gas importtax payments that the state requires QFs to pay on fuel used to generatepower sold to the utilities.   According to NiMo, the state law is preempted by the Public UtilityRegulatory Policies Act and FERC's PURPA rules. ``The PSC cannot both obeythe New York statute and heed its obligations under Sec. 210 of PURPA,''NiMo said (Docket No. EL96-26).   The legislature imposed a monthly ``privilege tax'' on certain gasimporters amounting to 4.25% of the price paid for gas imported into thestate for use or consumption. For cogenerators, the amount of gas taxed isthat used in producing power for sale to utilities, not the gas used toproduce power or steam for steam hosts.   Utilities may pass the payments through in fuel cost adjustments.   NiMo itself paid about $7.2-million in 1994 and $4.8-million in 1995through Sept. 30. The company projected it will pay between $7.2-million in1996 and $13.5-million in 2006.   FERC's 1995 rulings in cases involving Connecticut Power & Light (IPR,27 Jan '95, 10) and Southern California Edison (IPR, 24 March '95, 4)``leave no room for doubt that this New York statute is preempted'' becauseit requires utilities to pay above avoided-cost rates to QFs, NiMo said(IPR, 21 April '95, 1; 24 March '95, 1).Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINDEPENDENT POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   N.Y. JUDGE SEES ISO AS KEY IN MOVE TO WHOLESALE COMPETITION, ACCESS   An administrative law judge has recommended New York set up anindependent system operator to formalize wholesale competition and ensure asmooth transition to retail competition.   Her recommended decision in the state's Competitive Opportunitiesproceeding also calls for separating transmission and distribution fromgeneration and for recovering stranded costs with an access charge imposedby a distribution company.   Administrative law judge Judith Lee of the state's Dept. of PublicService filed her recommendation Dec. 22 with Ronald Liberty, deputydirector for the Energy and Water Division. Subject to review by the PublicService Commission, it aims to lower New York's high electricity rates andkeep industry in the state.   Key parts of the more than 200-page review are:   -- Stranded costs ``may be made unrecoverable by the transition fromregulation to a competitive market for electricity.'' These costs could berecovered by a separate mechanism outside the market, such as anon-bypassable access charge or wires charge imposed by a distributioncompany.   -- Transmission and distribution should be separate from generation``to limit the exercise of market power,'' and T&D companies will need toserve all would-be buyers in the short term.   Lee said she saw as ``critical'' the reliability of the bulk powersystem, noting that it should not be sacrificed in any way to achieve thepotential price reduction that may be associated with a system of retailaccess. Therefore, ``effective competition at the wholesale level should beestablished first, with an eye toward adding retail access as rapidly aspossible once a market is established and reliability is ensured.''   No timetable for the ``as rapidly as possible'' transition to retailaccess is available, a PSC spokesperson told Independent Power Report.   Lee's recommendation was a ``tremendous disappointment'' to New Yorkindustrials ``and to any advocate of full and open retail competition,''said Barbara Brenner, counsel to Multiple Interveners, the industrial usersgroup. ``It delays, without schedule, retail competition and, in fact,appears to delay even the implementation of wholesale competition for twoyears.''Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINDEPENDENT POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   PACIFIC GENERATION BUYS 25% INTEREST IN 100-MW ONTARIO PLANT FROM DESTEC   Pacific Generation, a unit of PacifiCorp, has acquired a 25% interest inthe 100-MW Kingston cogeneration project under construction in Ontario,Canada, from Destec Energy Inc.   Destec retains 50% ownership in the gas-fired project, located inErnestown Township. The plant will supply power to the Ontario Hydro gridand process heat to Celanese Canada's Millhaven polyester plant.   PanCanadian Petroleum holds the remaining 25% interest and will supplynatural gas to the plant, which will enter service in late-1996.   Pacific Generation and Destec are already partners in thealmost-completed 240-MW Crockett cogeneration plant near San Francisco,which will begin operation in April. Other partners are Tomen Power andEnergy Investors Fund. Pacific Gas & Electric will buy the power.   ``The Kingston project fits our plan for growing our business throughacquisition of existing facilities and the development of new powerprojects,'' said John Miller, Pacific Generation president and chiefexecutive officer.   In October, Miller had said that after several years of being in a``holding pattern,'' his company intended to aggressively expand itsindependent power activities (IPR, 6 Oct '95, 14). In November, the companysaid it was beefing up its top management by hiring five people fordomestic and international expansion (IPR, 17 Nov '95, 3).   The company, based in Portland, Ore., was formed in 1989 with the mergerof Pacific Power & Light and Utah Power & Light. Ownership and operatinginterests of projects developed by Pacific P&L affiliate Onsite Energy Inc.and UP&L affiliate Energy National Inc. were transferred to PacificGeneration.   Pacific Generation holds an interest in 11 power plants in the U.S.totaling 703 MW. Destec has equity in 19 operating plants totaling 2,810 MWand has seven projects with over 1,700 MW in construction or advanceddevelopment.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINDEPENDENT POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   MISSION FORMALLY EXITS 400-MW PROJECT AT WEYERHAEUSER MILL IN WASH. STATE   Weyerhaeuser Co. of Longview, Wash., and Mission Energy told Washingtonstate regulators they have reached a stipulated agreement over developmentof a 400-MW, gas-fired cogeneration plant, that would give Weyco fullrights to develop the plant alone at its Longview paper mill (IPR, 1 Dec'95, 13; 29 Jan '93, 1).   Weyco asked the Energy Facility Site Evaluation Council to amend itscertification agreement to reflect its decision to proceed alone.   It also asked for an amendment that would extend the agreement for 18months.   EFSEC will make a decision in February on the request. If the councilapproves the deal, ``we will require the governor to sign the newagreement,'' said Jason Zeller, EFSEC manager.   Zeller said the two companies reached a stipulated pact after beingpressured by EFSEC to resolve their differences on their own. ``We wereunhappy'' that the companies had been unable to settle their dispute overthe development of the project, he said. The original permit expired inAugust.   Weyco officials indicated to the council they were still interested indeveloping the plant eventually, even though the company recently agreed topurchase 150 MW from the Bonneville Power Administration to cover part ofits 300-MW load at the Longview mill.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINDEPENDENT POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   AES, ONTARIO HYDRO UNIT IN TALKS TO BUY 2,700-MW ARGENTINE PLANT   A strategic alliance of Ontario Hydro International, a unit of OntarioHydro, and AES Corp. of Arlington, Va., has opened talks with thegovernment of Argentina concerning the acquisition of the 2,700-MW Yacyretahydro project, now under construction on the Parana River, which forms theborder between Argentina and Paraguay.   Other unidentified developers have also opened discussions on theproject, jointly owned by the governments of Argentina and Paraguay.   Previously, an international solicitation was scheduled for release inAugust 1995, but was not issued (IPR, 30 June '95, 1).   Analysts said it is unlikely Ontario Hydro and AES could acquire theplant via a negotiations, and would more likely have to compete in aninternational solicitation open to all.   The project consists of 20 turbines of 135 MW each.   Officials of Ontario Hydro International and AES met recently withArgentine government officials about the project.   Ontario Hydro officials said it and AES may form a consortium to enter abid for Yacyreta when and if it is offered via a solicitation.   Both companies have equity in other South American electric projects.   The plant will be completed by the middle of 1998.   Argentine officials confirmed representatives of the two companies metwith energy officials, but nothing substantive came of the meeting.Meetings with other private developers are taking place.   Separately, a consortium known as LISTA will build and operate atransmission system to move power generated by the Yacyreta plant.   LISTA consists of Jose Cartellone Construcciones Civiles SA(Cartellone), Sideco Americana SA (Sidecdeco), Italy's Impresa Frate SpA.(Frate), Pirelli Consultora Conductores e Instalaciones SA (Pirelli),Construccion Obras de Ingenieria SA (Codi), and Electroingenieria SA.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINDEPENDENT POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   TAIWAN FIRM PROPOSES 1,010-MW BOT HYDRO PROJECT IN HONDURAS   Oslow Associates Ltd. of Taiwan has proposed to the government ofHonduras development of a $2-billion, 1,010-MW hydroelectric project on abuild-operate-transfer basis.   Oslow, a large trading company based in Taiwan, submitted the proposalfollowing a government trade mission to Honduras.   The Honduran government tentatively accepted the proposal, pendingcompletion of a number of subsequent agreements.   The project will be financed through government-backed loans in Taiwanand with funds from foreign banks.   Additional equity partners are expected to be involved in the project,but none have been identified, Honduran officials said.   Load growth is high in Honduras, but the country is relatively small.Installed capacity--two-thirds hydro--is less than 600 MW. Honduras is saidto have an estimated untapped hydro potential of about 3,600 MW.   Overall, up to 800 MW could be available to the private sector inHonduras by 1999.   If the 1,010-MW hydro project is completed, it could export power toother countries in Central America via the 1,100-mile, high-tensiontransmission grid known as the Electricity Interconnection System forCentral America, now in development.   The Inter-American Development Bank is expected to eventually provide a$157-million syndicated loan to partially finance the transmission grid.   The government of Taiwan also agreed to provide undisclosed financingfor the transmission project, which would allow each country to supply orbuy electricity from all others, and serve as an emergency electric supplybackup.   Recently, Mosbacher Power Group (MPG) of Houston launched pursuit ofsmaller independent power projects in Honduras, mostly within theindustrial power niche for projects between 20 MW and 50 MW (IPR, 17 Nov'95, 16).Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINDEPENDENT POWER REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   SPAIN'S ENDESA SELLS 9.7% OF EDENOR IN ARGENTINA FOR ABOUT $76-MILLION   Spanish electric utility Empresa Nacional de Electricidad SA (Endesa)said its Endesa Group sold a 9.7% stake in Argentine electricitydistribution company Edenor to Banco Santander de Negocios for about (U.S.)$76-million.   Less than two weeks earlier, Endesa paid $156-million to expand itsequity stake in Edenor by 19.5 percentage points, pushing total holdings to31% (IPR, 29 Dec '95, 12). Endesa bought that piece of Edenor from theArgentine government.   Endesa said the sale to Banco Santander de Negocios was made forfinancial reasons.   Endesa said it will maintain its 21.3% holdings in Edenor with jointventure partners, Astra CAPSA of Argentina, Electricite de France, SocieteD'Amenagement Urbain et Rural of France, Empresa Nacional HidroelectricaRibargozana of Spain, and J.P. Morgan.   Endesa officials said the company remains strongly interested inadditional equity roles in Latin American electricity projects.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List WT02-B35-24IA086-000616-B011-213http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/ey68.html 205.156.212.5 19970121235959 text/html 87618HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Tuesday, 21-Jan-97 23:57:55 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:40:50 GMTContent-length: 87433Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ey68.html Sample Issue Copyright INDUSTRIAL ENERGY BULLETIN via NewsNet January 12, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES CLOSING PRICES FOR NATURAL GAS FUTURES CONTRACTS (325 words) INDUSTRIAL ELECTRICITY PRICES BY UTILITY (292 words) EARLY DECEMBER FUEL OIL PRICES (178 words) CITY ATTORNEY BLASTS TOLEDO EDISON'S NUMEROUS SPECIAL INDUSTRIAL DISCOUNTS (522 words) ELCON DETAILS PLAN FOR RESTRUCTURING, ISSUES `ROAD MAP' TO COMPETITIVE ERA (1292 words) NEES REACHES DEAL WITH N.H. PUC STAFF FOR WHEELING PILOT THAT WILL BEGIN IN MAY (455 words) MOJAVE PIPELINE PLANS NEW OPEN SEASON IN JAN. OR FEB. TO DECIDE FATE OF PROJECT (358 words) N.J. MOVES PSE&G LGAC TO MONTH BASIS, TO LET BIG USERS PLAY MARKET BETTER (187 words) RATE DESIGN IN WHAT MAY BE PG&E'S LAST GENERAL RATE CASE, INDUSTRIALS WIN 8% ELECTRIC CUTS (613 words) SOUTH CAROLINA INDUSTRIALS TO CHALLENGE BROAD RATE HIKES APPROVED FOR SCE&G (722 words) CONSUMERS INKS LONG-TERM DISCOUNT DEALS WITH THREE MICH. INDUSTRIALS (475 words) PUC CLOSES PECO INTERRUPTIBLE RIDER; INDUSTRIALS SAY GROWTH WILL SUFFER (496 words) N.C. MUNICIPAL SAYS COINCIDENT-PEAK RATES ATTRACT, RETAIN INDUSTRIALS (877 words) MONSANTO PHOSPHORUS UNIT INKS LONG-TERM DEAL WITH UTAH P&L (235 words) INTERVENTION NIPSCO INDUSTRIALS TO SEE $1.5-MILLION REFUND IN DISPUTED INSURANCE CLAIM (342 words) UTILITY RESTRUCTURING PA. FIRMS STRESS CHOICE OF SUPPLIERS; SEE UTILITIES CONTROLLING POWER POOL (558 words) ASSEMBLY SPEAKER BACKS RETAIL ACCESS IN N.Y.; NO GUARANTEE ON STRANDED COSTS (455 words) INDUSTRIAL DSM SEEN GETTING CUSTOMIZED, INCLUDING HELP ON PRODUCTION, POLLUTION (304 words) UTILITY COMPETITION INDIANA QUARRY'S REQUEST FOR SERVICE FROM PSI ENERGY OVER CO-OP IS APPROVED (417 words) WEPCO IN DISPUTE WITH UPPER PENINSULA POWER OVER SERVING MINE EXPANSION (712 words) ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT MAINE PS WINS APPROVAL FOR DISCOUNTS FOR INDUSTRIALS CREATING NEW LOAD (419 words) SIGECO CREDITS DEVELOPMENT EFFORTS FOR WINNING MAJOR NEW TOYOTA PLANT (288 words) WABASH VALLEY REORGANIZES ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT RATES FOR INDUSTRIALS (388 words) TROUBLED VERDIGRIS VALLEY CO-OP DENIES ALLEGATIONS IN CLASS ACTION LAWSUIT (417 words) NYPA ASKS PSC TO KEEP OTHER UTILITIES FROM COMPETING ON INDUSTRIAL RATES (473 words) CopyrightINDUSTRIAL ENERGY BULLETIN via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   CLOSING PRICES FOR NATURAL GAS FUTURES CONTRACTSCLOSING PRICES FOR NATURAL GAS FUTURES CONTRACTSNEW YORK MERCANTILE EXCHANGEDecember 27, 1995--January 8, 1996$/mmBtuDelivery Months        Contract    Open        Feb     Mar     April   MayDate    Volume      Interest    1996    1996    1996    1996Dec 27  41,781      162,606     2.868   2.298   1.999   1.849Dec 28  38,814      163,771     2.509   2.135   1.886   1.786Dec 29  18,382      162,783     2.619   2.195   1.901   1.796Jan 1                       Holiday; Market ClosedJan 2   21,117      162,763     2.859   2.295   1.971   1.861Jan 3   34,362      164,448     2.986   2.377   2.005   1.875Jan 4   25,754      164,251     2.964   2.376   2.023   1.888Jan 5   27,268      N/A         2.916   2.424   2.059   1.919Jan 8                       Market Closed Due to Weather                           Delivery MonthsDate    June    July    Aug     Sept    Oct     Nov     Dec        1996    1996    1996    1996    1996    1996    1996Dec 27  1.784   1.759   1.764   1.774   1.814   1.896   1.983Dec 28  1.746   1.731   1.736   1.751   1.799   1.891   1.978Dec 29  1.756   1.741   1.746   1.761   1.809   1.901   1.988Jan 1                       Holiday; Market ClosedJan 2   1.811   1.776   1.776   1.786   1.836   1.929   2.016Jan 3   1.820   1.785   1.785   1.795   1.845   1.938   2.025Jan 4   1.833   1.798   1.799   1.810   1.861   1.954   2.041Jan 5   1.859   1.824   1.819   1.827   1.882   1.976   2.063Jan 8                Market Closed Due to WeatherNote: The standard NYMEX gas futures contract represents 10,000 mmBtu. Forexample, a single contract, purchased on Wednesday, January 3, for deliveryin December, 1996, was valued at $2.025/mmBtu or $20,250.   Volume represents the total number of contracts traded that day.   Open Interest is the number of contracts in existance on that day whichhave not been satisfied by an offsetting sale or purchase. The minimumprice change is one-tenth of a cent per mmBtu; the maximum daily pricechange is 10 cents per mmBtu,or $1,000 per contract. Trading terminates atthe close of business, eight business days prior to the first calendar dayof the delivery month. Delivery point is Sabine Pipe Line Company's HenryHub in Erath, Louisiana.   Source: New York Mercantile ExchangeCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINDUSTRIAL ENERGY BULLETIN via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   INDUSTRIAL ELECTRICITY PRICES BY UTILITYINDUSTRIAL ELECTRICITY PRICES BY UTILITYNew England/Mid-Atlantic   Industrial electricity prices for  April 1994 and April 1995 for majorelectric utilities in the New England/Mid-Atlantic region of the UnitedStates. Prices (cents/kWh) include demand, fuel adjustment, and othercharges, and are intended as a general index rather than a specific pricefor industrials on-line with a given utility.                                             April   April     %                                             '94     '95     Change 1.      NY--Consolidated Edison            11.04   11.23      1.7 2.      MA--Commonwealth Electric           8.54    9.68     13.3 3.      NH--PS New Hampshire                9.40    9.49      0.9 4.      CT--United Illuminating             9.01    8.88     -1.5 5.      MA--Boston Edison                   7.95    8.69      9.3 6.      MA--Western Mass Electric           7.80    8.46      8.5 7.      CT--Connecticut LIght & Power       8.38    7.93     -5.4 8.      NJ--Public Service Electric & Gas   7.21    7.91      9.7 9.      NJ--Jersey Central P&L              9.06    7.87    -13.110.     MA--Massachusetts Electric           7.58    7.67      1.211.     RI--Narragansett Electric            6.85    7.61     11.012.     PA--Philadelphia Electric            7.37    7.05     -4.313.     ME--Central Maine Power              6.15    5.66     -7.914.     PA--Pennsylvania Power & Light       5.56    5.46     -1.815.     NY--Niagara Mohawk Power             5.62    5.43     -3.516.     VT--Green Mountain Power             5.86    5.20    -11.217.     DE--Delmarva Power & Light           4.25    4.53      6.618.     PA--West Pennsylvania Power          4.49    4.51      0.419.     NY--New York Power Authority         2.14    2.09     -2.1   Prices are based on gross revenue and sales figures given to the Dept.of Energy each month via form EIA-826. Figures are preliminary and subjectto  revision at the end of the year.   Industrial Electricity Prices by Utility appears  in alternate issues,each time presenting one of six different regions of the country in thefollowing order: New England/Mid-Atlantic; Southeast; East Central; WestCentral; Mountain; Pacific. Each region is updated every six months. TheNew England/Mid-Atlantic region last ran in the May 19, 1995 issue, page5.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINDUSTRIAL ENERGY BULLETIN via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   EARLY DECEMBER FUEL OIL PRICESEARLY DECEMBER FUEL OIL PRICES   Refiners' posted prices at end of month. No. 6 and No. 4 fuel oil are indollars per 42-gallon barrel. Prices are generally for tank cars goingdirectly to consumers rather than for resale.                                 Dec     Nov     Dec                                 '95     '95     '94No. 6 Fuel Oil ($/bbl)0.3% sulfur     Hess, New York             24.95   21.45   21.65        Coastal, New York       24.10   22.10   22.150.5% sulfur     Hess, Philadelphia         22.65   20.15   20.85        Coastal, Boston         25.00   21.25   21.751.0% sulfur     Hess, Philadelphia         20.65   18.55   19.802.1% sulfur     Hess, Wilmington           19.15   17.05   18.102.5% sulfur     Global, New York           18.40   17.90   18.05     High sulfur        Global New York         18.05   17.80   18.35No. 4 Fuel Oil ($/bbl)0.3% sulfur        Hess, Philadelphia      25.20   22.45   22.000.5% sulfur        Global, Boston          29.80   24.80   --        Alliance Boston         29.80   24.80   26.001.0% sulfur        Global, Boston          28.80   24.60   --        Alliance, Boston        28.80   24.60   25.00No. 2 Fuel Oil (cents/gallon)Coastal, Boston                 64.50   56.50   55.50Coastal, New York               65.00   57.00   59.00Hess, New York                  62.05   54.85   53.60Hess, Wimington                 62.15   57.10   55.75Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINDUSTRIAL ENERGY BULLETIN via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   CITY ATTORNEY BLASTS TOLEDO EDISON'S NUMEROUS SPECIAL INDUSTRIAL DISCOUNTS   Toledo Edison's practice of negotiating special discount contracts withlarge industrials is coming under heavy fire from the city of Toledo as theutility's $35.2-million electric rate case moves slowly through the OhioPublic Utilities Commission.   Cleveland Electric Illuminating, a Centerior Energy subsidiary as isToledo Edison, is seeking a $83-million rate hike. Together, the twocompanies whose electric rates already are among the highest in the Midwestare asking for $118-million (Case No. 95-300-EL-AIR) (IEB, 21 April '95,5).   In written comments filed recently with the PUC, the city of Toledo tooka dim view of Toledo Ed's request, especially in light of what the cityclaims is an over-reliance on special contracts by the utility.   Toledo city attorney Kerry Bruce objected to a recent PUC staff reportthat recommended the commission approve the full $118-million increase forthe Centerior companies. The report, Bruce said, ``fails to considerwhether the number of incentive contracts and the magnitude of thediscounts provided violate the prohibition (under Ohio law) against thesetting of special rates.''   According to Bruce, the report also ``fails to determine whether theextensive use of incentive contracts to industrial customers exceeds thepurpose of retaining load and instead establishes a rate which is unjustlydiscriminatory and unjustly preferential'' in violation of state law.   Bruce asserted that more than 71% of the potential customers and 92% ofthe potential kWh sales under Toledo Edison's Large Power Rate PV-44 are onspecial contracts. Under such a scenario, ``it is not clear what purposethe tariff rate serves,'' he said.   A Toledo Edison spokeswoman acknowledged that ``yes, we do have a largenumber of our large load customers on special contracts.'' She said specialcontracts often are the best way to address the individual needs ofcustomers, not just with price but with other utility services as well.   Of the 87 large industrials that qualify for Toledo Edison's PV-44 rate,62 either have special contracts or are receiving the utility's economicdevelopment rates, she confirmed. Under the PV-44 rate, a primarytransmission customer pays a monthly demand charge of $18.25/kVA for thefirst 1,000 kVA, $18.05/kVA for the next 29,000 kVA and $17.16/kVA for eachadditional kVA. For sub-transmission, the comparable charges per kVA are$17.48, $17.20 and $16.18.   Despite the relatively high rate, the number of special contracts, Brucetold Industrial Energy Bulletin, is simply unacceptable. ``It violatesratemaking policy to have more load under special contracts than under atariff,'' he said. ``It shows the company is subject to market pressuresand really can't implement its regulatory rate.''   The Toledo Edison spokeswoman defended the special contracts.``Obviously, it is a competitive marketplace,'' she said. Her company``recognizes the need to keep large customers in our service area. It'simportant to keep those jobs and economic development here instead ofletting it leave.''   Bruce summed up the city's position by insisting that the utility shouldnot increase its rates ``because it's bad for business.'' Instead of askingcustomers to pay an additional $118-million annually, both Toledo Edisonand CEI should eliminate heir dividend, he said.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINDUSTRIAL ENERGY BULLETIN via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   ELCON DETAILS PLAN FOR RESTRUCTURING, ISSUES `ROAD MAP' TO COMPETITIVE ERA   Industrials' major national representative on electric power issues, theElectricity Consumers Resource Council, last week issued its detailed``Road Map for the Transition,'' which fills in gaps that critics found inits ``Blueprint for Customer Choice'' (IEB, 6 Oct '95, 1).   The biggest feature of the transition document is a plan for dealingwith utilities' stranded investment. Under ELCON's proposal, utilitieswould be able to recover up to 50% of their costs stranded by competition,but in practice, few if any would be able to get back that much.   The Edison Electric Institute quickly denounced the road map as ``fullof dead ends and some pretty deep potholes.'' EEI criticized the proposalas a one-size-fits-all imposition of a federal structure on the country'selectric system that will benefit ELCON's members ``at the expense ofeveryone else.''   Still, the road map puts ELCON once again in the vanguard of therestructuring movement; its proposal is the first one offered in suchdetail for consideration by Congress and states as they approach majordecisions this year and next. It is surely not the last, however.   Rep. Dan Schaefer (R-Colo.), chairman of the House energy and powersubcommittee, told Industrial Energy Bulletin Monday that the fullCommerce Committee will vote out restructuring legislation this year.Anyone who thinks it will not do so is mistaken, he declared. He urgedinput from all sectors of the industry.   Schaefer reacted only briefly to ELCON's plan. ``I thought they broughtin some good points,'' he said, although he took issue with ELCON'sproposed three-year transition to retail competition, which he called toofast. ``Real comprehensive legislation--you have to give it time,'' hesaid. ``I'm not sure three years is the answer.'' He suggested a phased-inapproach so as not to ``upset things.''   When ELCON released its blueprint in September, it purposely glossedover the stranded-cost issue. Shortly thereafter, Schaefer and WilliamMassey of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission challenged the group tocome forward with specific proposals addressing stranded-cost recovery.   ELCON's answer to those challenges is a five-step process featuring aformula for dividing up responsibility for unmitigable stranded investment.The formula assigns a ``responsibility factor'' to utilities, to bedetermined by state regulators according to how efficiently a utilityresponded to regulatory mandates and whether the company opposed themandates in the first place.   A utility would be required to absorb at least 50% of its unmitigablestranded costs, but in practice it probably would have to bear a greatershare. In a nutshell, the formula starts by assigning stranded costsequally between ratepayers and shareholders, with the responsibility factordeciding how much of the ratepayers' 50% share the utility would berequired to absorb in addition to its 50% share.   But the formula only would be applied after state regulators conductwhat ELCON is billing as ``the last great rate case'' to determine whatsunk costs are not mitigable. In the alternative, the utility could opt tosell its generation assets as a means of determining stranded costs.   Stranded-cost recovery mechanisms would be subject to negotiation withindividual customers and classes of customers. Regulators would deciderecovery in the absence of a negotiated settlement. The utility would haveno more than five years to recover its stranded costs.   ELCON executive director John Anderson called the road map's strandedcost provisions a ``statesmanlike'' effort to end the impasse between ELCONand EEI over stranded-cost recovery. Historically, ELCON has rejected anylevel of stranded-cost recovery in response to EEI's position thatutilities are entitled to 100% recovery. With its proposal on the table,the issue of stranded-cost recovery is now open to negotiation, Andersonsuggested.   But EEI president Thomas Kuhn called ELCON's proposal on stranded costsa nonstarter.   ``I don't see that there's anything new in the ELCON proposal,'' Kuhnsaid in an appearance before the Washington International Energy Group.``We don't see a bargaining chip here at all.''   Kuhn cited ``leading economists,'' FERC and most states as endorsingEEI's position that utilities are entitled to 100% recovery. He predictedthat states will reject ELCON's complicated proposal.   ELCON's road map proposes a three-year transition featuring a ``customerelection period'' based on the telephone industry experience. No later thanthe mid-point of the three-year transition period, state regulators wouldfeature a ``Day One'' designating the beginning of the customer electionperiod. As of that date, every customer would have the right to choose anelectric service provider. Customers would be notified at least six monthsprior to Day One of their right to switch from their utility provider.   At the end of the transition, all generation assets will have beenremoved from rate base. The generation company may continue to sell theasset's power to its affiliated--or previously affiliated--distributioncompany beyond the transition period under terms of a transition contractapproved by the state.   Transition contracts also would provide for ancillary and backupservices to qualifying facilities under the Public Utility RegulatoryPolicies Act. The utility PURPA Reform group criticized this aspect of theproposal as setting the stage for ``the last great PURPA land rush.'' Thegroup called it inconsistent to deny utilities stranded costs whilecommitting them indefinitely to the purchase of QF power.   But ELCON's Anderson rejected utility complaints about uneconomic QFcontracts as ``a thing of the past.'' No utility is entering into high-costcontracts with PURPA facilities today, he said. The importance of PURPA'sSection 210 is not its mandatory purchase provision, but the section'srequirements that utilities provide backup and ancillary services to QFs.   As a check against market power, ELCON's road map calls for operationalunbundling of vertically integrated utilities using the Dept. of Justice'smethodology. While free market entry is an important check, it is notsufficient in and of itself, the group said. Transmission assets would beturned over to an independent system operator and controls would be placedon interaffiliate pricing of transmission services and interaffiliatedistribution transactions.   EEI's Kuhn dismissed as ``specious'' ELCON's concerns about utilitymarket power and industry concentration. The electric utility industry is agreat deal less concentrated than the telephone industry or most ELCONmembers, Kuhn asserted.   ELCON further proposed that, during the first two years of thetransition, owners of FERC-regulated transmission facilities would berequired to file regional transmission group proposals. Siting of newinterstate transmission systems would become FERC's responsibility. ELCONalso proposed establishment of unregulated Private Delivery Systems, orPDSs, such as a line linking two industrial facilities.   If a new transmission line is built privately and without the exerciseof eminent domain, then the line would be unregulated. Owners of existingtransmission systems could petition FERC for a license to opt out from rateregulation if the owner can show it does not exercise market power and theline was not sited through the power of eminent domain. The unregulatedprivately owned transmission facilities would provide competitive pressureson monopoly transmission providers, ELCON suggested.   Independent System Operator franchises would be granted for finiteperiods in order to allow others the opportunity to competitively bid forthe right to serve the franchise, ELCON proposed.   Local distribution services would be unbundled with traditionaldistribution functions split between the ``wires'' business and theelectric services merchant business under the proposal.   ELCON also proposes establishment of joint federal-state boards to makerecommendations for state legislative actions to ensure universal service.   The road map places much of the responsibility for the outcome of thetransition with state regulators, said ELCON's Anderson. The proposal isintended to put to rest concerns of state regulators that ELCON advocates``federalizing the system,'' he said: ``The states are going to have awhole lot to do'' if the road map is implemented.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINDUSTRIAL ENERGY BULLETIN via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   NEES REACHES DEAL WITH N.H. PUC STAFF FOR WHEELING PILOT THAT WILL BEGIN INMAY   New England Electric System has reached an agreement with the NewHampshire Public Utilities Commission staff on conditions for its localaffiliate, Granite State Electric, to carry out a retail wheeling pilotprogram starting in May 1996.   NEES announced the breakthrough Jan. 5 during a briefing to thecommission on collaborative talks between the staff and all utilities inthe state on the two-year pilot, which had been proposed in October tocover 3% of utility load.   No other utility announced on Jan. 5 that it had come to terms with thestaff and, therefore, the commission permitted an extra week until Jan. 12for negotiations.   In the NEES agreement with the staff, only general outlines were madepublic. But sources familiar with the deal said the two sides split thedifference on the key stranded cost issue and that Granite State would beallowed to recoup 75% of its losses caused by the pilot.   Granite State will use an access charge to recover the stranded cost andsaid the level would be low enough to give customers a ``meaningful'' levelof savings from the pilot. Currently, Granite State's average prices are10.3 cents/kWh for residential and 7.9 cents/kWh for industrial users.   In its September draft guidelines, the PUC had proposed 50% recovery oflosses, and NEES and the other utilities had replied by demanding full 100%recovery before they would cooperate on the plan.   Once the NEES deal with the staff is formally proposed to the PUC, it issure to draw fire from both industrial groups that support the original 50%level and probably Public Service of New Hampshire, which has held out for100% recovery.   In a statement, NEES said the agreement was meant to allow the retailwheeling pilot proceed as scheduled in May for Granite State customers evenif it is delayed for other utilities in the state. NEES also said that oncethe plan was approved by the PUC, it would communicate with its customersabout how they could participate in the pilot.   Participants would receive unbundled rates for transmission anddistribution and could chose their power supplier. They also would continueto receive energy conservation programs from the distributor.   In its October proposal, the PUC allotted 3.75 MW of Granite State'sload to the statewide pilot, which would cover a total of 60 MW. PSNH is byfar the largest participant with 44 MW, although this level may be reducedto 33 MW.   While reaching a final deal with PSNH is clearly the top priority of thePUC, the agreement with NEES appears to be a breakthrough that could makeit harder for PSNH to maintain a hard line in future talks.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINDUSTRIAL ENERGY BULLETIN via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   MOJAVE PIPELINE PLANS NEW OPEN SEASON IN JAN. OR FEB. TO DECIDE FATE OFPROJECT   Mojave Pipeline will hold a new ``open season'' auction in January orFebruary, and the outcome could decide the fate of the controversialCalifornia natural gas pipeline project.   Mojave, the Bakersfield, Calif., subsidiary of El Paso Natural Gas, hasbeen trying since 1992 to break into the California market, providing theonly major transportation alternative to Pacific Gas & Electric for bigusers. The line would extend from the Arizona border to Sacramento, withlaterals running to the industrial area around San Francisco Bay. With itsfirm rate of 47 cents/decatherm, the line drew a number of largeindustrials eager to escape PG&E's intrastate transport rates, which canexceed $1/dt.   But the project got bogged down by regulatory demands at both the stateand federal levels (IEB, 8 Sept, 2). Meanwhile, PG&E began discounting itsrates to large users and a number of industrials took those offers, ratherthan wait out the regulatory uncertainty.   In the most recent development, the Federal Energy Regulatory Commissionordered Mojave to hold an open season for shippers on Mojave's existingline--which only extends as far as Bakersfield--to release capacity toprospective northward expansion customers.   Although this does not directly affect the expansion itself, Mojavedecided to throw open the whole project to auction in order to gauge theremaining market interest, according to president Michael Holland.   The existing contracts call for a firm rate of 47 cents/dt, escalatingat 1% annually, for 15 years. That, however, was based on a project of 475million cubic feet per day (mmcf/d). ``If the market supports a smallerproject, rates may hve to go higher,'' Holland said, and he added thatMojave will need at least 325 mmcf/d to proceed at all.   On a positive note, the recent FERC order favored Mojave on a naggingpricing issue that threatened to repel more customers (Docket No.CP93-258-007).   Previously, the commission ruled that Mojave would have to file new ratecases each year, instead of fixing 15-year contracts. But the companycomplained that neither Mojave nor its customers could abide that kind ofuncertainty and the condition was overturned on rehearing.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINDUSTRIAL ENERGY BULLETIN via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   N.J. MOVES PSE&G LGAC TO MONTH BASIS, TO LET BIG USERS PLAY MARKET BETTER   The New Jersey Board of Public Utilities has approved a proposal byPublic Service Electric & Gas to switch gas price calculations from ayearly to a monthly basis.   This will affect the levelized gas adjustment clause (LGAC), which letsutilities recover their actual fuel costs. Traditionally, utilities haveupdated the LGAC on an annual basis, but the market is now so vibrant, thatcustomers need more frequent price signals, according to the BPU.   ``The monthly pricing scheme reflects the current market price and willallow customers to make more informed decisions concerning their energyneeds,'' said BPU president Herbert Tate.   With the LGAC changing on a monthly basis, large users will be able todecide whether to buy from the utility, or from outside suppliers.   Very large industrials mostly buy exclusively from suppliers ormarketers, using the local utility only for transportation. However,smaller industrials may still take gas supplies from their localutilities.   PSE&G, which proposed the alteration, is indifferent to the pricechanges, since utilities only pass along fuel costs on a dollar-for-dollarbasis, and earn no profit.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINDUSTRIAL ENERGY BULLETIN via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   IN WHAT MAY BE PG&E'S LAST GENERAL RATE CASE, INDUSTRIALS WIN 8% ELECTRICCUTS   Pacific Gas & Electric's large industrial customers will enjoy an 8%reduction in electric rates this year while the utility also will reduceits gas rates and pipeline tariffs for core and noncore customers andcogenerators.   The California Public Utilities Commission December 20 ordered PG&E toreduce its 1996 electric rates by $434-million, or an average 5.5%, and gasrates by $262-million, or an average 11.77%, effective January 1. Thecombined rate cuts incorporated PG&E's general rate case with several otherelectric and gas revenue and pipeline expansion proceedings.   The rate cuts will be shared by all customer classes, with all classesgaining at least 50% of the average reduction and large customers limitedto 150% of the average reduction. The PUC reduced PG&E's electric rates forcommercial and small industrial customers 7%, agricultural rates 2.6%, andresidential rates 2.9%.   ``This is great news for PG&E customers,'' said PUC Commissioner JessieKnight, Jr. ``As industrial customers see lower electric costs the economybenefits,'' as higher earnings stimulate job growth, he said   This is expected to be PG&E's last three-year general rate case sincethe PUC plans to adopt performance-based ratemaking in implementing itselectric restructuring order providing incentives for utilities to operatemore efficiently and rewarding productivity.   The PUC has adopted a PBR mechanism for San Diego Gas & Electric and iscurrently considering a PBR proposal by Southern California Edison.Moreover, the PUC has already severed fuel costs, Diablo Canyon ratemaking,and rate of return issues from PG&E's general rate case and reviews them inseparate proceedings.   The PUC noted that the decision represented its first step towardremoving large commercial customers from averaging of core residential andnonresidential gas rates and tariffs. The PUC accordingly approved a slightshift in PG&E's gas revenue requirement from noncore to core customers.   The commission adopted PG&E's proposal to reinstate a seasonal ratedifferential for noncore industrial and cogeneration gas customers. At thesame time, the PUC rejected the Sacramento Municipal Utility District'sproposal for an unbundled backbone transmission rate, noting that PG&Eplans to unbundle tranmission and storage services.   The PUC adopted the recommendations of Administrative Law Judge KimMalcolm, trimming PG&E's 1996 rates more than the utility had requested.PG&E had proposed reducing its 1996 electric rates by $128.7-million andits gas rates by $203.6-million.   The utility had initially sought to reduce its electric rates by$200.8-million and its gas rates by $119.1-million, but modified itsrequests several times. PG&E has proposed rate cuts to reduce its electricrates to 10 cents/kWh by December 1999 from its current rates of 10.5cents/kWh.   ``It is unusual for a utility to request substantial rate reductions inits general rate case but a welcome one,'' PUC President Daniel Fesslersaid. ``This represents significant progress (in reducting electric rates),but it is a beginning.''   PG&E maintained that its final revenue request was a ``bare bones''proposal in line with its ongoing corporate-wide programs to reduceoperating costs and rates. However, ALJ Malcolm found that PG&E's estimatesof doing business in 1996 and $4.6-billion revenue requirement request weretoo high. She stressed that it would be unfair for ratepayers to helpfinance the utility's transition to a competitive electric industry.   Malcolm determined that PG&E had overestimated its future costs fornuclear decommissioning, employee compensation and pension fund, andpipeline replacement. She also found that PG&E's timing of recovery forfossil and geothermal decommissioning costs was unreasonable.   The ALJ also denied PG&E's request for nearly $30-million in ratepayersubsidies for marketing programs designed to retain customers, saying thatthose costs should be paid by shareholders or customers that benefitdirectly from such programs.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINDUSTRIAL ENERGY BULLETIN via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   SOUTH CAROLINA INDUSTRIALS TO CHALLENGE BROAD RATE HIKES APPROVED FORSCE&G   An industrial group in South Carolina will challenge the Public ServiceCommission's late-December decision to approve virtually all of the generalrate increase requested by South Carolina Electric & Gas (Docket No.95-1000-E).   Arthur Fusco, a Columbia, S.C., attorney who represents the SouthCarolina Energy Users Committee, said the group will urge the PSC toreconsider several key aspects of its ruling, which granted SCE&G a 7.34%,$67.5-million general rate increase to be implemented in two phases--a$59.5-million hike as soon as its new, 385-MW baseload plant in Cope, S.C.,begins commercial operation later this month, and an $8-million increasenext Jan. 1.   The investor-owned utility had requested a two-step increase totaling$76.7-million, or 8.35%, primarily to recoup the $436-million cost of theCope plant.   The commission also said it will allow SCE&G to earn a 12% rate ofreturn on common equity, which is lower than the 12.25% rate the utilityhad requested, but higher than both the 11% it had been permitted to earnand the 11.25% to 11.75% range proposed by most of those who testified tothe PSC.   Fusco took issue with the 12% rate of return, noting that even aquarter-percent increase in that rate results in ``significantly higher''rates for industrials and others. He also criticized the PSC's decision tosupport SCE&G's proposals to establish a $50-million, customer-funded stormdamage reserve fund, and to transfer nearly $256.7-million in depreciationreserves from the utility's transmission and distribution assets to itsnuclear generation assets.   The depreciation-reserve shift, Fusco said, will artificially reduceSCE&G's nuclear generation costs, but increase the utility's T&D costs and,presumably, its transmission-access and wheeling costs. That, he continued,would give SCE&G an unfair competitive advantage over other generators, andwill force anyone who seeks access to the utility's T&D system to paymore.   Belton Ziegler, SCE&G's general counsel, said the transfer is anecessary preemptive step to ensure that any industrials that leave theutility for other suppliers help pay for assets SCE&G had developed toserve them.   Without the shift, he said, residential and small-commercial customerswould likely end up paying for ``100%'' of the utility's strandedinvestment, ``and we don't think that would be fair.''   Ziegler continued, ``If you look at the natural gas industry, thebenefits of deregulation went--for the most part--to large customers whocould move off the system'' and avoid, as much as possible, theresponsibility for paying off the investments their old gas companies hadmade to serve them.   ``We are telling industrials that if they leave as generation customersthey still will have to pay [for the nuclear assets SCE&G developed forthem] as transmission and distribution customers.''   Ziegler also dismissed assertions that the storm fund is unfair. He saidthat after Hurricane Hugo battered SCE&G's service territory in September1989, the utility looked into ways it could prepare for the next bigstorm.   ``It became clear that commercial insurance would be prohibitivelyexpensive, and that would make more sense to set up a fund'' like the onethe utility proposed and the PSC just approved.   Fusco said the industrial group is likely to support the South CarolinaDept. of Consumer Affairs' newly announced plan to ask the PSC toreconsider its ruling.   Nancy Vaughn Coombs, DCA's deputy consumer advocate, told IndustrialEnergy Bulletin said the DCA took issue with virtually all aspects of thePSC's ruling, asserting that the rate increase is more than three timeslarger than it should be, and that South Carolina law does not allow thecreation of a storm fund like the one the commission approved.   But Coombs said her agency is most concerned about thedepreciation-reserve transfer, which she said would have the effect ofshifting SCE&G's costs away from its generation sector, which is likely toface increasing competition as electric-industry deregulation takes hold,to its transmission and distribution sector, which is likely to remain amonopoly.   As a result, she said, SCE&G will have ``a significantly increasedprobability'' of recouping--through T&D rates--nuclear investment coststhat ``otherwise would have been subjected to an uncertain policy regardingthe recovery of costs of uneconomic generation capacity.''   Coombs said that if the commission fails to reverse this and other keyelements of its ruling, her agency is likely to file a legal challenge instate court.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINDUSTRIAL ENERGY BULLETIN via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   CONSUMERS INKS LONG-TERM DISCOUNT DEALS WITH THREE MICH. INDUSTRIALS   Three large industrial firms in Consumers Power's territory have strucklong-term power agreements with the utility in exchange for specifieddiscounts.   On Dec. 7, the Michigan Public Service Commission granted ex parteapproval to Consumers' request to become the sole supplier of electricityto Dow Corning and its affiliate Hemlock Semiconductor (Case U-10997).   The PSC also granted ex parte approval to Consumers to provide power toBundy Tubing on a sole-supplier basis (Case U-10995). A contract betweenthe utility and Pharmacia & Upjohn is pending.   Under the agreement between Consumers and Dow Corning, Consumers will besole supplier over an eight-year period. Although specific dollar figureswere not disclosed, Dow said it would save several million in energy costsover the life of the agreement.   The deal covers three key industrial facilities and is crafted to retainan existing load and to meet new power requirements between now and 2003.According to a Consumers spokesman, the utility currently supplies a totalof 50 MW to Dow's corporate center, Hemlock Semiconductor and Dow's Midlandsite, which contains an operating 18-MW, wood-fired cogeneration plant.   Over the eight years of the agreement, this 50 MW gradually be increasedto 110 MW, as the cogeneration unit is shut down next year and HemlockSemiconductor expands its facility, the spokesman said.   A separate agreement calls for the Midland Cogeneration Venture, aConsumers Power affiliate, to supply approximately one billion lbs. ofsteam annually to Dow Corning.   The special contract with Bundy Tubing has an initial term of fiveyears, after which time it is subject to automatic renewal for successiveone-year periods. However, after the initial term either party may cancelthe contract by providing the other with timely written notice.   The contract requires Bundy Tubing to purchase all of its electricityfrom Consumers except for back-up generation. Rates and terms of thepurchase are governed by Consumers' Rate D less 15%. Rate D has a charge of$100/customer/month and an on-peak billing demand charge of $7.85/kW. Inaddition, there is a maximum demand charge of $1.85/kW for primary service,$0.97/kW for subtransmission service and $0.52/kW for transmissionservice.   The special contract with Bundy contains provisions to encourage theindustrial to implement demand and energy savings programs. Consumers hasagreed to reimburse Bundy for the cost of such programs up to $20,000,provided the programs are completed to Consumers' satisfaction before Jan.1, 1996, are designed to improve the industrial firm's operations inColdwater, Mich., and are performed in accordance with applicable laws andregulations.   On Dec. 4, Consumers signed a contract with Pharmacia & Upjohn, itssecond largest industrial customer, to become the sole supplier of 75 MW atdiscounted rates for 10 years. The contract applies to the industrialfirm's research facility in Kalamazoo, Mich., and its manufacturing plantin Portage, Mich.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINDUSTRIAL ENERGY BULLETIN via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   PUC CLOSES PECO INTERRUPTIBLE RIDER; INDUSTRIALS SAY GROWTH WILL SUFFER   The Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission ruled that PECO Energy mayclose its interruptible rate program to new load (Docket No. R-943281). Themove was opposed by the Philadelphia Area Industrial Energy Users Group(PAIEUG) and Scott Paper Co., who said interruptible rates help attract newload, and that freezing the program will hurt economic development (DocketNos. R-943281C002 and R-943281C0003).   The Large Interruptible Rate Option (LILR) provides a discount rate ofapproximately 57%, reducing charges from PECO from 7.493 cents/kWh to 3.217cents/kWh. Although the PUC approved an alternative rate (IR-1), this willprovide a discount of only 5%, to new interruptible customers.   When PECO proposed freezing LILR, it asked to limit interruptible ratesto customers who were under contract by Oct 1, 1995 (IEB, 25 Aug '95, 7).It argued that interruptible rates were meant as a load management tool.However, the utility now has up to 1,000 MW of excess capacity, and thevalue of interruptible load has diminished. Since 1984, it has onlyinterrupted the LILR customers 12 times, PECO pointed out.   However, industrials responded that the interruptible program isimportant for economic development, and was never meant primarily as a loadmanagement tool. Closing out this program will deter firms from startingnew plants in PECO territory or expanding existing plants, they said. Inaddition, industrials fear that PECO will use the freeze as the first steptoward phasing-out existing interruptible rates altogether--basing thisprospect on statements by the company. PAIEUG noted that some of itsmembers have invested millions of dollars to expand in PECO territory, withthe expectation of interruptible service.   In its decision, the PUC pointed out that PECO has other economicdevelopment tariffs, such as flexible rate options, and that ``PECO iswell-equipped, without the LILR, to attract new load to the territory.'' Itadded that electric rates are rarely the sole decisive factor in acompany's location decision and said that LILR has only been a significantfactor in only one firm's decision to move into the area--Lukens Steel.Taxes, transportation and telecommunications are usually more importantfactors, according to the PUC.   It added that ``Continued availability of [LILR] would...produce areduction in PECO's revenues, which would ultimately cause the rates ofother customer classes to increase, which would not help to preserveexisting employment and investment.'' Because the economic developmentargument is ``a bald assertion'' by PAIEUG, ``there are no direct benefitsto balance the cost of providing a subsidy of over 3.5 cents/kWh to LILRcustomers,'' the PUC said.   The commission also rejected PAIEUG's assertion that interruptiblecustomers should not incur generation-related capital costs since theutility does not have to plan to meet their needs--it can simply interruptthem any time it needs the capacity. The PUC noted that these customers areonly curtailed at times of peak demand, so that interruptible load onlydisplaces relatively low capital-cost peaking capacity, and cannotsubstitute for baseload or intermediate capacity.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINDUSTRIAL ENERGY BULLETIN via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   N.C. MUNICIPAL SAYS COINCIDENT-PEAK RATES ATTRACT, RETAIN INDUSTRIALS   Coincident-peak-based rates that all larger industrial customers ofGreenville, N.C.'s municipal utility must pay are not only enablingexisting industrials to lower their electric bills, they are also helpingthe muni lure new industrial firms to the city.   So says John D. Chaffee, executive director of the Pitt CountyDevelopment Commission, adding that industrials that take full advantage ofwhat the CP rates can offer generally pay no more--and sometimes less--thanthey would for electricity from investor-owned utilities and electriccooperatives that serve areas around Greenville.   The Greenville Utilities Commission (GUC), as the muni is known,purchases all its wholesale power from the North Carolina Eastern MunicipalPower Agency, which in turn buys most of its power from Carolina Power &Light. Because a significant portion of NCEMPA's and the muni's wholesalepower costs is based on their demand during CP&L's highest systemwidedemand hour each month, the muni agency and Greenville have been workinghard to minimize their monthly peaks through, among other things,aggressive residential load control programs, and programs to helpindustrials install peak-shaving generation (IEB, 29 Dec `95, 4).   GUC general manager Roger Jones said the Greenville muni also inmid-1994 replaced its traditional industrial rate schedule with a new menuof CP-only rates that all customers with a demand of 750 kW or more mustchoose from.   They include an ``A'' rate for 750 kW-plus customers whose energy usemust be relatively constant, a ``B'' rate for 750 kW-plus industrials withmore flexibility, and a ``C'' rate for 8 MW-plus customers that arewilling--and able--to make significant reductions in their energy useduring coincident-peak periods.   Under each rate, the customer pays a basic monthly charge of $440, plusa relatively high per-kW rate for its demand during the 60 minutes eachmonth when CP&L--the muni's ultimate power supplier--experiences itshighest systemwide demand. The customer also pays a much smaller per-kWcharge for difference between that coincident-peak level and its highestdemand for all that month, plus energy charges.   For instance, under the ``C'' rate, a 8-MW customer that reduces itscoincident-peak demand to 2 MW pays the $440 basic charge, plus demandcharges of $21.34/kW on the 2-MW coincident-peak demand and $2.86/kW on the6 MW above that level. The customer also pays an energy charge of 3.323cents/kWh.   ``B'' rate customers, in turn, pay demand charges of $20.16 percoincident-peak-hour kW and $4.25/kW of demand above that level, and energycharges of 3.583 cent/kWh for the first 250 MWH and 3.278 cents/kWh foradditional energy.   ``A'' rate customers, finally, pay a CP-hour demand charge of $18.36/kW,$7.77/kW for excess demand, and the same energy charges as ``B'' ratecustomers.   [The GUC typically notifies its industrial customers by automated signalwhen it expects a potential coincident-peak period to be approaching; atthat point, the rate agreement says, the customer ``may utilize any meansdeemed suitable to reduce its coincident peak demand,'' including, forinstance, temporary production cuts and/or the use of muni-approvedpeak-shaving generators.]   Jones said that the muni's 750-kW-plus customers, who also include somelarge commercial and institutional accounts, together comprise aboutone-quarter of Greenville's total energy use, and that the CP rates haveencouraged them to reduce their peak-period demand by 15 to 20% from whatit typically would have been without the coincident-peak rates.   The magnitude of reductions in coincident-peak demand varies widely fromcustomer to customer, the muni manager said. Some are able only to trimtheir demand slightly, while others have been ``very aggressive'' and haveslashed peak-period demand by more than 50%. For example, a large Proctor &Gamble manufacturing plant in Greenville that typically demands about 8 MWreduces its demand to between 1 and 1.5 MW during coincident peaks, Jonesnoted, saving both P&G and the muni thousands of dollars in monthly powercosts.   Chaffee said P&G ``basically shuts down production [during forecasted CPhours] to achieve the maximum possible savings.'' To make the best use ofits down time, he noted, the manufacturer performs required maintenance onits production and other equipment.   The development commission head said his panel and GUC work closely withpotential industrial recruits to explain the CP rates and to demonstrateprecisely how the industrial could make the fullest use of the rate to itsadvantage.   Chaffee gave as an example the new automobile parts plant that Japan'sASMO Co. Ltd. in 1994 developed--and in 1995 expanded--in Greenville. Thecombined $50-million facility demands about 2.5 MW.   ``An important issue for ASMO in deciding where to site the [initial]plant was power costs,'' he said. ``We were able to demonstrate that byutilizing Greenville's CP rate and installing [a 1-MW peak-shavinggenerator to further reduce CP demand] that they would be paying ratescompetitive with'' industrial rates offered by Duke Power and otherlow-cost, investor-owned utilities in the Southeast.   Chaffee added, finally, that in his view the CP has been a significantfactor in enabling Greenville to draw increasing numbers of new industries.He noted that while industrial firms announced $20-million in newinvestments in the city in 1992 and $33-million the year after that,industrial investment jumped to $43-million in 1994 and $55-million in1995--the first two years the CP rates were mandated.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINDUSTRIAL ENERGY BULLETIN via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   MONSANTO PHOSPHORUS UNIT INKS LONG-TERM DEAL WITH UTAH P&L   Monsanto Co. and Utah Power & Light have signed a new power supplyagreement extending to 2001 service that was scheduled to expire inmid-1997 for Monsanto's elemental phosphorus manufacturing plant at SodaSprings.   Approved by the Idaho Public Utilities Commission, the new agreementincludes payment of $30-million to the utility for early termination of theexisting contract, a $66,600 monthly minimum charge and 1.85 cents/kWh forall energy delivered. (Order No. 26282).   The new contract allows for delivery of about 1.66 billion kWh annually.UP&L will supply Monsanto with 9 MW of firm power and up to 206 MW ofinterruptible power. UP&L may interrupt or curtail service to Monsanto, itslargest Idaho customer, at any time to maintain its system integrity.   ``The company's new agreement with Monsanto,'' the commission said,``reflects changes required by manufacturing and supply options availableto Monsanto, and market and regulatory changes within an increasingly morecompetitive electric industry.''   Monsanto has alternatives to continuing its current levels of electricuse such as acquiring power through the Soda Springs municipal electricsystem or changing to a much less energy-intensive, purified wet-acidchemical process of producing phosphorus.   The commission said, ``Our acceptance and approval of the proposed newagreement should in no way be interpreted as preauthorization of retailwheeling, accounting, ratemaking treatment or any rates other than thosespecifically identified in the new agreement.''Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINDUSTRIAL ENERGY BULLETIN via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   NIPSCO INDUSTRIALS TO SEE $1.5-MILLION REFUND IN DISPUTED INSURANCE CLAIM   Industrial customers of Northern Indiana Public Service are expected toreceive at least a $1.5-million refund from a disputed insurance settlementstemming from the July 2, 1991, collapse of a water pipe at NIPSCO's 480-MWBailly coal plant on Lake Michigan.   Bailly was knocked out of commercial operation for nearly five monthsfollowing the collapse of its main circulating water pipes leading intoLake Michigan. The 15-foot-diameter pipes gave way while Pure Air Inc.worked nearby to construct a $110-million scrubber at Bailly.   During the outage, NIPSCO was forced to purchase surplus power fromother utilities at prices higher than what Bailly's industrial customershad been paying. NIPSCO eventually recovered $9.65-million from itsinsurance carrier, but flowed back only $2.75-million to compensateratepayers for fuel increases in excess of $6-million as a result of theaccident.   According to industrial attorney Jack Wickes, of the Indianapolis lawfirm Lewis & Kappes, ratepayers paid an additional $6.1-million in fuelcosts during Bailly's outage. Wickes told the Indiana Utility RegulatoryCommission in a hearing late last year that ratepayers should be ``madewhole'' for their higher costs, meaning they should get an additional$3-million (Cause No. 387-06-FAC 18-S1) (IEB, 16 Dec '94, 10).   In a 3-2 vote Dec. 19, the commission ordered NIPSCO to refund anadditional $3.35-million. The IURC based its refund amount on the actualexpenses and required the insurance proceeds to be applied first to theincreased fuel charges, which are covered by the insurance policy.   Wickes told Industrial Energy Bulletin the order ``makes sense...[NIPSCO] carried insurance for an eventuality that occurred and NIPSCOwanted some of the money.'' Of the $3.35-million refund, industrials areexpected to receive at least $1.5- million because they represent ``45% to50% of the consumption'' at the Bailly plant. The money will be refunded asa credit on industrials' fuel-adjustment charge.   Two commissioners--David Ziegner and Richard Klein--dissented from theorder. They agreed with the majority that a further refund was due, butsaid only about $2-million should be refunded.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINDUSTRIAL ENERGY BULLETIN via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   PA. FIRMS STRESS CHOICE OF SUPPLIERS; SEE UTILITIES CONTROLLING POWER POOL   Pennsylvania industrials told the Public Utilities Commission thatretail competition would provide the choice of suppliers that they enjoy inall other purchasing decisions and while a wholesale pool would providesome rate benefits, it would be dominated by the utilities, who would keepprices artificially high.   The Industrial Energy Consumers of Pennsylvania (IECPA) stressed thechoice issue during testimony in the PUC's Investigation into ElectricPower Competition (Docket No. I-00940032). In that case, industrials arecalling for a six-year transition to retail competition, beginning in 1997with customers over 5 MW (IEB, 17 Nov '95, 1).   During recent hearings, IECPA attorney David Kleppinger, of theHarrisburg law firm McNees, Wallace & Nurick, told the commission thatretail competition is ``a matter of sound public policy. Customer choicewill empower Pennsylvania customers with the ultimate regulator of price,namely the competitive marketplace.'' However, customers must have directaccess to utilities' transmission and distribution systems to exercise thatchoice, he added. Further, utilities should be required to provideancillary services on an unbundled, embedded cost-of-service basis. Thesewould include scheduling, dispatch, balancing, load following, voltagesupport, reactive power and loss compensation.   The issue of choice arose again when PUC commissioner John Hangerquestioned IECPA's analysis of the proposed wholesale pool. Assuming``perfect competition,'' the pool price would be 2.67 cents/kWh, IECPAfound, but industrial witness Randall Falkenberg added that utilities``could bid the price up to anything they want really, but I think thatthey would stop at a point just a little bit below what new generationwould be''--or 3.5 to 4 cents/kWh.   ``What is so bad about a price per kilowatt hour...of 3.5 cents/kWh or 4cents/kWh as compared to today's prices?'' asked commissioner Hanger. Evenwith another 1.2 cents added on for retail distribution, Hanger continued,``[A]s to the prices people are paying right now in Pennsylvania, is this adisaster?''   Falkenberg, with the Atlanta firm Kennedy & Associates, responded, ``Theproblem is how you get there. You get to that price because that is theprice at which the market-dominant utilities--principally PECO orPP&L--decide that they want to charge. That's the problem. It's not that itfalls out of the competitive market. It's that a few people at PECO candecide that's what we want the price to be, and they can enforce that.'' Headded that the utilities could set the price ``at a level just enough belowthat a new entrant could build a generating unit at'' in order to keep outcompetition.   In a pool, Falkenberg explained, there would be seven main utilitysellers and one buyer--the independent system operator (ISO). But withretail competition, ``what you've got is hundreds of thousands of buyers,each one playing off one seller against another.''   The hearings also covered stranded investment. IECPA argued that thesecosts should be shared, with ratepayer contributions limited to costs thatresult directly from deregulation, and which cannot be mitigated byutilities. Industrials would probably be willing to bear some cost ofmitigation strategies such as accelerated depreciation of plants andbuyouts of overpriced contracts from non-utility generators, according toFalkenberg. Utilities might also mitigate stranded costs by selling assetsand downsizing, he added.   The PUC expects to wrap up the case by April, when it will makerecommendations to the governor and legislature.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINDUSTRIAL ENERGY BULLETIN via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   ASSEMBLY SPEAKER BACKS RETAIL ACCESS IN N.Y.; NO GUARANTEE ON STRANDEDCOSTS   Several New York legislators, including the speaker of the assembly,have proposed an electric restructuring plan that would open up retailcompetition by the year 2000, but the plan would not give utilities anyguarantee that they could recover all of their stranded investments--aposition that industrials have long taken.   Democratic Assembly Speaker Sheldon Silver announced the proposal lastweek, along with Assembly Majority Leader Michael Bragman and EnergyCommittee Chair Paul Tonko. An aide to Silver said that legislation isbeing drafted and is expected to be introduced by the middle of January.Sponsors would then be sought for a senate version of the bill.   The ``Competition Plus'' plan would immediately freeze electric rates,and would phase-in competition over the next seven years. The first phaseof the transition would begin in September 1997, when all utilities wouldbe required to purchase power in a competitive wholesale market. In thesecond phase, beginning in September 2000, all customers would be allowedto choose their power suppliers, and utilities would be required to providetransmission and distribution service. In September 2002, utilities wouldbe required to divest their generating resources.   A key aspect of the plan is that it would provide ``no guarantee thatutilities will recover all previously incurred costs.'' The strandedinvestment issue is one of the biggest disputes in the restructuringdebate. Utilities demand full recovery of stranded costs, saying they havebeen required to build enough capacity to meet load forecasts, and thatregulators approved the expensive projects, such as nuclear plants, thatcould become financial millstones in the competitive market.   Industrials, however, argue that many high costs result frommismanagement and that utility shareholders should absorb some of theburden. They say utilities should only be allowed to collect costs thatresult directly from deregulation and which cannot be mitigated (IEB, 3 Nov`95, 10).   The legislators' initiative comes as the Public Service Commission movestoward resolution of the ``Competitive Opportunities'' proceeding (Case No.94-E-0952). It challenges the recent ruling in that case by AdministrativeLaw Judge Judith Lee, who recommended only wholesale competition until someunspecified date when retail competition is proven not to harm smallratepayers and reliability. Industrials bitterly condemned that decision,saying it preserves the status quo and lets utilities control the directionof change (IEB, 29 Dec `95, 4).   In announcing the proposal, Assemblyman Tonko stated, ``As the electricindustry moves to a competitive environment, it is clear that thelegislature has a role in the process. Lessons learned from around thecountry--specifically in California and the New England states--indicatethat a purely administrative solution to this complex challenge will notachieve the desired goal of reducing energy prices.''Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINDUSTRIAL ENERGY BULLETIN via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   INDUSTRIAL DSM SEEN GETTING CUSTOMIZED, INCLUDING HELP ON PRODUCTION,POLLUTION   Utilities must transform their industrial demand-side managementprograms to meet the demands of the competitive market, according to a newreport. This means shifting from a ``resource procurement'' focus to acustomer service approach, says IRT Environment Inc., a Basalt, Colo.,information and consulting firm.   IRT states that ``Utilities must provide enhanced, rather than reduced,services to their industrial customers to satisfy them as customers in adirect-access environment.'' It notes that industrials are utilities``least captive'' customers, with options for fuel switching, cogeneration,and shifting loads to other regions. Therefore, utilities must heed theircomplaints about rate-subsidized DSM, the report says. Most bigmanufacturers have been pursuing conservation for years, so they seerate-based DSM as a form of socialism to subsidize others--includingcompeting industrial firms that have not taken the same initiative.Utilities should also realize that prescriptive rebates are not appropriatefor industrial users, the report adds. Up to now, utilities have generallyprovided industrials very basic services, such as audits and rebates formotors and lighting. But process work has not been widespread, partlybecause processes vary greatly from industry to industry and from firm tofirm. This demands customized approaches, which should include not justenergy efficiency, but help with power quality, productivity improvementsand environmental compliance.   Some industrials interviewed for the report doubted that utilities canprovide effective energy services, since they have no entrepreneurialskills. They think utilities can best promote efficiency throughinformation, rate design and financing. However, some utilities arecontracting with or even acquiring existing energy service companies.Others may use consultants with expertise in particular industries to helptheir customers.   The report, ``Industrial Efficiency Programs: Building StrategicPartnerships,'' is available for $100 from The Results Center, IRTEnvironment Inc., P.O. Box 2239, Basalt, Colo. 81621; (970) 927-3155.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINDUSTRIAL ENERGY BULLETIN via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   INDIANA QUARRY'S REQUEST FOR SERVICE FROM PSI ENERGY OVER CO-OP ISAPPROVED   Citing reliability concerns, an Indiana industrial has prevailed in itsrequest to the state Utility Regulatory Commission to be served by PSIEnergy, the state's largest electric company, instead of a small ruralelectric cooperative (Cause No. 40008).   In a mid-December ruling the URC authorized PSI to serve a 1.1-MW loadat U.S. Aggregates' Delphi Quarry, a limestone and gravel quarry nearDelphi, Ind., over the objections of Carroll County Rural ElectricMembership Corp.   Kenneth Robinson, vice president of operations for U.S. Aggregates, saidhis company bought the quarry in 1993 and has been expanding it. Thecurrent site consists of a ``primary'' plant located in Carroll County'sservice territory and a ``secondary'' plant located in PSI's territory.   U.S. Aggregates based its preference for PSI on a number of factors: Thepresent service from PSI has been good; PSI's energy-only rates with nodemand charge, allowing U.S. Aggregates to forecast its usage and utilitycosts accurately; PSI offers a larger industrial base and more stable ratesin the future; U.S. Aggregate's concern with possible brown-outs during thesummer, its peak season; and its belief that PSI's capacity and resourcesensure a continuity of service, even during peak demand periods.   Carroll County manager Ron Kennedy told the URC that even though hisco-op only has five industrial customers, those customers comprise 35% ofits total load. One customer, Indiana Packers, has a peak demand of 5 MW.   Also, Carroll County, apparently to quell concerns over the possibilityof outages, noted that its office is located only one-half mile from theDelphi Quarry. The commission issued its ruling somewhat grudgingly, sayingit discourages the practice of ``rate shopping'' by electric utilitycustomers. The URC said it has been ``reluctant to base determinations ofpublic convenience and necessity matters relative to service boundarydisputes on rate differentials.''   To do so, ``could encourage `rate shopping' at the expense of prudentplanning and good utility practice.'' In this case, however, the URC agreedwith U.S. Aggregates that PSI ``can better provide adequate and reliableservice.'' The investor-owned utility, a subsidiary of CINergy Corp., has a``marginal benefit'' with regard to reliability over the co-op.   A URC spokeswoman stressed that the agency's comments about ``rateshopping'' do not mean the commission is necessarily opposed to retailwheeling. ``We have to go by our interpretation of the existing law,'' shesaid. ``Until and unless we have a different direction from theLegislature, we have to follow existing laws.''Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINDUSTRIAL ENERGY BULLETIN via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   WEPCO IN DISPUTE WITH UPPER PENINSULA POWER OVER SERVING MINE EXPANSION   Wisconsin Electric Power and Upper Peninsula Power are currently insettlement talks trying to resolve a dispute over a proposed retailwheeling agreement that would have allowed WEPCO to supply electricity tothe White Pine mine in Michigan's Upper Peninsula--one of UPPCo's currentcustomers.   White Pine is one of the facilities of Copper Range--a corporationengaged in the mining, refining, and selling of copper in the UP. Itconsists of an underground copper mine and related ore processingfacilities located in Carp Lake Township, Ontonagon County, Michigan.   Until recently, the mine utilized two 20 MW coal-fired generating unitsto supply most of its electric energy requirements while occasionallypurchasing small amounts of energy from UPPCo.   In its application to the Michigan Public Service Commission forapproval of a special contract with the mine, WEPCO said that because ofincreased competition, White Pine began exploring the possibility ofexpanding its mining operations or, in the alternative, temporarilyshutting down the mine in order to install a new ``solution'' miningproject while pursuing the construction of a new smelter.   Solution mining injects a slightly acidic liquid into the rockformations and brings the copper up in liquid form, to be recovered lateras a precipitate.   Whether White Pine expands operations or builds a new smelter, it hasconcluded that the best way to reduce its operating costs, protect jobs,and provide the greatest likelihood for expanded operations in the futureis to shut down its generating plant and purchase electricity from WEPCO,the utility stated in its special contract application.   If approved, WEPCO would supply curtailable electric service to WhitePine. However, WEPCO does not have transmission facilities to serveincreased loads so in order to service to the mine, the utility, on June 1,entered into a joint use transmission agreement with UPPCo that wouldobviate any necessity for WEPCO to build new facilities to serve the mineuntil the new smelter is built.   In its special contract application, WEPCO stated that it was seeking nocertificated authority to render retail service to any resident or businessin Carp Lake Township other than White Pine. The utility also told the PSCthat the proposed agreement was advantageous to the mine because WEPCOmight buy the mine's generating plant.   UPPCo said it entered into the joint use transmission agreement withWEPCO at a time when it was believed that UPPCo's transmission facilitiesalone would, in the future, be unable to provide reliable service to WhilePine. UPPCo noted that if the mine had shut down its two generating units,installed the new ``solution'' mining project, and constructed the newsmelter, demand might have increased to more than 100 MW. UPPCo does nothave transmission facilities in place that are capable of serving loads ofthis magnitude and an investment would have been required to construct suchfacilities. To make such an investment ``in a volatile industry would havecreated a substantial risk for a small utility such as UPPCo,'' the companytold the PSC in its petition to intervene.   When it learned that WEPCO was willing to assume the risk of buildingnew transmission facilities, UPPCo said it decided to cooperate with thelarger utility and entered into the joint use agreement.   However, according to UPPCo, there has been a subsequent change incircumstances that makes the joint use agreement no longer ``necessary orappropriate'' for its purposes. Specifically, Copper Range shut down itsWhite Pine mining operations, including the 40 MW generating plant,retaining only the experimental solution mining project and maintenanceoperations.   ``As a result, the resulting curtailed White Pine mine load can beadequately served by UPPCo over its existing transmission facilities, andthe participation of Wisconsin Electric is no longer necessary ordesirable,'' UPPCo told the PSC in its intervention petition. Accordingly,UPPCo asked the PSC not to approve WEPCO's special contract petition.   In a similar argument before the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission,UPPCo declared that the changed circumstances led it to decide not to filethe joint use agreement with FERC and that WEPCO was not authorized to filethe agreement on UPPCo's behalf. Regulatory proceedings at both FERC andthe PSC are on hold, pending the outcome of settlement talks, sourcessaid.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINDUSTRIAL ENERGY BULLETIN via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   MAINE PS WINS APPROVAL FOR DISCOUNTS FOR INDUSTRIALS CREATING NEW LOAD   Maine Public Service has won approval from the Maine Public UtilitiesCommission for a new targeted economic development rate that would givetemporary discounts for new and existing industrial customers creating newload.   Under a special rate proposal approved Dec. 1 (Doc. No. 95-802), newcustomers with average demand of at least 50 kW who take full load from MPSwill get a credit on their monthly bills equal to 20% the first year of thecontract, 15% the second year, 10% the third year and 5% the fourth year.   Also, existing customers adding at least 20 kW of new load and meetother criteria will receive 20% credits for the new supplies in the firstand second contract years, 15% in the third year and 10% in the fourthyear.   The PUC said it would cap the special credits at a cumulative amount of20 MW of new supplies and that requests for the discounts for individualcustomers would be considered in the order they were received.   At the same time, the PUC approved a separate 10% permanent discount foragricultural storage facilities, which will especially help the localpotato industry. In both cases, the PUC also ordered that any revenuelosses due to the discounts will be borne totally by MPS shareholders andnot ratepayers.   Early in 1995, MPS asked the PUC for an 18.5% rate hike spread over fiveyears to meet revenue losses caused by the closing of a local air base andloss of a major wholesale customer. In November, the PUC approved afour-year, 12.8% hike but left open for a decision next year how the costswill be allocated among customer classes. MPS has asked that the mainburden be placed on residential users, to bring industrial rates more inline with cost-of-service levels.   The new discounts will enable the company to partially offset the costof the rate hike for new and expanding businesses and aid industrialrecruiting while the allocation issue is being debated. They also may helpbring new industrial users to the former Loring Air Force Base and restoresome of the revenues lost due to the closure.   In early January, MPS said it had signed its first economic developmentcontract under the new system with the Happy Farms cold storage facility inCaribou, Me. It said the company had increased business activity and loadneeds and qualified for the discounts starting at 20% and dropping to 10%by the fourth year.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINDUSTRIAL ENERGY BULLETIN via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   SIGECO CREDITS DEVELOPMENT EFFORTS FOR WINNING MAJOR NEW TOYOTA PLANT   Toyota Motor Corp.'s decision to build a $700-million truck assemblyplant near Princeton, Ind., is expected to generate a 25-30 MW electricload, at least initially, for Southern Indiana Gas & Electric, and ifhistory is any guide, the load is likely to increase dramatically over theyears.   SIGECO credited its economic development efforts with contributing toToyota's choice of a 1,100-acre site in Gibson County for its new plantinstead of competing sites in Kentucky, Ohio and other parts of Indiana.All of the site, located along U.S. 41 about 20 miles north of Evansville,is within SIGECO's service territory. PSI Energy, another IOU, serves anarea just north of the plant site.   In announcing their selection of the Princeton site, Toyota officialssaid the plant would employ 1,300 people and begin producing pickup trucksin 1998. SIGECO worked closely with the Princeton Chamber of Commerce,which played a vital role in building a relationship with Toyota, as wellas regional economic development agencies and state government, includingthe Indiana Department of Commerce.   The utility will be building additional transmission facilities,including a transmission line extension and a new substation, to serveToyota. Likewise, SIGECO also will be making similar enhancements to itsnatural gas system.   Although SIGECO would not disclose the plant's projected load, Toyota'sautomotive assembly plant near Georgetown, Ky., about 200 miles away,started out with an approximately 30 MW load in the mid-1980s. Since then,Toyota has built a second plant at Georgetown, and the site's total loadhas mushroomed to 112 MW.   Kentucky Utilities, which serves the plant, said Toyota's electricalusage has increased from 166,055,040 kilowatt hours in 1989 to 552,122,640kilowatt hours in 1994.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINDUSTRIAL ENERGY BULLETIN via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   WABASH VALLEY REORGANIZES ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT RATES FOR INDUSTRIALS   The Wabash Valley Power Assn. has restructured its economic developmentrates, replacing its old catch-all EDR-2 rate with three rates designed toappeal to a broader range of industrial and commercial customers.   Wabash Valley's three new EDR tariffs were contained in a settlementagreement recently approved by the Indiana Utility Regulatory Commission(Cause No. 40298). ``In some ways, we're modeling what we're doing on whatPSI/CINergy is doing'' in the area of economic development, said a WabashValley spokesman. PSI Energy is headquartered in Plainfield, Ind., just afew miles from Wabash Valley's Indianapolis office.   Under its EDR-2 rate, only new customers with a load in excess of 750 kWcould qualify for its provisions: a demand charge of $10.70/kW fordistribution and $9.70/kW for transmission and an energy charge of 18.81mills. The discount rate expired after three years. Now, eligible new loadsor existing plant expansions can obtain the revised rates for five years.   The new EDR-3 rate applies to loads from 300 kW to 749 kW, a load that amachine shop or Laundromat might have. It carries a demand charge of$10.72/kW for distribution and $972/kW for transmission and an energycharge of 18.733 mills.   The new EDR-4 rate applies to loads from 750 kW to 1.499 MW. It carriesa demand charge of $8.45/kW for distribution and $7.45/kW for transmissionand an energy charge of 17.571 mills. The final rate--EDR-5--applies toloads in excess of 1.5 MW. This rate is negotiable on a case-by-casebasis.   Wabash Valley, a generation and transmission cooperative that plans toemerge in 1997 from more than a decade in Chapter 11 reorganizationproceedings, negotiated the terms of the new tariffs with the state Officeof the Utility Consumer Counselor. Wabash Valley and the OUCC said the newEDRs are intended to encourage new and expanded industrial and commercialloads to locate or remain in Indiana.   ``Based upon this and the evidence presented, the proposed tariffs arefound by this commission to be in the public interest,'' ruled the IURC.   The Wabash Valley spokesman said the new rates should help the co-opcompete for business against other utilities in a deregulated industry.``We're stepping up to the plate, and we're going to become as much of aplayer in this as anyone else.''Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINDUSTRIAL ENERGY BULLETIN via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   TROUBLED VERDIGRIS VALLEY CO-OP DENIES ALLEGATIONS IN CLASS ACTION LAWSUIT   Verdigris Valley Electric Cooperative, its economic developmentsubsidiary and four current and former trustees have formally deniedallegations of gross negligence, breach of fiduciary duty and violation ofstate and federal laws or regulations in connection with one of the largesteconomic development losses ever sustained by a distribution co-op.   The allegations were raised in a class action lawsuit filed in Octoberby Cal McKinney, a member and harsh critic of the Collinsville, Okla.-basedco-op that in October 1993 announced a $5.68-million writeoff from aneconomic development loan to Precision Tubulars, a metalworking firm thatwent bankrupt without ever reaching full production (District Court ofTulsa County, Case No. CJ-95-04552) (IEB, 20 Oct, 11).   McKinney's suit was designed to make co-op members financially whole.   In his answer on behalf of the co-op, Tulsa attorney Stephen Riley alsoasserted that losses from the Precision deal were ``due to circumstancesbeyond [the defendants'] control.'' He also asserted that an Oklahoma lawrequiring member approval before a co-op can encumber or otherwise disposeof a ``substantial'' portion of its assets does not apply in this case.   The co-op admits to loaning Precision $6.79-million, but it denies thatthis constituted a substantial portion of its assets. VVEC's current annualreport lists total assets of $57-million.   Riley also contended that McKinney lacks standing to represent otherco-op members and that the suit is barred by the two-year statute oflimitations. He said McKinney knew or should have known of the losses toVVEC members before it was officially announced at the October 1993 annualmeeting because of news accounts of Precision's problems starting in 1991.   Riley said that former general manager Doyle Fulton and five current andformer trustees also named as defendants are not covered by the answerbecause they have not yet been officially served with copies of thelawsuit. An amended answer will be filed once they are served, he said.   Riley's answer listed nine grounds on which he contends the suit shouldbe dismissed but also indicated that the defendants acknowledge a need forfurther discovery and investigation. No procedural schedule has been setfor the case, but the discovery process is expected to be lengthy andcomplex.   This litigation marks the first time that all aspects of the Precisiondeal and VVEC's involvement in it have been subject to court review. AWashington County civil case involving much narrower issues generated oneof the largest court files in that county's history.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINDUSTRIAL ENERGY BULLETIN via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996   NYPA ASKS PSC TO KEEP OTHER UTILITIES FROM COMPETING ON INDUSTRIAL RATES   The New York Power Authority (NYPA) has asked the New York PublicService Commission to prevent other utilities in the state from offeringindustrial incentive rates that compete with its economic developmentprograms. It warns that if investor-owned utilities cut rates toindustrials, other ratepayers will absorb the burden of the lost revenues,while those customers would suffer no such impact from the NYPA discountrates.   Although NYPA mainly supplies wholesale power to utilities and publicagencies, it provides some low-cost power directly to industrials under aneconomic development program set up by the state Legislature. This powercomes from the FitzPatrick nuclear plant and is normally given to firmsthat pledge to create or retain a certain number of jobs. It runs about 4cents/kWh, and the industrials must then pay wheeling charges to theirlocal utilities for delivery.   NYPA now complains that some utilities are competing with those economicdevelopment rates, and it wants the PSC to stop them. It has asked thecommission to review the economic development tariffs of Rochester Gas &Electric (Case No. 94-E-0757), Niagara Mohawk Power (Case No. 94-E-0651)and New York State Electric & Gas (Case No. 94-E-0990).   In its petition to the PSC, NYPA states, ``The rationale for thiscommission having barred the use of flexible rates to compete withNYPA's...was clear--to avoid a conflict between complimentary statepolicies encouraging the expansion and retention of business and to assurethat customers did not unduly benefit by playing suppliers off each otherto obtain discounts subsidized by other customers.''   NYPA's petition was triggered by a dispute with RG&E over Amplaco Inc.,a plastic molding company in the Rochester, N.Y., area. In March of thisyear, NYPA trustees approved a 350-kW allocation for the firm, which agreedto create 29 jobs and protect 186 existing positions. The NYPA allocationwas expected to save the firm $49,000 annually on its electric bills. Butin May, Amplaco notified NYPA that it intended to take power from RG&E atan undisclosed, negotiated rate.   NYPA responded that, ``Amplaco was satisfied with the rate it hadobtained from the authority and was prepared to make the job commitmentsassociated therewith. The state's economy therefore gained nothing fromRG&E's flex rate response.''   RG&E has not formally responded to NYPA's petition, but a utilityspokesman stressed that the company's shareholders will pick up the lostrevenues for the Amplaco discount, not other ratepayers. Nevertheless,retaining the manufacturer will help other ratepayers because lost loadforces remaining customers to absorb stranded fixed costs. The move willalso benefit the local economy.   In earlier discussions of the issue, industrial group MultipleIntervenors had asserted that the PSC should encourage utilities to competeas much as possible, including with NYPA. The group is not activelyinvolved in the NYPA-RG&E dispute.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List WT02-B35-25IA086-000616-B011-255http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/ey69.html 205.156.212.5 19970122000023 text/html 81191HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Tuesday, 21-Jan-97 23:58:20 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:40:49 GMTContent-length: 81006Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ey69.html Sample Issue Copyright INSIDE ENERGY/WITH FEDERAL LANDS via NewsNet January 8, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES A PUBLIC MEETING ON GAS VALUATION ISSUES IS SET FOR JAN. 22 in Houston. The (102 words) ONSHORE OIL AND GAS WESTERN STATES PLAN TO MEET OVER POSSIBLE ADOPTION OF BLM ROLES (835 words) ENVIRONMENTS WILDERNESS SOCIETY FINDS NEW CONGRESS `WORST EVER' ON ENVIRONMENT (755 words) SURFACE MINING OSM PLANS TO CONDUCT EMERGENCY INSPECTIONS IF FURLOUGH CONTINUES (289 words) ENVIRONMENT CONSERVANCY FINDS ONE-THIRD OF NATION'S PLANTS, ANIMALS THREATENED (284 words) OCS THE DEADLINE IS MARCH 7 TO FILE COMMENTS ON SURETY RULES under revision by (158 words) IBLA DIGEST IBLA DIGEST (19 words) ENERGY DOE ISSUES FINAL RFP FOR HANFORD WORK (750 words) BOB ALCOCK HAS BEEN NAMED ACTING ASSISTANT SECRETARY for congressional, (161 words) GAO SAYS SPENDING GAPS TYPICAL FOR DOE (1175 words) O'LEARY ATTEMPTS TO CLEAR AIR OVER IMPACT OF OVERSEAS EXCURSIONS (803 words) E. SHIRLEY THOMAS, DOE OMBUDSMAN AND FRIEND OF SECRETARY HAZEL O'LEARY, has (165 words) BUDGET CUT FORCES LAYOFF OF PART-TIME AND STUDENT WORKERS AT DOE (441 words) ERVIN SAYS DIVISION WILL CUT STAFF BY ONE-THIRD OVER NEXT FIVE YEARS (619 words) HOUSE BID TO OVERRIDE CLINTON VETO OF INTERIOR SPENDING BILL FAILS (355 words) DOE WILL PROVIDE $100,000 TO JAMES E. RUSSELL PETROLEUM INC., to improve a (375 words) THE NUCLEAR ENERGY INSTITUTE MISTAKENLY LISTED A CONSUMER GROUP among (256 words) EEI PRESIDENT THOMAS KUHN WOULD NOT BE SURPRISED IF CONGRESS waits until (403 words) A PANEL CHAIRED BY DOE AND EPA HAVE SELECTED EIGHT PROJECTS involving four (359 words) SECRETARY O'LEARY'S CHIEF ADVISER ON RUSSIA, ROBERT BERLS JR., left DOE (130 words) ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT ENVIRONMENTALISTS CLAIM DOE IS `BACKSLIDING' ON REPROCESSING POLICY (684 words) REPORT BY SRS CONTRACTOR APPEARS TO ADVOCATE REPROCESSING AT SITE (756 words) SAIC EXECUTIVE ALM NOMINATED AS DOE'S ENVIRONMENTAL CLEANUP CHIEF (416 words) EM DIVISION TELLS CONGRESS OF ITS PLAN FOR COPING WITH BUDGET CUTS (620 words) A SWAP OF WASTE OIL FROM TVA TO DOE SAVED TAXPAYERS $100,000, according to (179 words) CopyrightINSIDE ENERGY/WITH FEDERAL LANDS via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   A PUBLIC MEETING ON GAS VALUATION ISSUES IS SET FOR JAN. 22 in Houston. TheA PUBLIC MEETING ON GAS VALUATION ISSUES IS SET FOR JAN. 22 in Houston. TheMinerals Management Service said the session is meant to gather publiccomment on a proposed rulemaking, published in the Nov. 6 Federal Register,which would implement the recommendations of the Federal Gas ValuationNegotiated Rulemaking Committee. The panel's recommendations would amendthe rules governing the value of gas produced from federal leases.   MMS also extended the comment period on the proposed rule until Feb. 5.   For more information on the meeting, contact MMS' David Guzy at (303)231-3194; E-mail, Davidzy@smtp.mms.gov .Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINSIDE ENERGY/WITH FEDERAL LANDS via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   WESTERN STATES PLAN TO MEET OVER POSSIBLE ADOPTION OF BLM ROLESBy:Sheryl MorrisRepresentatives of several Western oil and gas producing states will meetlater this month near Denver to discuss a proposal by the Clintonadministration to relinquish some of the Bureau of Land Management'sinspection and enforcement functions to the states.Although larger producing states like New Mexico and Wyoming still havesome unanswered questions over the proposal, they believe the plan has somemerit.   The meeting will be the first for the Interstate Oil and Gas CompactCommission's BLM Oil and Gas Inspection and Enforcement Transfer Committeesince an organizational session at the IOGCC annual meeting in Houston lastmonth. Ten states have representatives on the special panel.   Committee member, William LeMay, described the upcoming Denver sessionas a ``strategy meeting'' to formulate an IOGCC consensus for presentationto the administration. LeMay is the director of the New Mexico OilConservation Division and the New Mexico governor's designatedrepresentative to IOGCC.   ``We think a lot of those [I&E] functions could be performed moreeconomically and efficiently at the state level,'' LeMay said. The keyelements, he added, are adequate funding and site-specific regulations.   ``The same thing that's required on federal lands on the Californiacoastline wouldn't apply to some of the deserts in New Mexico,'' LeMaypointed out in urging tailored regulations. ``We don't want to just be anenforcement arm of federal rules and regulations,'' he added.   Wyoming may be interested in the transfer if the move saves money andboth the federal government and the state benefit, said another committeemember, Donald Basko, supervisor of the Wyoming Oil and Gas ConservationCommission.   ``But if we have to follow in their footsteps'' as the land manager andno savings result, ``then there may be no interest in taking it over,''Basko said. ``We can maybe accomplish the same thing with fewer people andless money, but that remains to be seen.''   As part of Vice President Gore's campaign to re-invent government, theInterior Dept. last year proposed the transfer of some BLM I&E functions,as well as the abolishment of the Minerals Management Service. The latterwould have included distribution of MMS royalty functions to states andtransfer of the MMS offshore program to another agency.   When the so-called MMS ``devolution'' was hastily retracted in the faceof intense criticism, states were caught somewhat flatfooted (IE/FL, 7 Aug,14).   LeMay acknowledged some fear now that Interior may repeat the MMSscenario; what he called a ``whoops, we're sorry'' withdrawal of theproposal involving the BLM activities.   ``We put a lot of effort'' into studying the MMS abolishment and how NewMexico might assume the royalty function on federal lands within itsborders, said LeMay, who noted that state officials felt Interior did notact in ``a lot of good faith'' in offering and then retracting the MMSplan. Because MMS is the royalty center for Interior and the BLM I&E issueis tied to costs and revenues, there may be ``some resurrection of thosearguments'' about MMS and state assumption of royalty duties, LeMay said.   Wyoming ranks first in revenue on mineral royalties from federal lands,and New Mexico has the largest number of wells on federal tracts, LeMaysaid in explaining the particular interest of the two states in maximizingefficiency in governing those properties.   While the administration has suggested the I&E transfer, LeMay said,``we kind of need to tighten it up'' in terms of how the move would beaccomplished. States want answers regarding potential savings, fundingoptions and personnel needs, he said. ``Each state may have a littledifferent viewpoint,'' LeMay noted, but the object is consensus ``so we donot have five or six of the largest states each proposing somethingdifferent.''   Nevada's representative on the committee said ``conceptually it makes alot of sense for states to play a greater role in I&E on public landsbecause, for the most part, many of us are either doing it concurrently ordoing that work in some sort of cooperative memorandum of understandingwith BLM right now.''   Russell Fields, administrator of the Nevada Division of Minerals,pointed out that his state and BLM have an MOU to reduce duplication andeffort. Were the state to take a larger role, it would have to be``adequately compensated for work done on federal lands,'' he said.   Beyond I&E, states may be ``interested in what other oil and gasfunctions they rightfully should take on,'' Fields said, such as authorityto issue and maintain leases and collect royalties.   Nevada would not be interested ``in just becoming the cops for thefeds,'' Fields said. States may be more interested if the government wantssomething more than just I&E transfer, Fields said, such as an integratedprogram with the goal of more efficient use of resources.   The I&E Committee session is slated for Jan. 26 in Aurora, Colo. Otherstates represented on the panel include Utah, Louisiana, California, NorthDakota, Oklahoma, South Dakota and Nebraska.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINSIDE ENERGY/WITH FEDERAL LANDS via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   WILDERNESS SOCIETY FINDS NEW CONGRESS `WORST EVER' ON ENVIRONMENTSupport for bills to open the Arctic National Wildlife coastal plain to oiland gas development and reform the Endangered Species Act are just twoelements of a grievous environmental record that makes the 104th Congressthe ``worst Congress ever,'' The Wilderness Society has charged in a newreport.   ``The hard-liners in this Congress make James Watt look timid,''Wilderness Society President Jon Roush said in releasing the study Dec. 27.``They have a playbook written by the mining, logging, and ranchingindustries, and they're hacking away at everything except the subsidiesenjoyed by those industries.''   In the report, the Society termed the new Congress ``a worseenvironmental accident than the Exxon Valdez,'' and said the ``election ofmany zealots whose allegiance is to the extractive industries'' threatensmany of the nation's natural resource treasures.   The study singled out for criticism the record of some newly powerfullawmakers, including Rep. Don Young, R-Alaska, chairman of the HouseResources Committee, Rep. James Hansen, R-Utah, chairman of the HouseResources subcommittee on national parks, forests and lands, Rep. JohnDoolittle, R-Calif., chairman of the House Resources subcommittee on waterand power resources, Sen. Frank Murkowski, R-Alaska, chairman of the SenateEnergy Committee, and Sen. Slade Gorton, R-Wash., chairman of the SenateAppropriations interior subcommittee.   The leadership changes have placed in power members who have tried foryears to rewrite environmental protection laws, the society warned.   ``The most threatening aspect of this realignment is that thedevelopment-at-all-costs Alaskan delegation heads both resourcescommittees,'' the report said. In addition, should Sen. Ted Stevens,R-Alaska, replace retiring Sen. Mark Hatfield, R-Ore., as chair of theSenate Appropriations Committee, the Wilderness Society warned that``[s]enators casting swing votes will be under enormous pressure to goalong with the Alaskan delegation's agenda.''   Environmental groups have strenuously opposed any oil development in the1.5-million-acre ANWR coast plain, but the Alaska delegation managed toinclude language authorizing ANWR leasing in the budget reconciliationpackage that President Clinton vetoed last month. The future of theprovision remained uncertain last week as Congress and the presidentcontinued discussions on the budget and partial government shutdown.   The GOP-led Congress appears intent on gutting the nation's endangeredspecies statute, the report added, with major ESA reform bills introducedby Sens. Gorton (S. 768) and Dirk Kempthorne, R-Idaho, (S. 1364), and Reps.Young and Richard Pombo, R-Calif., (H.R. 2275).   While the three bills differ, the report charged they all would allowsome species to go extinct, curtail ESA's protections of species' habitaton private land, limit protection for subspecies, and require taxpayers topay developers not to destroy habitat if protections would diminish theproperty value.   The report also attacked the language in two FY-96 Interiorappropriations bills, both vetoed by the president, that would place atemporary moratorium on listing of new endangered species and designationof critical habitat.   Republican lawmakers' intent to dismantle the National BiologicalService also drew criticism, as The Wilderness Society noted the oppositionof extractive industries and real estate interests to NBS. The service wascreated by Interior Secretary Bruce Babbitt in 1993 to consolidate thebiological science expertise within the department.   NBS would be eliminated and its functions transferred to the U.S.Geological Survey under the Interior appropriations measures vetoed byClinton.   In other complaints, the report objected to what it termed ``give-away''legislation, supported by some GOP lawmakers, that would allow states totake over Bureau of Land Management lands within their borders. It alsoattacked ``takings'' measures passed in the House and by the SenateJudiciary Committee that would compensate landowners when environmentalprotection actions by the government degrades their property values.   Lifting of the Alaskan oil export ban was folly, the report added. WhileStevens argued for repeal of the ban, saying it forced shipment of Alaskancrude to West Coast markets where it created a glut and depressed prices,the report noted the senator, in contrast, ``insists that there is an oilshortage'' when he advocates drilling of ANWR.   The Society group noted, overall, ``The most important question as 1995turns to 1996 is probably how vigilant and outspoken Americans will be'' onenvironmental issues. It said polls indicate the ``public is firmlycommitted to environmental protection and wants to see more progress ratherthan an unraveling of current law.''   The report, ``The Worst Congress Ever: A Review of the EnvironmentalRecord of the 104th Congress at Mid-point and the Outlook for 1996,'' isavailable from The Wilderness Society at (202) 833-2300.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINSIDE ENERGY/WITH FEDERAL LANDS via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   OSM PLANS TO CONDUCT EMERGENCY INSPECTIONS IF FURLOUGH CONTINUESA limited number of federal inspectors will visit surface mines on federaland Indian lands on an emergency basis this week if the partial governmentshutdown continues, Office of Surface Mining Deputy Director Ed Kay saidThursday.   Fewer than 10 OSM inspectors will likely be involved in the effort afterthey have been designated essential personnel by agency officials.   The reason for the special designations is that ``nothing is beingdone'' to oversee lands where OSM has the primary inspection functionbecause of the government closure, Kay said. Partial visits are needed ``tomake sure everything is okay,'' the deputy director added, noting that theInterior Dept. solicitor has approved such inspections on a limited basis.   Although primacy states conduct the necessary inspections within theirborders, OSM is responsible for assuring health and safety on lands inWashington and Tennessee, where it is the primary enforcer, as well as onIndian lands in New Mexico and Arizona and federal lands in Kentucky.   At OSM's Western Region Coordinating Center in Denver, processing of 100Indian and 50 federal permits has stopped, its director, Richard Seibel,said.   The federal shutdown may also hamper issuance of permits by states,which have been unable to use OSM's Applicant Violator System since theagency closed, Seibel said. States check companies through AVS foroutstanding permit violations before issuing new permits, he noted. Losingaccess to AVS may delay the states' issuance of new permits.   OSM is dealing with emergency situations with a skeleton staff, Kaysaid. The fact that most surface-mining crises occur during other parts ofthe year, when there is typically more rain, makes coping with the currentsituation somewhat easier for the agency, he added.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINSIDE ENERGY/WITH FEDERAL LANDS via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   CONSERVANCY FINDS ONE-THIRD OF NATION'S PLANTS, ANIMALS THREATENEDThe Nature Conservancy issued a 1996 species report card last week in whichit warned that the survival of one-third of the nation's plants and animalsis threatened, particularly those species dependent on rivers, lakes andstreams. More than 500 scientists examined more than 20,000 U.S. species.   The troubles of freshwater aquatic species were attributed to poor waterquality and long-term effects of dams and other water diversions. ``Thesefigures clearly show that efforts to protect the nation's water qualitywill not only benefit people, but also these species,'' said John Sawhill,president and chief executive of the Nature Conservancy.   The data compiled in the annual report is used by federal and stateresource managers to decide on land use, and by private businesses andindividuals to design projects that do not harm sensitive species andhabitat, the Conservancy said.   The Conservancy described the report, ``Priorities for Conservation:1996 Annual Report Card for U.S. Plant and Animal Species,'' as the ``mostcomprehensive assessment to date on the conservation status of U.S.species.''   The group found that one species, the Merriam's Bearpaw Poppy, a desertwildflower, is doing better than thought. The wildflower is more abundanton a Nevada military base than previously known, it said.   ``Based on this find by Conservancy botanists, the plant probably willnot need to be listed under the federal Endangered Species Act,'' the groupsaid.   The animal groups listed as most at risk were: freshwater mussels,crayfish, freshwater fish, and amphibians.   The report was a NatureServe publication, sponsored by Canon U.S.A. Inc.as part of its Clean Earth Campaign. Information on the report is availablefrom the Conservancy's Larry Carpman at (703) 841-8740.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINSIDE ENERGY/WITH FEDERAL LANDS via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   THE DEADLINE IS MARCH 7 TO FILE COMMENTS ON SURETY RULES under revision byTHE DEADLINE IS MARCH 7 TO FILE COMMENTS ON SURETY RULES under revision bythe Minerals Management Service. The agency said it is considering creationof a deadline of two years for all Outer Continental Shelf oil and gaslessees to bring their bond coverage into compliance with new levels ofcoverage established in 1993.   The proposed regulations would clarify MMS' position that ``assignees,assignors, and co-lessees are jointly and severally liable for compliance''with OCS lease requirements. The rules also would establish a framework forlease-specific abandonment accounts and acceptance of a third-partyguarantee, and would update the bond coverage required for right-of-wayholders and geological and geophysical exploration permittees.   MMS said the changes were needed in order to ``reduce the risk ofdefault by an underfunded company operating a lease or holding aright-of-way.''   For more information, contact Gerald Rhodes of the MMS engineering andtechnology division at (703) 787-1609.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINSIDE ENERGY/WITH FEDERAL LANDS via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   IBLA DIGESTDue to the continuing government shutdown, no IBLA decisions were releasedlast week.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINSIDE ENERGY/WITH FEDERAL LANDS via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   DOE ISSUES FINAL RFP FOR HANFORD WORKBy:Mary Powers, Birmingham, Ala.DOE Thursday released a final request for proposals for a five-yearmanagement and integration contract at its Hanford Site that for the firsttime includes specific performance objectives and measures.   The RFP is the latest large site management contract issued under theagency's two-year-old contract reform initiative and is the first toinclude performance objectives specified by DOE. Until now, DOE has reliedon bidders to propose such benchmarks.   DOE said it will attach incentives to a number of the performancemeasures to reward contractors for making progress toward cleanup. Thecomplete fee structure is open for negotiation, however, and will beproposed by each bidder. Proposals could include a base fee or could be100% incentive fee. ``We don't want to discourage any innovative thinkingby bidders,'' said a DOE spokesman. The contract has an estimated value of$4.6 billion over its five-year duration.   The language in the final RFP was strengthened from that contained in adraft RFP released last year to emphasize cost-effective innovativeapproaches and to include cost reductions in specific areas, such asoverhead and indirect costs, the agency said. Bidders' past performance aswell as their proposed approach to cost reduction will be weighed duringselection. The RFP specifically outlines an aggressive ``make-or-pay''program that requires work to be contracted out or privatized if it is moreefficient to do so.   The contract covers all work at Hanford that is not included in theenvironmental restoration management contract now held by Bechtel HanfordCorp. It includes the cleanup of the waste tanks and spent fuel, as well asinfrastructure management, base operations, construction and constructionmanagement. The statement of work included in the final RFP is organizedaround what DOE calls ``Project Hanford,'' an effort to duplicate the bestadministrative and management controls found in the private sector.   Proposals are due March 15. DOE says it will make a final selection inJune, with the winner to take over operations Oct. 1. Three, and possiblyfour, companies have lined up teams to bid on the Hanford management andintegration contract.   California-based Fluor Daniel Inc.. is leading a team that includesLockheed-Martin; Rust Federal Services; Babcock and Wilcox; Duke Energy andServices, Numatec and International Technology Corp. Bechtel Corp., whichhas the environmental restoration contract at Hanford now, is leading ateam that includes Westinghouse; BNFL Inc.; Computer Sciences Corp., andJohnson Controls. A third team led by Boston-based Raytheon Corp. includesCH2M Hill; ICF Kaiser; Tenneco Boeing Information Services Corp., andSiemens Power Corp.   Sources last week said a fourth team may be organizing under TRW Inc.'sand Parsons Corp.'s lead. None of the three teams are final yet, and thesources said other companies will be added as the final RFP is examined. ABechtel spokesman said its team will include several more pre-selectedsubcontractors, but that most of the subcontracted work will becompetitively bid after the contract is awarded.   The contract out for bid is now held by Westinghouse and ICF Kaiser. Atleast one industry source gives Bechtel the best odds at winning. ``It hasthe strongest team because it includes two large contract holders therenow,'' the source said. Others, however, argue the opposite, saying thatBechtel can't win because Westinghouse is on its team. ``That company isthe kiss of death out there,'' he said.   Meanwhile contractors are waiting for the RFP that will replace EG&G atDOE's Mound site. DOE has promised a draft will be issued between Jan. 15and Feb. 8. Sources said a number of teams want to bid on the much smaller$500 million contract.   ``We're lucky that these two are coming out close together. The bigplayers are looking at Hanford, leaving the smaller companies to pursueMound,'' one source said. The job will include cleaning up the site andreturning the assets to the City of Miamisburg, Ohio, and is expected to bevalued at $80 to $100 million a year for five years.   International Technology Corp. is planning to lead a team, while sourcessay Fluor Daniel's management team at DOE's nearby Fernald EnvironmentalManagement Project will also bid the job. Other players looking to lead orjoin teams include ICF Kaiser, Babcock & Wilcox, Parsons, Morrison Knudsen,Weston, SAIC, Foster Wheeler, and TRW.    ``There's lots of mating dances going on here,'' said an industrysource, who along with other company officials are in Ohio planning theirstrategy.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINSIDE ENERGY/WITH FEDERAL LANDS via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   BOB ALCOCK HAS BEEN NAMED ACTING ASSISTANT SECRETARY for congressional,BOB ALCOCK HAS BEEN NAMED ACTING ASSISTANT SECRETARY for congressional,intergovernmental and public affairs at DOE. Alcock, who most recentlyworked as deputy assistant secretary for intergovernmental affairs,replaced Carolyn Herr Watts, who left the agency for the private sectorlast month.   The White House has nominated and the Senate Energy Committee hasconfirmed Derrick Forrister. a former special assistant to Energy SecretaryHazel O'Leary, for the assistant secretary job, but the nomination has beenblocked in the Senate since last summer.   Alcock worked as former Texas Democratic Rep. Barbara Jordan'slegislative assistant from l1973 to 1979 and, after two years in theprivate sector, returned to Congress as chief of staff to CaliforniaDemocratic Rep. Esteban Torres.   He was named deputy assistant secretary in February 1994. In thatposition, he was responsible for providing liaison between DOE and variousstate and local government officials including governors, mayors, statelegislators, county supervisors and tribal leaders.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINSIDE ENERGY/WITH FEDERAL LANDS via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   GAO SAYS SPENDING GAPS TYPICAL FOR DOEDOE's inability to document $255,000 in expenses it incurred on two trademissions to India and South Africa are part of a ``systemic''record-keeping problem at the department that may date back to theManhattan Project, an official with the General Accounting Office saidThursday.   At a hearing before the House Commerce subcommittee on oversight andinvestigations, Victor Rezendes, GAO's director of energy, resources andscience issues, said his office found DOE was unable to provide records for$80,000 in expenses it claimed for an October 1994 trade mission to Indiaand $175,000 in charges made during a similar trip to South Africa inAugust.   In both instances, GAO said, the money was paid by U.S. embassies in thecountries for goods and services purchased on behalf of the DOEdelegations.   Rezendes, whose office looked into the cost of the two trips at therequest of Ohio Republican Rep. Martin Hoke, a critic of Energy SecretaryHazel O'Leary's overseas travel, told the subcommittee that DOE did nothave written procedures in place during either of the trips specifying whattypes of records were to be kept or the process to follow when obtainingtravel support from the State Dept.   For both trips, Rezendes said, embassies reported charges to DOE thatlisted the amounts paid to vendors. ``The lists sometimes, but not always,provided a brief description of the nature of the charges,'' he said.   ``DOE's accounting office recorded the charges in DOE's accounts, butrelied on the responsible program office to approve the charges. However,the program officials did not maintain supporting documents of the expensesincurred,'' he said. Further, Rezendes said that in some cases, the programofficials ``could not provide an explanation for the embassies' charges.''   DOE, Rezendes added, could not provide GAO auditors with supportingdocuments to ``give assurances of what the money was spent for. This is nota new problem at DOE and without the documentation, we don't know, nor doesDOE know, what the money was spent on.''   ``We want to ensure that double billing did not occur, and maybe therecharges are perfectly okay, but the point is we don't know,'' he said.   Rezendes said the problem of shoddy bookkeeping at DOE precedes O'Learyand may, in fact, have its origins in the Manhattan Project. ``This goesback a long time and probably predates DOE, the [Atomic Energy Commission]and goes back to the Manhattan Project. The United States government, inits effort to build the atomic bomb, agreed to total cost reimbursement.Everything was allowable and after the war the same total costreimbursement system was retained,'' he said.   ``Anytime we have looked at DOE with a microscope we have found a lackof documentation and an understanding of what it is paying for,'' Rezendesadded.   Questioned by Rep. John Dingell, D-Mich., Rezendes said hisinvestigation failed to turn up any evidence of improper or illegal use offederal funds, but he added that the problem is there is insufficientdocumentation available yet to make a conclusive determination.   Rezendes credited O'Leary for making ``the most aggressive changes'' ofany of her predecessors in the agency's contracting process and said DOE,working with GAO, is working to develop written procedures that wouldrequire DOE officials traveling abroad to follow specific steps, such ascompleting certain documents and vouchers and submitting all requiredreceipts in support of travel expenses to the agency's accounting office.``If properly implemented, these procedures should prevent similar problemsfrom occurring in the future,'' he added.   The GAO report was critical of DOE's decision to change the source offunding for security staff accompanying O'Leary on overseas trips from theagency's administration account to its Defense Programs account. DOEtransferred $400,000 from the DP account to pay for the security costs inFY-95.   The decision, Rezendes said, ``is inconsistent with a long-standingprinciple of appropriations accounting.'' DOE acted improperly, GAO said,by using the Defense Programs money to cover the security costs withoutfirst informing Congress.   Congress has already acted to address the problem, Rezendes said. In theFY-96 energy and water development appropriations act, Congress directedthat all costs to support the travel of any security detail accompanyingO'Leary are to be paid out of the departmental administration account.   House Republicans used last week's hearing to reissue a demand thatO'Leary resign.   Hoke, in an opening statement, said DOE, under O'Leary's leadership,``has unfortunately become a glaring symbol of government waste.''   ``Up until now, most of the media focus has been on Secretary O'Leary'slavish excessive travel -- 100 trips -- which in itself is a seriousproblem.   However, that is just the tip of a mismanagement iceberg that masks themuch larger problem of profound agency chaos, with tens of millions ofdollars in lost computers and other property, hundreds of thousands ofdollars unaccounted for, special perks for special friends, a useless andstupid waste of $43,000 to rate the friendliness of reporters, editorialboards, and members of Congress, illegal lobbying, hundreds of full-timeemployees devoted to public relations and the secretary's personalimage-building, and countless other examples of waste, fraud and abuse,''he said.   House Commerce Committee Chairman Thomas Bliley, R-Va., joined hiscolleagues in condemning O'Leary's travel. ``It is becoming more and moreclear to me that under the current leadership, [DOE] has little respect forthe American taxpayer. The secretary and her entourage of hundreds travelin luxury at taxpayer's expense throughout the world.   ``Yet, according to the findings in the GAO report, they don't even careenough to keep a single, solitary receipt for more than a quarter-milliondollars expended on just these two trips alone. And when they run short oftravel funds, they violate nearly a century's worth of budget principles todrain other funds to pick up the tab,'' he said.   Subcommittee Democrats voiced support, arguing that no evidence had beenprovided that showed money had been misused and that the problem may benothing more than an accounting glitch.   Dingell, in his opening statement, questioned why the panel had notasked DOE or State Dept. officials to testify about the trips. ``I hope itdoesn't show that we are more interested in a political hatchet job than weare in finding the truth,'' he said. State Dept. employees have beenfurloughed by the government shutdown.   DOE said Wednesday that it had received ``summary statements that showthat each expenditure incurred was certified by a State Departmentofficial.'' While DOE said it had not received every voucher to determinewhether it should have paid all of the certified expenses, it expects toreceive those documents when the federal shutdown ends.   DOE also said it disagreed with GAO's criticism of its decision to payfor security on foreign trips with $400,000 from Defense Program accounts,which officials noted have been used for some time for security on domestictravel. ``We stand by our decision to use the same appropriation accountfor security for both foreign and domestic travel,'' DOE said.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINSIDE ENERGY/WITH FEDERAL LANDS via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   O'LEARY ATTEMPTS TO CLEAR AIR OVER IMPACT OF OVERSEAS EXCURSIONSExactly how much new business has been gained by U.S. companies by virtueof DOE's four overseas trade missions was still an open question lastweek.   In a Dec. 28 letter to Congress, Energy Secretary Hazel O'Leary saidcompany executives who accompanied her on the trips have told the agencythey have completed, or are close to finalizing, $4.3 billion in deals thatcould be tied to the missions.   O'Leary's letter came in response to a Dec. 20 request from the chairmenof seven House Committees and subcommittees asking the secretary to explainwhat they described as apparent multibillion-dollar discrepancies in theeconomic benefits she said companies have gained from her overseas travel(IE/FL, 25 Dec, 1).   At various times, O'Leary has claimed the trips have resulted in as muchas $27.7 billion and as little as $2.4 billion in new business for U.S.companies.   At a hearing last week before the House Commerce subcommittee onoversight and investigations, however, Ohio Republican Rep. Martin Hokesaid his own survey of company officials put the value of the trips atabout $1.4 billion. Hoke suggested, moreover, that even that figure may begenerous.   Hoke, who has been a harsh critic of O'Leary's travel, said thesecretary's trade missions are the product of an agency undergoing a``bureaucratic midlife crisis, desperately pretending to be something it isnot in an attempt to find a new purpose to justify its continuedexistence.''   O'Leary, he continued, ``often acts more like the head of a statechamber of commerce trade delegation ... than a member of the president'sCabinet charged with the profoundly important, if somewhat dull,responsibility of safeguarding the nation's nuclear weapons stockpile.''   Just how much new business the trade missions have returned to U.S.companies is important to determining how effective the trips have been,Hoke said.   The congressman said O'Leary originally claimed that the trade missionsto India, Pakistan, China and South Africa resulted in $19.7 billion worthof contracts for U.S. companies. Recently, however, in response to anewspaper inquiry, DOE said $2.4 billion in deals had been signed. On Dec.19, the agency revised the figure to $4.3 billion.   Hoke said he believes the actual number is probably closer to $1.4billion. Even that number is ``guesswork,'' Hoke said, adding that most ofthe contracts were won by large U.S. companies with strong internationalrepresentation. They were capable, he said, of securing the contractswithout DOE's help.   In her letter to Congress, O'Leary attempted to clear the air. Intestimony she delivered to the Senate in March, O'Leary estimated thatenergy-related business agreements advanced during DOE and CommerceDept.-sponsored trade missions had a combined potential and realized valueof $27.7 billion.   A later estimate of $19.7 billion represents realized and potentialagreements of energy-related deals that have come out of DOE trademissions. They include, she said, ``memoranda of intent or understanding ... , power purchase agreements, fuel supply agreements and other stepsnecessary to advance business deals. The $19.7 billion estimate representsthe total potential value of the deals advanced by the trade missions thatI headed and is an important guidepost for tracking the long-term successof the missions.''   As for the $4.3 billion figure, O'Leary said that represents the numberof deals that have been completed. The $2.4 billion estimate DOE gaveearlier this year in response to an inquiry from the Los Angeles Times didnot include several deals companies later reported as completed.   In her letter, O'Leary told members that while the trade missions haveprovided U.S. companies with new contracts and have created American jobs,business deals are not the only benefits that have accrued.   DOE trade missions ``help shape policies that support the success ofU.S. competitiveness, democratization and market economies,'' she said.   ``Our missions have encouraged countries to create the necessary legal,financial, and regulatory policies that are the cornerstone of marketeconomies, while also enabling projects with U.S. energy companies to reachclosure. ... Every nation in which we have conducted trade missions hasfurther endorsed market reforms in the energy sector, and I believe ourwork has greatly contributed to that progress.''   The trips have also helped create a ``level playing field'' for U.S.business, O'Leary said. U.S. businesses have asked for DOE's help andCongress has given DOE the authority to provide assistance, ``because thesemarkets are important to their future and because foreign competitors enjoystrong support from their governments.''   O'Leary said DOE will continue to track the progress of the dollar-valueof the trade missions, but warned that because the emerging marketsinvolved in the trade missions have little experience in competitivemarkets, the final dollar figure for successful projects advanced duringthe trips may not be known for five to 10 years.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINSIDE ENERGY/WITH FEDERAL LANDS via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   E. SHIRLEY THOMAS, DOE OMBUDSMAN AND FRIEND OF SECRETARY HAZEL O'LEARY, hasE. SHIRLEY THOMAS, DOE OMBUDSMAN AND FRIEND OF SECRETARY HAZEL O'LEARY, hasbeen notified she will have to repay between $20,000 and $25,000 she hasreceived as a living allowance for nearly two years, but for which she wasineligible.   A department spokeswoman said Thomas was informed by the agency's Officeof General Counsel that she will have to pay back a $35 per day allowanceshe had received as an allowance for maintaining her principal residence inNewark, where she was employed as a social worker before being tapped byO'Leary for the $93,000-a-year DOE post. In fact, Thomas moved to theWashington area in December 1993.   DOE spokeswoman Barbara Semedo said Thomas was said to be ``eager'' torepay the funds. Thomas could not be reached for comment.   O'Leary in November defended Thomas against charges from HouseRepublicans that her job is unnecessary and that she was appointed to thepost chiefly because of their longtime friendship.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINSIDE ENERGY/WITH FEDERAL LANDS via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   BUDGET CUT FORCES LAYOFF OF PART-TIME AND STUDENT WORKERS AT DOEAlthough a DOE plan to meet congressional cuts in the agency'sadministration budget spared full-time employees from layoffs, 32 part-timeworkers and student interns were not as lucky.   DOE last week said it will lay off nine part-time workers, eight of whomwere employed in the agency's mailroom, and 23 college and high schoolstudents, to help it comply with a congressional directive that it cutadministrative staff by 15% this year.   In its FY-96 energy and water development appropriations bill, Congressreduced funding for DOE's administration $41 million below what thedepartment had sought. In report language accompanying the bill, thelawmakers said the funding level assumed a 15% cut in DOE's workforce.   The administration budget pays the salaries and other operating expensesfor about 2,900 employees in non-program offices, including humanresources, the office of congressional and public affairs, policy fieldmanagement and the Idaho, Oak Ridge and Chicago field offices.   DOE managers and union representatives signed off on a plan shortlybefore Christmas that would comply with the congressional requirement yetspare forced layoffs through such actions as increasing the number ofworkers opting for early retirement, eliminating overtime spending andperformance bonuses, continuing a hiring freeze and furloughing eachemployee for at least 48 hours spread out over the current fiscal year(IE/FL, 25 Dec, 12).   The plan, however, does call for some forced reductions. A DOE officiallast week said 32 workers will be laid off. Under the plan, the ninetemporary employees will be dismissed from the agency on or before Jan.26.   Twenty-three student employees -- including college students working inthe department's cooperative education program and high school studentsemployed under the agency's ``Stay in School'' program -- will get theirwalking papers.   Under the cooperative education program, DOE gives college students theopportunity to gain professional experience while they work toward theirdegrees. Upon graduation, the students have the opportunity to move intofull-time permanent positions at the agency.   The Stay in School program involves clerical work largely for highschool students, whose financial situation may otherwise force them to dropout before matriculating.   Eligibility for both programs is based on financial need. Students inboth programs will be asked to leave their jobs by April 19, the officialsaid.   Department-wide, DOE will retain 40 college students in the cooperativeeducation program and six under the Stay in School program, the officialsaid. In addition, officials are hoping that some of the 23 students willbe picked up by DOE program offices that are not facing the same salaryrestrictions as is the department administration account.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINSIDE ENERGY/WITH FEDERAL LANDS via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   ERVIN SAYS DIVISION WILL CUT STAFF BY ONE-THIRD OVER NEXT FIVE YEARSBy:Lira BehrensAs part of its effort to comply with DOE's Strategic Alignment Initiative,DOE's Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy division is aiming to cutstaff by a third and reduce administrative costs by 50% over the next fiveyears.   EERE Assistant Secretary Christine Ervin told reporters in a briefingThursday that it was unclear where the cuts would be made, but two-thirdsof them would likely be made in the first two years. Many of the cuts alsowill come from closing four of the 10 EERE Regional Support Offices thatwas announced in August.   The administrative improvements will come from a new computerizedpersonnel center the division hopes to unveil in February, as well as apartnership with the National Renewable Energy Laboratory, which Ervin saidhas ``its own aggressive program to reduce administrative costs.'' A teamof EERE employees has already identified 67 processes where ``there mightbe major savings,'' she said.   Ervin described the restructuring of the division as ``not a dramaticreorganization, but a natural evolution.''  One major effect of the change, Ervin said, would be to decrease theratio of managers to staff within the division from 1:5 to 1:15. Doing so,she said, would ``push decisionmaking down in the organization, giving moreauthority to the staff.''   The other major change effected by the reorganization is what she termed``graduation day'' for the division's Office of Technical and FinancialAssistance. The office, which deals primarily with state and localassistance programs, has previously been in a ``separate box,'' which shesaid had been an obstacle to deployment of EERE's r&d programs.   Under the new organization, OTFA's Weatherization Assistance Program andState Energy Conservation Program grants would be housed with thedivision's building energy programs under a new Office of Building Systemsand State and Community Programs. Mary Fowler, who had been OTFA's actingdeputy assistant secretary, is now the associate deputy assistant secretaryfor the new office.   Ervin said the lack of an Interior appropriations bill (which funds thedivision's efficiency programs) has not required employee furloughs orcutbacks in grants because the department has money left over from FY-95and so-called ``no-year money.'' According to Ervin's Chief of Staff BrianCastelli, the programs could operate ``a few more months'' on the outyearfunding.   One program Ervin said has been delayed by the government shutdown isthe implementation of an agreement reached in early December with theEnvironmental Protection Agency to consolidate the two agencies' applianceefficiency labeling programs. EPA, whose funding bill has not beenapproved, has an ``energy star'' program that labels computers and otherappliances as energy efficient, while DOE is responsible for setting energyefficiency standards for appliances.   According to Ervin, DOE and EPA have worked with retailers such asCircuit City, Sears and Home Depot on what the new labels should look like.The department had hoped to complete the label consolidation by the end ofthe year, but has been unable to meet with EPA because the agency'semployees are furloughed.   In other programs, Ervin said the department plans to issue finalguidelines for Home Energy Rating Systems by January 31. The department hasasked the Home Energy Ratings Systems Council and several state-run HERSprograms known as the Residential Energy Services Network, to resolve theirdifferences on technical issues related to the guidelines before then.   Members of the HERS Council, which submitted recommended guidelines toDOE in October 1994, late last year expressed concern that the disagreementthreatened the program (IE/FL, 30 Oct, 7). The groups have now apparentlynarrowed the list of issues over which they disagree and have tentativelyscheduled a series of meetings for mid-January.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINSIDE ENERGY/WITH FEDERAL LANDS via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   HOUSE BID TO OVERRIDE CLINTON VETO OF INTERIOR SPENDING BILL FAILSHouse Republicans failed to override President Clinton's veto of theInterior appropriations bill Thursday, garnering only 239 of the 278 votesneeded to pass the bill over Clinton's objections.   Among the reasons the president said he vetoed the bill (H.R. 1977) wasthat it did not contain enough funding for DOE's energy efficiency programs(IE/FL, 25 Dec, 4). According to administration sources, the bill's futurewill likely hinge on the White House's negotiations with Congress on theoverall budget agreement.   Sources familiar with the negotiations last week said advocates of theefficiency programs in the White House were asking for $75 million inadditional FY-96 funding to be split between three efficiency programs: theWeatherization Assistance Program, the Partnership for a new Generation ofVehicles program, and the programs aimed at implementing theadministration's Climate Change Action Plan.   A congressional aide, however, denied that the overall budgetnegotiations would affect the FY-96 Interior appropriations bill. The aidesaid it was unclear what appropriators would do with the interior bill. Thetwo options, she said, were to either move another stand-alone bill, orroll funding for the programs into a long-term continuing resolution.   The FY-97 budget request process is apparently on hold until the FY-96budget levels are settled. DOE has submitted a budget request to the Officeof Management and Budget of $915 million for EERE, but it was unclear atpress time how that may have been changed during the ``passback'' process.   Of the outlook for FY-97 funding for her programs, DOE AssistantSecretary for Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy Christine Ervin toldreporters last week that ``a lot of it is hinging on the negotiations forFY-96.''   While she would not divulge details of the FY-97 request until it hasbeen submitted to Congress by the president, Ervin said the ``historicpercentage increases [in efficiency and renewable energy programs] in pastyears are not likely to continue. We do know that energy efficiency andrenewable energy remain a high priority for the secretary and theadministration.'' And she added there will be ``some decent continuationsfor programs.''Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINSIDE ENERGY/WITH FEDERAL LANDS via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   DOE WILL PROVIDE $100,000 TO JAMES E. RUSSELL PETROLEUM INC., to improve aDOE WILL PROVIDE $100,000 TO JAMES E. RUSSELL PETROLEUM INC., to improve anew process to clean water used in oil field operations.   The ``air flotation process'' emerged from an earlier DOE co-sponsoredproject with Russell Petroleum and the University of Kansas. RussellPetroleum, Abilene, Texas, will contribute $102,000 of its own to continueresearch on the project. DOE's award will be made through the NationalInstitute for Petroleum Energy Research in Bartlesville, Okla.   According to DOE, water produced with oil is often reinjected into thereservoir to increase the efficiency of the oil recovery operation. Butimpurities in the water can plug the tiny pores in the reservoir rock,often blocking the water from reaching the target zones.   In the air flotation process, air is bubbled through a flotation column.Waste impurities cling to the air bubbles and are removed from the water.The technique, a modification of a process originally developed to cleancoal and other minerals, has been used in some offshore oil operations. Itwas unclear, however, whether the process would be cost-effective foronshore oil fields, particularly those operated by smaller, independentproducers.   According to the department, the original Russell Petroleum projectshowed that the air flotation device may make economic sense for manyindependent producers. The company credits the technology with contributingto the recovery of some 300,000 barrels of oil that otherwise would havebeen left in the ground.   Under the second phase of the project, which will last 18 months,Russell Petroleum will develop screening criteria to help other producersdetermine where and when the process can be applied; develop optimum designand operating guidelines for the technology; determine the cost ofimplementing critical design improvements; and communicate the correctmethod of applying the technology and its benefits to other operators.   The original project was funded under DOE's Reservoir Class FieldDemonstration Program, which is aimed at demonstrating ways that oilproducers can avoid prematurely abandoning their wells. The RussellPetroleum follow-on project is the result of a solicitation DOE issued tothe 33 participants in the ``near-term'' category of the program. Thedepartment has recently requested proposals for follow-on projects fromparticipants in ``mid-term'' and other categories of the program.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINSIDE ENERGY/WITH FEDERAL LANDS via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   THE NUCLEAR ENERGY INSTITUTE MISTAKENLY LISTED A CONSUMER GROUP amongTHE NUCLEAR ENERGY INSTITUTE MISTAKENLY LISTED A CONSUMER GROUP amongsupporters of a bill aimed at fixing DOE's high-level nuclear wasteprogram.   In an ad NEI placed in the Dec. 12, 13 and 14 Washington editionS of theLos Angeles Times, the industry group included the Consumer Federation ofAmerica in a list of organizations it said support the bill (H.R. 1020). Ina letter to the paper's editor, CFA Executive Director Stephen Brobeck saidthe group did not approve the use of its name in the ad and that it has noposition on the bill.   Brobeck, who asked the paper to print a correction, said NEI ``hasadmitted their error and apologized to us.''   The ad was brought to the attention of CFA by several state PublicInterest Research Groups, who are members of the federation, and who opposethe bill.   U.S. PIRG said the incident ``is just one more example of the brazenexcess the nuclear industry uses to ram a destructive bill throughCongress.''   An NEI spokeswoman Friday acknowledged the group made a mistake inincluding CFA among those groups endorsing the bill. She, however, said CFAwas included because the group had passed a resolution urging Congress toensure that money paid by consumers into the nuclear waste fund was usedfor the program. That provision, she added, is a key part of thelegislation.   The spokeswoman criticized PIRG, saying the group was allowing its``anti-nuclear views to get in the way of protecting consumers.''Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINSIDE ENERGY/WITH FEDERAL LANDS via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   EEI PRESIDENT THOMAS KUHN WOULD NOT BE SURPRISED IF CONGRESS waits untilEEI PRESIDENT THOMAS KUHN WOULD NOT BE SURPRISED IF CONGRESS waits untilthe end of the session to decide on nuclear waste legislation. That's whenthe first two laws addressing the topic passed in 1982 and 1987, Kuhn saidduring a briefing last week for the Washington International Energy Group,and he suggested that history may repeat itself this year.   Nevertheless, the Edison Electric Institute chief said a bill reportedoverwhelmingly by the House Commerce Committee in August could be the startof a new law this year. He said he thought the measure (H.R. 1020), whichwould require DOE to open an interim site for nuclear waste in Nevada by1998, may pass the House handily if it gets to the floor. That, he added,would ``motivate'' the Senate to respond similarly.   ``Hopefully, the issue is important enough that it will percolate up andbe finished this year,'' Kuhn said of a nuclear waste bill. ``There is acritical need for it.''   Kuhn was less sanguine that Congress will reconsider proposals to sellDOE's power marketing administrations, which EEI supported in 1995, butwhich failed because of opposition in the regions where the PMAs operate.He credited the public power and rural cooperative portions of the electricutility sector for their successful fight against the proposals.   ``I don't really believe there will be a very active discussion of theissue this year, but I do believe it will be back in the next Congress,''Kuhn said of the PMAs. The fact that the PMAs operate with a federal``subsidy'' will draw more scrutiny as the notion of competition in theoverall utility sector gains support nationally, he added.   While EEI wants lawmakers' help on nuclear waste and the PMAs, the groupwould prefer that they abstain from addressing retail wheeling orcompetition in the utility industry, he said. Kuhn acknowledged thatproposals by House Commerce Committee Chairman Thomas Bliley Jr., R-Va.,and other lawmakers that address those issues likely will be discussedfurther this year, but he said he hoped nothing would come of them.   ``We very strongly feel we don't need federally mandated wheeling,'' hesaid. ``We don't need a federal solution regarding competition.'' Accordingto Kuhn, utilities in conjunction with state regulators and other interestsare likely to find solutions to problems related to competition that willbe better than any prescriptions from Washington.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINSIDE ENERGY/WITH FEDERAL LANDS via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   A PANEL CHAIRED BY DOE AND EPA HAVE SELECTED EIGHT PROJECTS involving fourA PANEL CHAIRED BY DOE AND EPA HAVE SELECTED EIGHT PROJECTS involving fourcountries and 13 U.S. companies under the second round of the U.S.Initiative on Joint Implementation.   The pilot program encourages partnerships between U.S. companies anddeveloping countries to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. According to DOE,the program ``spurs technology cooperation by increasing the access ofdeveloping countries to energy-efficiency and renewable energytechnologies. Industrialized countries benefit through the expansion ofexport markets.''   Should a greenhouse gas control program be implemented in the future,U.S. companies hope they would be able to get credit for reducing emissionsoverseas, where such reduction measures are cheaper to implement.   The projects announced last week, which are financed by the privatesector, will employ geothermal, biomass, hydroelectric and wind energytechnologies, as well as forest management practices in Costa Rica,Honduras, Nicaragua and Russia.   Five of the eight projects -- selected from 21 proposals submitted --are located in Costa Rica. At a ceremony announcing the selected projectslast month, DOE Deputy Energy Secretary Charles Curtis attributed thenumber of projects in Costa Rica to its president, Jose Maria Figueres, whohas created a special office of joint implementation and has vowed to``make Costa Rica a showplace'' for such projects.   Curtis said Energy Secretary Hazel O'Leary has ``worked hard to gaingreater acceptance'' of joint implementation projects. The first round ofseven projects were selected in February 1995.   The projects announced last week are: a forestry project in Costa Ricainvolving U.S. partner Newton Treviso Corp.; a geothermal project inNicaragua, with Trans-Pacific Geothermal Corp.; a biomass generationproject in Honduras with U.S. participants Nations Energy, a subsidiary ofTucson Electric, the Edison Electric Institute and Add on Energy 1; ahydroelectric project in Costa Rica with New World Power Corp.; a windfarmin Costa Rica with New World Power Corp.; a wind facility in Costa Ricawith Power Systems Inc. and EnergyWorks; a forest restoration project inCosta Rica with the Nature Conservancy; and a fugitive gas capture projectin Russia with Oregon State University, Sustainable Development TechnologyCorp., Sealweld Corp., and EPA.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINSIDE ENERGY/WITH FEDERAL LANDS via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   SECRETARY O'LEARY'S CHIEF ADVISER ON RUSSIA, ROBERT BERLS JR., left DOESECRETARY O'LEARY'S CHIEF ADVISER ON RUSSIA, ROBERT BERLS JR., left DOEDec. 29 to join the department's former deputy secretary, William White, ina new international company based in Houston. Berls will be the vicepresident of corporate development for Howe-Baker Development Co., whichWhite formed after he left DOE earlier this year, the department announcedlast week.   No replacement for Berls at DOE has been named, a spokesman said. Berlscoordinated DOE programs involving Russia and other former Soviet states.In his new position, he will concentrate on business opportunities in thosenations, he said.   Howe-Baker Development is a limited-liability company that specializesin marketing and project development for small-scale refining andprocessing units built by Howe-Baker Engineers, Inc., Tyler, Texas, DOEsaid.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINSIDE ENERGY/WITH FEDERAL LANDS via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   ENVIRONMENTALISTS CLAIM DOE IS `BACKSLIDING' ON REPROCESSING POLICYBy:David KramerEnvironmental groups charged last week that DOE is ``backsliding'' on a20-year-old U.S. commitment to end reprocessing activities by pursuing aplan to use chemical separations ``canyons'' to treat spent fuel and othernuclear materials at the Savannah River Site.   Led by the Institute for Energy and Environmental Research, whichreleased a report on the issue Thursday, the groups claimed that bygenerating additional waste, reprocessing will cause more environmentalproblems than it solves and will undermine the credibility of U.S. effortsto convince other nations such as North Korea, India and Russia to endtheir reprocessing activities.   ``How is the United States going to convince these countries and othersto halt reprocessing if we're plunging into it ourselves?'' asked IEERresearcher Noah Sachs, author of the report: ``Risky Relapse intoReprocessing.'' Though DOE has pledged not to use the plutonium or highlyenriched uranium separated through reprocessing for weapons, othercountries will not be able to verify this, he noted.   ``It creates a kind of reprocessing double standard,'' Sachs said,adding that other nations will be unable to verify DOE's pledge not to usethe fissile materials that are separated through reprocessing for nuclearweapons.   After exhaustive environmental analyses, DOE has elected to reprocessmuch of the spent fuel and solutions containing fissile materials at SRS tostabilize the material for long-term storage. Moreover, a number ofinfluential Republican lawmakers, notably Sen. Strom Thurmond, R-S.C.,chairman of the Armed Services Committee, have consistently advocatedreprocessing as a solution to spent fuel management problems at SRS andother DOE sites.   But the environmental groups, which also included the Energy ResearchFoundation, an SRS watchdog organization, and Snake River Alliance, agrass-roots group located near the Idaho National Engineering Laboratory,argued that DOE should instead place the spent fuel into dry storage untiltechnical solutions to problems facing long-term disposition have beenresolved.   Beatrice Brailsford, executive director of SRA, also criticized DOE'scontinuing support at INEL of experimental technology known aselectrometallurgical processing, calling it a ``back door flirtation withreprocessing.'' The technology ``poses a peril to nonproliferation goals,''she said, and also fails to respond to any clear need.   ``DOE's bad interim storage policy is being driven by a bad long-termstorage policy,'' said Arjun Makhijani, IEER president. DOE should startfrom scratch in its efforts to find a high-level waste repository, he said,and abandon its trouble-plagued effort to characterize the Yucca Mountain,Nev., site. In so doing, the agency ought to resurrect its deep seabeddisposal research program, which was terminated when Congress ordered theagency to focus all its efforts on the Nevada site.   DOE need not rush into a repository, Makhijani maintained, since interimdry storage for a period of up to 100 years would permit the decay of mostof the highly radioactive and heat-generating fission products such asstrontium and cesium. That in turn would eliminate many of the technicaldesign concerns that face the Yucca Mountain project.   IEER also rejected reprocessing advocates' contention that DOE spentfuel, which unlike commercial fuel is in metal form, must be stabilizedprior to its permanent storage. Alternatives to reprocessing could bedeveloped over the next few decades, or special containers might bedesigned specifically for the DOE material, they said.   ``There is no spent fuel management option that is without risks,''Sachs said, ``but DOE's own data show that the storage option poses farfewer risks than reprocessing.''   According to Sachs, DOE data show that the radiation dose to thepopulation surrounding SRS during reprocessing activities would be four tofive million times higher than from continued storage of the materialthere. DOE estimates in the report indicate an exposure level of 15person-rem per year via air pathways, and a further 2.2 person-rem per yearvia water pathways to the population within 50 miles of SRS.   DOE's current reprocessing plans will add three million gallons ofhigh-level liquid radioactive wastes to the tanks at SRS, increasing thetotal volume of those wastes by around 10%, according to the report.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINSIDE ENERGY/WITH FEDERAL LANDS via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   REPORT BY SRS CONTRACTOR APPEARS TO ADVOCATE REPROCESSING AT SITEBy:David KramerThe operator of DOE's Savannah River Site prepared a report for a localcongressman that suggests reprocessing of spent commercial nuclear fuel atthe facility to prepare the material for permanent disposal.   An internal report by Westinghouse Savannah River Co., the managementand operating contractor, said reprocessing the nation's commercial spentfuel for disposal in a permanent repository could be accomplished at SRSfor as much as ``several billion dollars'' less than it will cost todispose of it directly in a repository, as the current plan calls for.Moreover, Westinghouse said, reprocessing would ``increase the technicalassuredness of the spent fuel management program, and potentially couldyield recyclable uranium feedstock.''   The report, which was prepared in August, was made public by the EnergyResearch Foundation, an SRS watchdog environmental group, last week. A DOEspokesman at Savannah River said the report was requested by Rep. CharlesNorwood, R-Ga., and took about a week to complete. He added that DOE hadnot sought the study.   ERF Director Brian Costner expressed outrage at the report, calling itscost estimates ``absolutely absurd.'' They do not include any expenses toupgrade the two 40-year-old reprocessing ``canyons,'' he said. Further, headded, they fail to account for additional wastes that would be generatedby reprocessing and do not consider ongoing problems with SRS' DefenseWaste Processing Facility, which would be used to vitrify the high-levelwastes that are separated from the spent fuel.   According to the report, DOE could dispose of the current inventory ofcommercial spent nuclear fuel for about $8 billion, including the estimatedrepository fees for the canisters that contain the vitrified waste. While afinal repository would still be required, the cost and technicaluncertainty would be cut significantly by the 20-fold volume reduction thatwould be achieved through reprocessing, as well as the conversion of thewaste to a single form containing only short-lived non-fissile fissionproducts, the paper said.   Reprocessing opponents point out that the procedure would result in ahuge volume of low-level waste that Westinghouse proposes to form into aconcrete-like ``saltstone'' for storage. The report argues that thesaltstone is ``a non-hazardous, non-regulated waste form which has noenvironmental impact,'' a characterization disputed by Costner.   Costner also charged that SRS was ``toying with U.S. nonproliferationpolicy,'' and ``trying to redefine reprocessing without a clear opendebate.''   The Clinton administration generally opposes reprocessing on the groundsthat it encourages proliferation of nuclear weapons-usable materials. DOE,however, plans to resume reprocessing activities at SRS in order tostabilize some of its spent fuel and other nuclear materials left over fromweapons production (related story above).   The administration has been especially adamant in opposing thereprocessing of commercial spent fuel, however, and has never considered itas an alternative for civilian spent fuel disposal.   However, a number of Republican congressmen and senators, particularlythose in the region surrounding SRS, have advocated reprocessing. Norwoodand Sen. Strom Thurmond, R-S.C., chairman of the Armed Services Committee,are two such proponents.   The report said SRS has documented that the canyons can operate until2015 ``with normal capital upgrades.'' SRS, said the report, ``has theimmediate capability to assist the DOE and the nuclear power industry inaddressing the nation's spent fuel crisis by beginning the immediatereceipt of commercial spent fuels.''   The DOE spokesman said Norwood's request came after Senate EnergyCommittee Chairman Frank Murkowski, R-Alaska, proposed using SRS and DOE'sHanford Site in Washington as interim storage facilities for commercialspent fuel. ``We get a lot of requests from our congressional delegationand we respond to them,'' he said.   The Westinghouse report, however, was well-detailed and appeared to bewritten with a pro-reprocessing slant. For example, it indicates that thedirect disposal route for spent fuel is fraught with technicaluncertainties, commenting, ``this uncertainty has not provided the publicwith any confidence that the DOE can successfully manage spent fuels.'' Bycontrast, the reprocessing route ``offers a technologically proven,cost-effective solution to the spent fuel disposal problem,'' it said.   The report also examined the feasibility of reprocessing spent fuel fromother DOE facilities -- the Hanford Site and the Idaho National EngineeringLaboratory. It concluded that the cost of disposing of DOE's Naval Reactorspent fuels could be cut by nearly two-thirds, to $5 billion, compared to$14 billion for direct disposal. The cost of disposing of DOE's stainlesssteel and zirconium-clad spent fuels could be cut to around $700 million,from $1.2 billion, it said.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINSIDE ENERGY/WITH FEDERAL LANDS via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   SAIC EXECUTIVE ALM NOMINATED AS DOE'S ENVIRONMENTAL CLEANUP CHIEFIn an action widely expected for months, the White House Dec. 27 nominatedScience Applications International Corp.'s Alvin Alm to take over DOE'senvironmental cleanup program. Alm, a director and senior vice presidentfor SAIC's Environmental Business Area, will replace Thomas Grumbly asassistant secretary for environmental management at DOE if he is confirmedby the Senate.   President Clinton Dec. 20 nominated Grumbly as DOE under secretary, thethird most senior position at the agency (IE/FL, 25 Dec, 10).   Prior to joining SAIC in 1989, Alm was the chief executive of AllianceTechnologies Corp. and served as the board chairman and chief executive ofThermal Analytical Corp. From 1983 to 1985 he was the deputy administratorof the Environmental Protection Agency.   In 1970, ALM served as the first staff director of the newly createdWhite House Council on Environmental Quality and in 1973 became EPA'sassistant administrator for planning and management, a position withresponsibilities for strategic planning, budgeting, policy and internalmanagement.   If confirmed by the Senate, Alm's new position would mark his secondstint at DOE. In 1977, he joined the agency as assistant secretary forpolicy and evaluation. Alm now serves as co-chairman of DOE's EnvironmentalManagement Advisory Board and is on the board of the Energy andEnvironmental Policy Institute and the Environmental Export Council.   Alm will inherit from Grumbly a roughly $6-billion-a-year program thathas come under increasing pressure in Congress and the administration toreduce its costs. Although it largely escaped deep spending cuts proposedby the House last year, the program is certain to come under still morescrutiny from congressional budget cutters this year. In addition, EnergySecretary Hazel O'Leary is moving ahead with a promise she made early lastyear to reduce the program's costs by more than $4 billion over the nextfive years.   Just how quickly the Senate will act on the two nominations is an openquestion. An aide to the Senate Energy Committee last week said Grumbly hasa good reputation among committee members and should have little difficultywinning confirmation. Less is known about Alm, he said, but there is littlereason to believe he will prove controversial.   Although Committee Chairman Frank Murkowski, R-Alaska, prefers to movequickly on nominations, the aide said it could be several months before thecommittee and Senate take action, largely because the Senate has beenoperating for several weeks without a full contingent and may do so forsometime longer.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINSIDE ENERGY/WITH FEDERAL LANDS via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   EM DIVISION TELLS CONGRESS OF ITS PLAN FOR COPING WITH BUDGET CUTSDOE's Environmental Management division last week told lawmakers how itplans to allocate the $476 million in cuts Congress made to its FY-96budget.   In letters sent to about 100 senators and representatives, ThomasGrumbly, the assistant secretary for environmental management, said EM hasslashed its headquarters costs by 37%, to $222 million, in response todirectives contained in the conference report accompanying the FY-96 Energyand Water Development Appropriations Act. It also used prior-year balancesas much as possible, also as directed by the appropriators, and acceleratedcleanup activities to reduce long-term costs both at the FernaldEnvironmental Management Project and the Rocky Flats EnvironmentalTechnology Site, he added.   Congress appropriated 7.3% less than DOE's amended budget request for EMthis year -- providing just over $6 billion. But lawmakers earmarked $135million in EM expenditures, further reducing the amount available toallocate among the DOE cleanup sites.   ``The bottom line for most sites is that in virtually all cases thefield office budget reductions were less than 10 percent,'' Grumbly wrotein the Jan. 2 letters. Reductions at each site were made after consultingwith and reaching agreement among all the field managers, he said.   Grumbly said the actual percentage cuts among all the sites varied forthree reasons. First, the level of prior-year balances varied among thesites, and reducing these was one of the goals set by Congress. Second, DOEsought to maximize the level of compliance at the sites with regulatory andother requirements, which also vary. And finally, the congressionalearmarks required the department to add funding to certain sites forspecific projects.   A direct comparison between FY-95 and FY-96 funding levels for each siteas a percentage of the EM budget is not possible due to the increase inresponsibilities of the EM progam in FY-96, he said. These new dutiesinclude site management at the Savannah River Site, Mound Plant andPinellas Plant, as well as additional nuclear materials managementactivities across the complex.   Among DOE's largest cleanup operations, funding for the Hanford Site isbeing cut 6.3%, to $1.3 billion, while the Savannah River Site's budgetwill decline 8.6%, to $1.2 billion. Funding for the Oak Ridge Reservationwill fall by 9.2%, to $782 million, while that for Rocky Flats will declineby 8.7%, to $573 million. The Ohio Field Office, which funds cleanup bothat Fernald and Mound, will decline by 3.5%, to $509 million, and IdahoNational Engineering Laboratory's budget will fall by 7.2%, to $471million.   Funding for Albuquerque Operations, which funds cleanup projects at twoDOE weapons labs as well as operation of the Waste Isolation Pilot Project,will decline 4.5%, to $608 million, according to the letter.   In a letter to Washington Republican Sen. Slade Gorton, Grumbly warnedthat additional job reductions beyond the 4,800 that have already beenannounced by DOE for the Hanford Site are likely. He added that a precisetally of cuts was not possible at this time.   Congressional earmarks included a $50 million increase to the budgetrequest for EM's technology development program to provide funds to bemanaged by DOE's Office of Energy Research to develop a research programthat uses the national laboratories and universities; a $25 supplement tothe technology development account for electrometallurgical r&d; $59million for the maintenance of funding levels at the Morgantown EnergyTechnology Center to fund contracts associated with private sectorinvolvement in developing improved technologies that address needs of thetechnology development ``focus areas'' and crosscutting programs; and $1million in additional funds to the Western Environment Technology Office inButte, Mont., to meet EM's commitment to maintain funding level required toaccomplish previously initiated activities.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINSIDE ENERGY/WITH FEDERAL LANDS via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   A SWAP OF WASTE OIL FROM TVA TO DOE SAVED TAXPAYERS $100,000, according toA SWAP OF WASTE OIL FROM TVA TO DOE SAVED TAXPAYERS $100,000, according toDOE. While trying to dispose of 75,000 gallons of mineral oil that wasslightly contaminated with polychlorinated biphenyls, officials at theTennessee Valley Authority found that DOE could use the material at its OakRidge K-25 Site.   The oil is now being used as a first step in cleaning out three largestorage tanks that previously held liquids containing much higher levels ofPCBs. Flushing the 22,500-gallon tanks with oil is a standard initial stepin removing PCBs from the tank walls.   According to Vince Adams, the DOE manager of the site's Toxic SubstanceControl Act Incinerator, where the storage tanks are located, thedepartment would have purchased commercial fuel oil, at a cost of about$80,000, to do the job, if not for TVA's offer. TVA estimates it saved$20,000 in disposal costs by finding a user for it.   The oil eventually will be burned in the incinerator, which was built inpart to destroy PCB-contaminated liquid wastes.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List WT02-B35-26IA086-000616-B011-294http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/ey70.html 205.156.212.5 19970122000101 text/html 98509HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Tuesday, 21-Jan-97 23:58:44 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:40:49 GMTContent-length: 98324Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ey70.html Sample Issue Copyright INSIDE F.E.R.C. via NewsNet January 8, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES ALJ SAYS GREAT PLAINS COAL-GAS SETTLEMENTS UNFAIR TO RATEPAYERS (1099 words) GAS PRICES TO CONSUMERS FELL MORE THAN WELLHEAD PRICES over the past 10 (426 words) PIPELINES WILLIAMS STEPS IN AS FULL KERN RIVER OWNER AFTER FTC KNOCKS QUESTAR OUT (1477 words) NEW PIPELINE SERVICES WITH CONDITIONS, FERC SIGNS OFF ON PARKING SERVICES FOR THREE PIPES (606 words) SERVICE REVISIONS GIVING TENNESSEE SHIPPERS MORE FLEXIBILITY took effect (179 words) FERC'S NOI SHOULD NOT HOLD UP OFFSHORE EXPLORATION PLANS, Shell Gas (526 words) LATE TO THE GAME, EASTERN SHORE FILES INITIAL RESTRUCTURING PLAN (736 words) INDUSTRY STRUCTURE CONSOLIDATION OF GAS COMPANIES WILL CONTINUE IN '96, ANALYSTS PREDICT (505 words) ELECTRIC UTILITIES AGA ANNOUNCED ITS SUPPORT OF THE D'AMATO BILL TO REPEAL PUHCA, saying that (338 words) UNION ELECTRIC, CIPS WANT STOCKHOLDERS TO GET CUT OF MERGER SAVINGS (909 words) ELECTRIC POWER THE STATE OF THE ELECTRIC INDUSTRY ``IS NOT AT ALL BAD'' (451 words) NEPCO CAN'T CHARGE A FIRM RATE FOR CURTAILABLE TRANSMISSION even though the (209 words) ELCON OFFERS STRANDED-COST RECOVERY PLAN; NO THANKS, SAYS EEI CHIEF (1749 words) ISOS, CAPACITY RELEASE, ALTERNATIVE RATES HIGHLIGHT FERC'S 1996 AGENDA (2167 words) BRIEFLY... COMMENT DEADLINE EXTENDED (121 words) NAME CHANGE (163 words) GAS STORAGE EQUITRANS AGREED TO BE PLACED AT RISK FOR ITS STORAGE EXPERIMENT involving (343 words) AVOCA'S CERTIFICATE AMENDMENTS WERE APPROVED WITH ONLY A FEW adjustments, (242 words) PLEASE LET US FINISH CONSTRUCTING OUR FACILITIES, EGAN TOLD FERC in an (396 words) PIPELINE RATES SHIPPERS CAN CHOOSE TO PAY KOCH GATEWAY DIRECTLY FOR FUEL USED to transport (279 words) AFTER FIVE MONTHS OF ACTIVE NEGOTIATIONS IN THE EL PASO RATE CASE, ``there (352 words) ANR IS DOUBLE-CHARGING FOR SERVICE TO A PLANT IN OKLAHOMA, Amoco Production (321 words) FERC WILL DETERMINE RATE TREATMENT FOR NORTHERN BORDER'S proposed (419 words) CopyrightINSIDE F.E.R.C. via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   ALJ SAYS GREAT PLAINS COAL-GAS SETTLEMENTS UNFAIR TO RATEPAYERSControversy over the Great Plains coal-gasification project, which hashaunted Ferc virtually since it was first approved in 1979, lingers on.After Administrative Law Judge Michel Levant refused to approve the termsof settlements negotiated by pipelines to resolve years of litigation, theplant's owner warned last week that, if unchanged, Levant's decision couldclose down the synthetic gas facility.   Four pipelines that signed 25-year, high-cost contracts to buy theplant's output thought they had finally resolved their problems when inearly 1994 they negotiated deals with Dakota Gasification Co. to lower theprice they must pay. But in a Dec. 29 initial decision, Levant pointed to``an abundance of post-settlement evidence'' confirming his view that thesettlements ``depart from the carefully crafted balance'' achieved inFerc's 1981 ruling, opinion 119, and do so ``at a grossly disproportionatecost to ratepayers.''   But in a statement, Dakota Gasification Vice President Kent Janssen saidLevant's decision would breach the original deal among pipelines,ratepayers and DOE. ``Pricing language in the gas purchase agreements wasdrafted by the ratepayers themselves,'' he said. ``Judge Levant's decisionwould allow them to break that deal. That simply isn't right.''   Natural Gas Pipeline Co. of America, Tennessee Gas Pipeline Co.,Transcontinental Gas Pipe Line Corp. and ANR Pipeline Co. had asked thecommission to endorse their deals with Dakota Gasification and DOE, theprevious owner of the plant, and rule that the resulting costs are eligiblefor full recovery under terms of order 636. The commission subsequentlysevered Natural from the proceeding because of a settlement between thepipeline and its customers. Ferc set the case for hearing in October 1994,instructing the ALJ to keep in mind the commission's cost-passthroughcommitment to the pipelines and its vow to ratepayers that costs would bemarket-based (IF, 17 Oct '94, 13).   The settlements committed the pipelines to pay a total of $504 millionin demand charges over seven years. The gas price would be pegged to thespot price at Ventura, Iowa, as reported in published indexes.   To begin with, Levant chided the pipelines for failing to confer witheither the commission or their customers during negotiations. It is``incomprehensible that the pipelines made no effort to consult with thecommission'' about their disputes with Dakota Gasification, which spawnedextensive litigation. And ``it is even more remarkable that even though theratepayers would be expected to pay the costs of any settlement agreement,the pipelines made no effort to bring them into the settlementnegotiations,'' said the decision (RP93-100, et al.).   What's more, the pipelines apparently did not conduct ``any meaningfulstudies or comparative analyses to evaluate the resultant costs andbenefits . . . to ratepayers'' under the original agreements and thesettlements. The ``thrust'' of the pipelines' argument in support of thesettlements ``was that they compared favorably with potential litigationoutcomes,'' Levant continued. But he characterized the pipelines'litigation scenarios as ``highly speculative.''   The bottom line is that the settlements ``do not reflect a reasonablecompromise,'' said the judge. There is ``simply no evidence in the record . . . which supports the imposition upon ratepayers of an obligation to pay$504 million in demand charges in seven years,'' he said, noting thatratepayers already had paid about $490 million in above-market gas costsover the past decade to support demonstration of the coal-gasificationtechnology.   Levant suggested that in weighing their options, the pipelines shouldhave paid more attention to their other high-cost gas supply contracts,which ``served to elevate the price'' of synthetic natural gas purchasedfrom Dakota Gasification under terms of the original pricing formula. Atthe time of the settlements, these contracts were being reformed, leadingto a natural decline in the SNG price. The option of continuing to buyunder the original agreements, ``with necessary and appropriatemodifications by the commission'' to reflect the restructured pipelineservices market, ``yields a more favorable result for the pipelines and,more importantly, for the ratepayers who must ultimately pay the bill,''Levant concluded.   At one time speculative, the coal-gasification technology developed atthe Great Plains project is now ``a great success,'' Levant asserted. Hesaid ``there has been no persuasive showing in the record that continuedoperations of the plant cannot be sustained'' under modified versions ofthe original agreements approved in opinion 119.   Levant also held that an appropriate ``top-of-the-market'' pricingformula for the period commencing May 1, 1993, would be based on an averageof Gulf Coast spot-price indexes plus a 5% premium. Testimony during thehearing by a ratepayer witness ``recognizes a reasonable premium for SNG intracking the natural-gas market, which is supported by [a] survey ofLDCs,'' said the decision.   The formula endorsed by Levant would have produced a 1995 average priceof around $1.65/MMBtu, using figures from Inside F.E.R.C.'s Gas MarketReport. In his statement, Janssen said that Dakota Gasification's cost ofproduction currently is $2.60/MMBtu, ``and the pricing Judge Levantsuggests comes nowhere near covering costs. For the judge to suggest[Dakota Gasification] can survive with that price is ludicrous.''   Levant ruled that the pipelines' purchase obligations should be limitedto the original total of 137,500 MMBtu/day, rather than the settlements'153,520 MMBtu/day. Even though the contract-demand language in the originalagreements is pegged to the total output of the plant, which has sinceincreased, Dakota Gasification ``has made no showing to justify unlimitedexpansion of the original contract obligations for the purchase of SNG bythe pipelines or the ratepayers,'' the judge said. Excess volumes producedat the plant can be made available for sale by Dakota Gasification ``atcompetitive market prices or for production of the more lucrativebyproducts and co-products.''   Dakota Gasification said the plant's average production since 1988 hasbeen 157,000 Mcf/day.   Finally, the rate charged by Dakota Gasification for transporting gasfrom the plant to an interconnection with Northern Border Pipeline Co. atHebron, N.D., should be 5.5 cents/MMBtu, rather than the 22 cents/MMBtuproposed by the plant owner, Levant said. According to an estimate by Fercstaff, Dakota Gasification already has collected some $46 million intransportation revenue, which has ``fully compensated'' the company fortransportation ``for the entire [25-year] life of the project,'' thedecision said.   If the decision is upheld, the pipelines would have to refund tocustomers all amounts above the price and volume specified in the ordersince May 1, 1993. Dakota Gasification, which vowed to file exceptions toLevant's decision within 30 days, noted that the commission has promised toact in the case by the end of 1996.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINSIDE F.E.R.C. via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   GAS PRICES TO CONSUMERS FELL MORE THAN WELLHEAD PRICES over the past 10GAS PRICES TO CONSUMERS FELL MORE THAN WELLHEAD PRICES over the past 10years, according to a study released last week by the American Gas Assn.While some classes of customers enjoyed greater savings than others, allcustomers experienced lower prices in real terms during the decade endingin 1994, said AGA President Michael Baly.   ``Over this 10-year period, the actual average price of natural gas toall customers declined by 93 cents/Mcf,'' while wellhead prices fell by 78cents/Mcf, he said. Industrial customers saw the largest savings, averaging57%, ``as regulators and utilities moved toward reflecting the actual costof service for a customer and toward eliminating the historic subsidizationof residential prices by large-volume users,'' the report said. During thesame period, residential gas prices fell by 24%, after having increased by111% the previous decade.   A recent Energy Information Administration study covering the period1988 through 1994 found that wellhead prices and the cost of transmissionto the city-gate fell roughly equally but that distribution markups did notdecline (IF, 4 Dec, 3).   Seeking to deflect criticism that the distribution and transmissionsectors of the industry have not done enough to reduce costs, Baly saidthat costs in these sectors declined by 33% during the 10 years. ``Thepricing structures of the different sectors of the industry are not thesame and they respond differently and at different times to the commodity,labor and capital markets, and to regulatory impediments,'' he said. Balyadded that ``this makes it unlikely that prices in each sector would moveidentically and simultaneously on a percentage basis.''   Offering a cost-cutting example, the report noted that the gas utilityindustry served almost 58-million gas meters in 1994 with about 187,000employees, compared with 49-million meters and 221,000 employees 10 yearsearlier. ``That's the equivalent of serving 18% more customers with 15%fewer employees, a personnel reduction of 34,000 across the utilityindustry,'' said the report.   The bottom line ``still is that all gas customers are benefiting fromincreased competition and lower gas prices,'' Baly concluded. Gas demandincreased by nearly 30% during the 10-year study period, the report noted.And to extend this trend in the face of growing competition from arestructured electric industry, ``all sectors of the industry will continueworking to reduce costs, to enhance product value to gas consumers and toresist attempts to fragment and weaken the industry.''   For more information on the study, ``The Effects of Competition onNatural Gas Prices,'' contact AGA at (703) 841-8400.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINSIDE F.E.R.C. via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   WILLIAMS STEPS IN AS FULL KERN RIVER OWNER AFTER FTC KNOCKS QUESTAR OUT   It all happened rather quickly. After the Federal Trade Commission latelast month moved to block Questar Pipeline Co.'s $225 million plan toacquire Tenneco Energy's 50% ownership interest in Kern River GasTransmission Co., the parties agreed not to challenge the decision andTenneco Energy promptly picked another suitor, reaching an agreement at alesser price with The Williams Cos. Inc. on Dec. 31.   Since it already owns the other half of Kern River, Williams would bethe sole owner of the Wyoming-to-California pipeline. The $205 million saleis subject to FTC approval, which is where Questar ran into problems in itsbid.   Reasoning that Questar's planned ownership in Kern River would translateinto a monopoly on gas service in the Salt Lake City area, the FTC on Dec.27 said it would bar the move. Questar owns Utah distributor Mountain FuelSupply Co. and the FTC was concerned that if it also held a portion of KernRiver, the pipeline would not bypass Mountain Fuel to serve customersdirectly, an FTC official noted.   If the purchase had gone through, ``Questar could discourage Kern Riverfrom competing in the area,'' according to William Baer, director of theFTC's Bureau of Competition. ``Kern River was soliciting business in theSalt Lake City area,'' and ``diminishing that threat of lateral bypass toKern River was our concern with the acquisition,'' Baer told InsideF.E.R.C. Industrial customers should view the ruling as a positivedevelopment, he asserted.   Following the decision, Questar decided to forgo the purchase ratherthan challenge the FTC. Litigation ``wasn't in our best interest,'' aQuestar spokesman said. ``Our interest was access to Nevada and Californiamarkets,'' he said. ``We are disappointed'' with the FTC ruling ``and don'tagree with it,'' Tenneco Energy Chairman and Chief Executive Officer SteveChesebro' said in a statement. But the company decided to contact potentialbuyers rather than fight the FTC, Chesebro' said.   The Questar spokesman noted that Questar and Tenneco Energy had fileddocuments with the FTC and conducted extensive discussions with FTC staffto demonstrate that the purchase would not reduce competition for gastransportation services in Utah. ``We said both Ferc and state regulatorswould pay attention to whether Mountain Fuel was acting in the customers'best interest,'' the spokesman explained.   Mountain Fuel does receive gas from Kern River to serve customers nearSalt Lake City, but ``Kern River has never sold gas in the area,'' headded. The Questar spokesman suggested that the FTC was ``using an obsoleteview of the pipeline industry'' that didn't include the open-accessprinciples of order 636. He noted that Questar had planned to have its KernRiver functions separate from its other operations to mitigate anyantitrust concerns.   According to a release from the FTC, the acquisition would``substantially reduce competition'' between Questar and Kern River, whichwould lead to ``higher prices and other anticompetitive effects.'' The factthat Questar owns Mountain Fuel ``enhanced its market power,'' Baer noted.He conceded that ``this is a somewhat unusual antitrust case'' because KernRiver is a competitive presence in the area ``even though they have zeropercent of the market.''   And ``we weren't convinced'' that Ferc regulation of Kern River wouldalleviate that market power, Baer said. What's more, Questar has said thatit faces competition from Kern River because Kern River has expressed itsintentions to expand to directly serve the Salt Lake City area, and theplanned purchase was like ``buying an insurance policy'' against thatcompetition, Baer asserted.   As for the sale to Williams, Tenneco Energy said the companies executeda binding $205 million agreement on the last day of the year. ``Weconcluded it was in Tenneco's best interest to avoid the time and expenseinvolved in restarting the bidding process and go ahead and finalize theterms of the transaction before year-end,'' Chesebro' said. The timing ofthe sale also allows Tenneco Energy to retain about $10 million of netoperating income accrued since September, when the company first announcedthe sale of its share of the system to Questar.   Williams is pretty confident that it will not run into trouble gettingFTC approval of its Kern River purchase, according to corporate spokesmanJim Gipson. ``I don't think they will have more of a problem with us owning100% of Kern River than they have with us owning 50%,'' he said. Williamssubsidiary Northwest Pipeline Corp., which transports gas from some of thesame Rocky Mountain production areas as Kern River, ``serves the PacificNorthwest,'' a market area completely different from Kern River's, henoted.   If the purchase is approved by the FTC, Gipson observed, ``we willwholly own five interstate pipelines'' -- Williams Natural Gas Co.,Northwest, Texas Gas Transmission Corp., Transcontinental Gas Pipe LineCorp. and Kern River.   Williams has had the right since last May to make an offer to purchaseTenneco Energy's half interest in Kern River. While the company ``has notcommented'' on whether or not it ever did, ``don't assume that we didn'tmake an offer,'' Gipson advised.   In September, when Questar agreed to pay $225 million for TennecoEnergy's portion of Kern River (IF, 18 Sept, 8), Williams declined a chanceto match that offer. But Keith Bailey, chairman, president and CEO ofWilliams, noted last week that lower interest rates, tax issues and otherfactors combined to change the economics of the acquisition since then.``We have always said that we were interested in [wholly] owning Kern Riverunder the right set of circumstances,'' Gipson pointed out.   Lower interest rates are key to the deal's viability, Gipson said.Williams and Tenneco Energy began working last year to refinance KernRiver's debt ``to take advantage of today's [low] interest rates,'' hestated, and that will help Williams finance its acquisition. When KernRiver was built in 1991, Williams and Tenneco Energy each paid $150 millionof the $1 billion cost, and the remaining $700 million was borrowed fromvarious banks at an average interest rate just over 9%, Gipson recalled.Williams plans to refinance the remaining $643 million of debt at aninterest rate that probably will be 2% lower, he said.   Tax issues also came into play in the structuring of the deal, Gipsoncontinued. While Questar's transaction with Tenneco Energy was to be a $225million stock purchase, Williams is buying Tenneco Energy's 50% partnershipinterest, rather than stock. For Williams, purchasing a partnershipinterest rather than stock is preferable for tax reasons, he said.   The stock-purchase structure of Tenneco Energy's deal with Questar wasone factor that discouraged Williams from matching Questar's offer when ithad the chance, according to Gipson. ``The deal we had to pass on lastfall, the only opportunity we had was to match [Questar's offer], instructure and price,'' he said. ``Every company is different, everycompany's financial profile is different. So what is a great deal for onecompany is not necessarily a great deal for another.''   Gipson also noted that Williams is paying $20 million less than Questarhad agreed to pay. Williams is paying $26 million more, however, forTenneco Energy's 50% partnership interest than its own 50% Kern Riverinterest carries in Williams' own books. Williams has appreciated itsinitial $150 million investment in Kern River to $179 million, Gipsonsaid.   As 100% owner of Kern River, Williams ``could monetize the 50%'' itbought from Tenneco Energy ``to an investor or to the public,'' Gipsonpointed out. ``We're not necessarily announcing that we are going to dothat,'' but the option would be there, he said.   If the purchase goes through, Williams will stop reporting income fromKern River as equity income and start reporting it as operating income. Thepipeline has been contributing $32 million to $33 million per year toWilliams' income; that would double once Williams gets Tenneco Energy'sshare, and Williams also expects savings from increased operatingefficiencies. Williams always has operated Kern River, but Tenneco Energyhas handled the administrative side. After the acquisition, administrativefunctions ``will be folded into our Salt Lake City offices,'' where anadministrative staff already is in place for Northwest. While it will add afew people to the current Salt Lake City staff, Williams expects Kern Riverto achieve ``annual savings of $2 million to $3 million'' as a result of``not having two corporate entities involved'' in running it, Gipson said.   Following the purchase announcement, Moody's Investors Service Inc.placed the securities ratings of Williams and its subsidiaries on reviewfor possible downgrade. Moody's said its review ``will examine thelikelihood of a deterioration in Williams' financial position as a resultof the acquisition. Although Williams' 100% ownership of Kern River mayprovide operational benefits, the acquisition is expected to add asubstantial amount of debt to Williams' balance sheet.''Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINSIDE F.E.R.C. via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   WITH CONDITIONS, FERC SIGNS OFF ON PARKING SERVICES FOR THREE PIPES   The added flexibility afforded customers is reason enough to approve theplans of three pipelines to provide hub services in the form of parking andloaning, Ferc reasoned in a series of orders issued late last month.Proposals by Panhandle Eastern Pipe Line Co., Mojave Pipeline Co. andIroquois Gas Transmission System all were approved with an effective dateof Jan. 1, subject to conditions. Ferc said technical conferences should beheld to address concerns about the Mojave and Panhandle plans.   The pipelines generally proposed to establish programs that would allowcustomers to park gas at specified receipt points for withdrawal at a laterdate.   Iroquois shippers were concerned that existing operations would behindered as the pipeline used excess line pack to provide the services (IF,18 Dec, 6). But Ferc dismissed that notion in its Dec. 29 order (RP96-63).Because Iroquois has assigned its parking and loaning service a lowerpriority than firm and interruptible transportation, ``there is no basisupon which to find, at this time, that the PAL service will adverselyimpact Iroquois' provision of firm service,'' Ferc said. The commissionalso found Iroquois' rates to be just and reasonable. It concluded thatIroquois shippers will ``reap significant benefits in the form of addedflexibility'' as a result of the PAL service.   For Mojave, which also sought to establish an imbalance trading service,shippers had several questions about how the pipeline would implement itshub proposal (RP96-67). With no storage facilities of its own, how wouldMojave's use of line pack relate to the creation of imbalances? shipperswondered (IF, 25 Dec, 15).   Ferc ordered a technical conference for parties to address ``theiroperational concerns regarding how Mojave will offer hub services and howthe hub services may impact other existing services and tariffprovisions.'' Ferc said customers should be able to explore Mojave'streatment of hub service revenues and its implementation of the newimbalance trading provisions at the conference.   ``Likewise, the technical conference can provide a more informed basisto determine if Mojave's maximum `first-day' and `subsequent-day' rates aretoo high, as suggested by several parties,'' Ferc said. The commissionnoted that it's difficult to compare rate design among the pipelinesoffering hub services because of the variety of those services and pipelinesystems. It's unclear what resources Mojave will use in rendering theservices, Ferc added. It accepted Mojave's hub plan subject to refund andthe outcome of the technical conference.   The commission called for a technical conference in the Panhandleproceeding as well, primarily to explore Panhandle's failure to allocateany costs to its parking service and the possibility of a revenue-creditingmechanism. Late last month, Panhandle sought to allay shippers' fearsregarding its parking service, insisting that it would meet its firm andinterruptible requirements before any parking transactions take place (IF,25 Dec, 14).   The commission's Dec. 29 ruling (RP96-51) found that the operationalflexibility, supply management and financial management options associatedwith the parking service should be in place as soon as possible during thecurrent winter season. Despite those benefits, however, Ferc said Panhandleneeds to provide more support for the parking service rates. The commissionsaid ``the convening of a technical conference is the best method toresolve the issues raised by the parties.''   The order noted that Panhandle did not show a derivation for itsproposed minimum daily rate of 0.5 cents/Dt. ``Panhandle will be requiredto file work papers and supporting materials which support and demonstratesuch derivations,'' Ferc said. It approved the parking service subject torefund and the outcome of the technical conference.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINSIDE F.E.R.C. via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   SERVICE REVISIONS GIVING TENNESSEE SHIPPERS MORE FLEXIBILITY took effectSERVICE REVISIONS GIVING TENNESSEE SHIPPERS MORE FLEXIBILITY took effectJan. 1 as scheduled, the pipeline reported to Ferc last week. The changeswere part of a settlement (RP95-396) on Tennessee Gas Pipeline Co.'smuch-maligned services. In approving the deal Nov. 1, Ferc ordered thestatus report on Tennessee's follow-through (IF, 30 Oct, 3).   Certain firm transporters now can bump interruptible shippers. Inaddition, flexible nomination and scheduling provisions have beenimplemented, and provisions on unauthorized overruns and maximum allowedvolumes give customers additional swing rights, Tennessee said. Thepipeline's production-area pooling, or supply aggregation (SA) service,also is now in place. Some 102 customers that scheduled nearly 3.9-millionDt/day used the modified services and SA service for Jan. 1 business,according to the pipeline.   Tennessee said a pilot group of shippers successfully tested TENN-SPEED3, an upgrade of its computer software, from Nov. 16 through Dec. 8. Allcustomers should be using the new software by April, it said. Alsobeginning in April, new ``swing on storage'' and cash-out services will beavailable.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINSIDE F.E.R.C. via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   FERC'S NOI SHOULD NOT HOLD UP OFFSHORE EXPLORATION PLANS, Shell GasFERC'S NOI SHOULD NOT HOLD UP OFFSHORE EXPLORATION PLANS, Shell GasPipeline Co. told the commission in two different petitions last month. Inits notice of inquiry (RM96-5) on systems operating in the OuterContinental Shelf, Ferc vowed to consider changes to its regulations in aprompt manner because there are several projects pending at the commission(IF, 4 Dec, 1).   Shell Gas late last month said Ferc should not wait for the outcome ofthe NOI before issuing an order on its proposed Mississippi CanyonGathering System (IF, 16 Oct, 11). Delaying a decision on its request for anonjurisdictional declaration ``would have exactly the effect that thecommission says it wants to avoid: impeding and distorting developmentalactivities on the OCS,'' Shell Gas said. If the commission cannot issue anorder by Feb. 1, it could issue an interim ruling, declaring theMississippi Canyon facilities to be nonjurisdictional, subject to theoutcome of its inquiry, the pipeline suggested in the Dec. 22 filing(CP96-9).   Meanwhile, in a new request for a declaratory order (CP96-113), ShellGas submitted plans to develop the Garden Banks Gathering System in theOCS. While Shell Gas commended Ferc for its effort to clarify itsregulations regarding the OCS, delaying the planned construction of theGarden Banks system risks disruption of oil and gas production fromcritical areas, it asserted.   The Garden Banks system would consist of a 50-mile, 30-inch-diameterpipeline extending from the planned Enchilada platform in the Garden Banksarea to a new platform to be set in the South Marsh area. It wouldinterconnect with the existing facilities of Transcontinental Gas Pipe LineCorp., ANR Pipeline Co. and the Blue Water header system. Shell Gas andAmerada Hess Corp., which has committed to a 20% ownership in the system,expect multiple lateral lines to deliver gas into the 30-inch line becausethere is insufficient pipeline capacity to handle expected productionvolumes in the area. Shell Offshore Inc.'s production from the Auger Fieldwas shut in during portions of 1995 because of a lack of pipeline outlets,Shell Gas claimed.   Asserting that the Garden Banks system meets Ferc's primary-functiontest, Shell Gas noted that Ferc found a similar ``spine and lateralsnetwork'' of the Viosca Knoll Gathering System to be nonjurisdictional.Although the planned 30-inch pipe would be the widest line classified byFerc as a gathering facility, the large diameter is necessary to handle allof the expected production from the area, Shell Gas said. It added that``collecting gas from multiple sources into a single 30-inch pipeline`spine' is a more economically efficient way to handle the large volumes ofanticipated production from the Garden Banks area than numerous piecemealgathering lines from individual blocks to individual pipelineconnections.''   The system would have a capacity of 1.2 Bcf/day, according to theapplication. Shell Gas asked Ferc to declare the facilitiesnonjurisdictional by March 1 so production can begin to flow by April 1,1997. If the system is not ready for service by then, ``Shell and otherGarden Banks producers will be subject to significant financial losses,''it told Ferc.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINSIDE F.E.R.C. via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   LATE TO THE GAME, EASTERN SHORE FILES INITIAL RESTRUCTURING PLAN   Two years after most pipelines were forced to jump through the hoops oforder 636, Eastern Shore Natural Gas Co. submitted its initialrestructuring plan. ``We've been in a unique situation,'' said MichaelMcMasters, director of planning for Eastern Shore, explaining that thepipeline at the time of industrywide restructuring was not required to jointhe ranks of open-access pipelines. All that is about to change, however:the pipeline agreed in a settlement to go open access and filed its plan(CP96-128) Dec. 29.   ``There really wasn't any great demand'' for open-access status on thepipeline ``by any of the customers or any public agency'' when order 636was issued, an attorney for Eastern Shore added. ``We felt customers werepleased with the service and the rates'' from the pipeline, the attorneynoted. Since Eastern Shore was not an open-access pipeline, order 636 didnot apply, according to the attorney.   More recently, however, at least one customer ``has expressed someinterest'' in unbundled service, ``and we thought the time was right'' tooffer it, the attorney said. McMasters added that in the pipeline's lastrate case, ``we agreed to open our system'' as part of a settlement.   Eastern Shore's system runs from interconnects with Columbia GasTransmission Corp. and Transcontinental Gas Pipe Line Corp. in southernPennsylvania through Maryland and Delaware, it noted. It serves four localdistribution companies and 12 direct sales customers, with a majority ofits throughput going to its parent, Chesapeake Utilities Corp., McMastersexplained.   Operation of its bundled city-gate sales service requires a significantamount of effort in coordinating receipts, McMasters said. It is severelyconstrained in operational flexibility because peak-day throughput is aboutfour times the system's linepack, the pipeline noted in the application.``The advent of open-access service on the Eastern Shore system, with newrights and obligations being bestowed on both Eastern Shore and itscustomers, may engender a great deal of uncertainty about the futureoperations of its system,'' Eastern Shore told Ferc.   Rather than retain upstream capacity, as some pipelines did, it proposedto have customers exercise nominating and scheduling rights on Transco andColumbia through Eastern Shore. ``We will act as an agent in schedulingtheir gas'' on the upstream pipelines in order to preserve operationalcontrol of its system, McMasters said.   Another critical element to its operations is a certificate request(CP96-97) filed last month (IF, 11 Dec, 14) to increase capacity on itssystem and deal with the declining pressure on its Hockessin line, where ittakes gas from Transco, McMasters added. Noting that Eastern Shore proposedan effective date for restructured services of no later than Nov. 1,McMasters said ``we can't open our system until we get the othercertificate.''   The pipeline intends to file a rate case implementing straightfixed-variable rate design on May 1, the application noted. The timing ofthe rate case is also tied to the certificate request in order to includethe cost of the additional facilities, according to McMasters. The switchto SFV and other elements should produce an average rate hike of 13.56%, hesaid.   Eastern Shore proposed to implement a capacity-release program, withbidding on a ``very simple'' electronic bulletin board that is still beingdeveloped. ``Eastern Shore is proceeding very deliberately in thedevelopment and implementation of its EBB in order to avoid unnecessarycosts which would ultimately be borne by its customers,'' it said. Anytransition costs resulting from restructuring will be collected consistentwith order 636, Eastern Shore said.   In offering unbundled firm transportation, Eastern Shore said customerswill receive entitlements equivalent to their current bundled servicerights. It is offering firm and interruptible transportation, and ano-notice transportation service. Eastern Shore said the cost-based salesservice requirement for small customers under order 636-A is not applicablebecause it has traditionally not offered sales under a small customer rateschedule.   It sought a limited waiver from the commission's marketing-affiliatestandards. ``Due to its small size, Eastern Shore has historically sharedfacilities and employees with Chesapeake,'' resulting in lower costs andlower rates for its customers, the pipeline noted. And since thedistributor sells off-system gas, it is likely considered a marketingaffiliate of the pipeline. Eastern Shore said that it has separated theoperations of its pipeline from those of its marketing affiliate to themaximum extent possible, however, with only two shared employees.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINSIDE F.E.R.C. via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   CONSOLIDATION OF GAS COMPANIES WILL CONTINUE IN '96, ANALYSTS PREDICTBy:Cathy Landry   The gas industry has not seen the last of consolidation, asever-increasing competition this year will force companies to seek greaterefficiencies and cost-cutting measures, according to industry analysts.   ``I would say . . . the merger-and-acquisition activity will rebuild in1996 as companies continue to transform into what I describe as energyconglomerates,'' explained John Olson, first vice president of securitiesresearch for Merrill Lynch. Even though there were some sizableacquisitions in 1995, Olson characterized the 1995 merger-and-acquisitionactivity as ``fairly quiet.''   The really big year for consolidation, he said, was 1994, when PanhandleEastern Corp. merged with Associated Natural Gas Corp. in a transactionvalued at about $800 million, and The Williams Cos. Inc. announced a $3billion acquisition of Transco Energy Co. (IF, 26 Dec. '94, 1). Olsonbelieves 1996 will rival 1994's activity level.   Two consolidation trends should emerge, Olson predicted. First, the bigintegrated energy companies -- ``the Williamses, Panhandles, Coastals,Enrons, Sonats of the world -- will be looking very hard at both U.S. andforeign acquisitions.'' Second, ``you will also see electric utilitieslooking very hard at both pure [distribution companies] and integratednatural-gas companies.''   Ralph Pellecchia, a gas analyst and senior director at Fitch InvestorsService Inc., predicted that companies will continue to position themselvesto deal with greater competition. Because of increasing head-to-headcompetition in a number of markets, Pellecchia suspects there will be evenmore ``partnering up'' in 1996. He said producers and marketers willcontinue to team up, as will producers and marketers with distributors. Inaddition, he said more gas and electric companies will become partners inthe coming year. And he thinks there is the potential for gas distributorsand telecommunications companies to match up.   Capacity turnback will remain one of the major issues in the gasindustry this year, Pellecchia predicted, with pipelines serving Californiaparticularly hard hit. And the turnback issue will ``heat up'' in theMidwest and in other areas of the country as contracts begin to expire andpipeline customers move toward shorter-term commitments, he said.   Gregg Anderson, an analyst with Duff & Phelps Credit Rating Co., agreedthat merger-and-acquisition activity will continue next year. ``I think1996 will be characterized by continuing consolidation and cost-cutting,''he said.   Anderson, who specializes in exploration-and-production companies,expects there to be more, smaller transactions in 1996 than the eye-poppingmegadeals in late 1994. ``I think there are fewer and fewer large companiesout there that have placed all their bets on long-term gas prices.'' Henoted, however, that ``there are a fair number of midsize companies thatare still being hurt by the volatility of gas prices.''   Duff & Phelps recently lowered its outlook for gas prices over the nextfive years. The rating group expects annual-average gas prices between$1.80 and $2/Mcf, down somewhat from its previous projection of $2/Mcfflat. If prices in fact do deteriorate, e&p companies will be forced tocontinue to cut costs, Anderson said.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINSIDE F.E.R.C. via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   AGA ANNOUNCED ITS SUPPORT OF THE D'AMATO BILL TO REPEAL PUHCA, saying thatAGA ANNOUNCED ITS SUPPORT OF THE D'AMATO BILL TO REPEAL PUHCA, saying thatintroduction of the measure ``is an important first step toward eliminatingan outdated statute that unnecessarily inhibits competition and has becomeredundant in light of other, more effective reform implemented in the last60 years.'' The American Gas Assn. board last month adopted a resolutioncalling for repeal of the Public Utility Holding Company Act (IF, 11 Dec,12), just weeks into the term of the group's new chairman, George DavidsonJr., who also is chairman and chief executive officer of ConsolidatedNatural Gas Co., one of five AGA members regulated under the act.   In a Jan. 3 letter to Sen. Alphonse D'Amato, the New York Republican whochairs the Senate Banking, Housing and Urban Affairs Committee, AGAPresident Michael Baly offered the group's explicit support for ``repeal ofPUHCA as called for in your bill.'' Under the measure (S. 1317), Ferc andthe states would be provided access to utility books and records, and theywould have jurisdiction over rate treatment of costs associated withaffiliate transactions (IF, 16 Oct, 1).   Baly further indicated that AGA ``recognizes that PUHCA relates tocorporate organization and financing, and repeal appropriately can beconsidered apart from other legislation on a stand-alone basis.'' Keyenergy lawmakers in the House plan to address PUHCA reform as part ofrestructuring of the electric industry, but Senate Energy and NaturalResources Committee Chairman Frank Murkowski, R-Alaska, has stated firmopposition to linking reform of the act with comprehensive reform of theindustry.   ``Your bill . . . recognizes the anachronistic and burdensome regulatorysystem in place to enforce the provisions of PUHCA,'' Baly's lettercontinued. ``That the Securities and Exchange Commission has endorsedrepeal of the statute makes this an opportune time for Congress to act onthis issue. We urge you to hold hearings on your bill in a timely fashionso that the momentum building on this will not be lost,'' he urged.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINSIDE F.E.R.C. via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   UNION ELECTRIC, CIPS WANT STOCKHOLDERS TO GET CUT OF MERGER SAVINGS   In seeking approval of their proposed merger, Union Electric Co. andCentral Illinois Public Service Co. have asked Ferc to authorize a ``sharedsavings plan'' that would enable stockholders to recover direct mergercosts and then split the remaining savings with ratepayers.   The two utilities, which would be operating utility subsidiaries of theregistered holding company Ameren Corp., also need Ferc approval ofagreements that would implement their plan to transfer Union Electric'sretail electric and gas service in Illinois to CIPS. The Dec. 22 mergerapplication (EC96-7) asked for expeditious approval without a hearing,asserting that ``there can be no dispute that the transaction will producesubstantial cost savings, will expand wholesale market opportunities forthe majority of regional market participants and, therefore, will beconsistent with the public interest.''   When Union Electric and CIPS announced their merger in August (IF, 21Aug, 1), they projected cost savings of $570 million over 10 years. Theapplication raised that to $590 million -- $196 million in corporate andoperations labor, $204 million in corporate and administrative programs,$69 million in nonfuel purchasing economies, $84 million in electricproduction and $37 million in gas supply.   The cost-savings projection was developed in the initial stages ofmerger negotiations and thus is ``not an ex post facto attempt to justify adecision to merge'' but rather has been ``an important element of theapplicant's internal merger planning,'' the application said. Theprojection also doesn't include programs to reduce costs and increaseefficiencies that the two utilities have undertaken on their own, apartfrom the merger, it added.   Subtracted from the savings are costs of $19 million to accomplish themerger, $22 million in transaction costs and a $232 million merger premium,yielding net savings in the first 10 years of $317 million.   The utilities said that in addition to the $590 million saved in thefirst 10 years, the merger would produce another $970 million in savings inthe second 10-year period and almost $1.4 billion in the third 10-yearperiod. To allow stockholders to share in the savings, the companies wouldamortize the $273 million in merger costs over 10 years in a way thatensures there are net savings in each year. They then would split netsavings equally between shareholders and customers. The utilities askedFerc to find that the sharing plan ``is consistent with appropriateregulatory accounting treatment.''   CIPS serves 317,000 retail electric customers and 166,000 gas customersin central and southern Illinois. Union Electric serves 1.06-millionelectric customers and 100,000 gas customers in Missouri and 64,000electric customers and 18,000 gas customers in Illinois. CIPS would acquireUnion Electric's electric and gas distribution systems in Illinois, but notits generation or transmission facilities in that state.   After the merger, under a ``system support agreement'' CIPS would buycapacity and energy from Union Electric to serve the transferred electriccustomers in Illinois. The agreement is intended to avoid cost-shiftingbetween state jurisdictions and, in short, ``to maintain the status quo,with the generation and transmission system planned and installed to servethese customers continuing to serve them,'' the application said. Withoutthe agreement, ``the transfer of the Illinois customers would not bepossible, and the resulting economies would be lost,'' it added, callingthe agreement ``central'' to the merger plan.   On a related point, the applicants asked Ferc to authorize the transferof the current balance in an Illinois account for Union Electric's nucleardecommissioning costs to a Ferc subaccount, since Union Electric no longerwould have retail service in Illinois.   Union Electric and CIPS also plan to operate their combined generationand transmission facilities as a single control area under a ``jointdispatch agreement.'' The single control area would interface with 28 otherutilities, which ``should enhance interchange purchase and salesactivities,'' they said. ``The result should be reduced costs'' for the twoutilities.   On wholesale electric issues, the two utilities said they have compliedwith Ferc's merger policy by filing open-access transmission tariffs thatconform to the pro forma tariffs in the commission's proposed transmissionrule (RM95-8).   Contracts for wholesale requirements customers would remain in place,and any inclusion of merger costs in rates after current contracts expirewould be negotiated with those customers, the application said. Moreover,Union Electric and CIPS committed to an open season in which any wholesalerequirements customer could terminate its contract by giving 90 days'notice if either utility files for a rate increase. That commitment wouldapply to the first five years after the merger is consummated. And anywholesale customer whose contract expires prior to the fifth anniversarywould be allowed to extend its contract to the fifth anniversary date.   Bulk-power market participants would benefit because the two utilitieswould transmit at a single-system, postage-stamp rate, which would expandrather than diminish bulk-power supply options, the utilities asserted. Theapplication included testimony by Rodney Frame of National EconomicResearch Associates Inc., who concluded that ``there is no likelihood of anadverse effect on competition in any of the relevant markets,'' theapplication said.   The merger was approved on Dec. 20 by shareholders of both UnionElectric and CIPSCO Inc., the parent of CIPS. The companies have filed forapproval from the Missouri Public Service Commission and the IllinoisCommerce Commission and said they will seek authorization from the NuclearRegulatory Commission and Securities and Exchange Commission as well asfederal antitrust clearance.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINSIDE F.E.R.C. via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   THE STATE OF THE ELECTRIC INDUSTRY ``IS NOT AT ALL BAD''THE STATE OF THE ELECTRIC INDUSTRY ``IS NOT AT ALL BAD,'' according toEdison Electric Institute President Thomas Kuhn. In a luncheon discussionin Washington last week sponsored by the Washington International EnergyGroup, Kuhn touted the 3.4% growth in electricity demand last year andasserted that steady merger activity is ``changing the face of ourindustry'' for the better.   At Ferc, ``the mega-NOPR is on target and the commissioners seem to bein sync'' for achieving the goal of issuing a final rule on open-accesstransmission and stranded-cost recovery this spring, he said. Commenting ona subject that is drawing increased attention both as part of and apartfrom the debate over the proposed rule, Kuhn said EEI is ``very much opento the concept of developing the specifics'' of what would constitute anindependent system operator for transmission service.   ``But before you say that the ISO should be applicable to every place . . . you have to look at a lot of those specifics'' to make sure that itaccommodates unique characteristics of the affected market, he continued.The industry remains concerned that one-size-fits-all solutions may beinappropriate in the context of the restructuring, Kuhn added.   Looking at what is going on in Congress, the EEI president maintainedthat there is no need for legislation ``to address retail competition thattells the state what they have to do.'' Asserting that ``states arevigorously looking at competition,'' Kuhn said they do not need a federalmandate to require retail wheeling. Asked if EEI is concerned that withouta legislative directive there will develop a hodgepodge of programs stateby state, Kuhn replied that markets are developing on a regional basis.``Issues are being addressed'' and solutions are being examined regionally,he asserted. ``You are just seeing the marketplace work.''   Kuhn declined to speculate on what action Congress might ultimatelytake, or when it might happen. House Commerce Committee Chairman ThomasBliley Jr., R-Va., and energy and power subcommittee Chairman Dan Schaefer,R-Colo., have talked about comprehensive legislation to restructure theindustry, possibly involving federal pre-emption on the issue of retailwheeling (IF, 27 Nov, 1), but ``they haven't really come up with anyparticular proposals at this time,'' he observed.   Commenting on specific state developments, Kuhn said the investor-ownedutility industry was very pleased that the California Public UtilitiesCommission's Dec. 20 restructuring order would permit 100% recovery ofstranded costs. And on that subject, he slammed the Electricity ConsumersResource Council's proposal to give utilities the chance to recover no morethan 50% of such costs, suggesting that it in fact would allow very littlecost recovery (see story on page 1).Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINSIDE F.E.R.C. via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   NEPCO CAN'T CHARGE A FIRM RATE FOR CURTAILABLE TRANSMISSION even though theNEPCO CAN'T CHARGE A FIRM RATE FOR CURTAILABLE TRANSMISSION even though thecustomer has agreed to the rate, the commission says. In a Dec. 29 order(ER96-200, et al.), Ferc directed New England Power Co. to file within 30days lower rates for the service that is subject to curtailment.   NEPCO transmits power from the New York Power Authority to variousMassachusetts municipal customers, whose agent is Massachusetts MunicipalWholesale Electric Co. In a renegotiation last fall, MMWEC agreed to pay afirm rate for transmission of 35,456 Kw. Of that amount, 17,730 Kw will betransmitted on a firm basis and the remaining 17,726 Kw will have acurtailment priority higher than some nonfirm transmission but lower thanthe firm service that NEPCO provides to itself and other firm customers.   Ferc declared itself unpersuaded by NEPCO's arguments that MMWEC agreedto pay the firm rate for the whole amount and that the utility wasn'tobligated to offer any firm service at all. ``For the firm service that itwill provide, NEPCO should be compensated. However, for the other serviceit will provide, i.e., for the less-than-firm service it will provide,NEPCO is not thereby entitled to an excessive rate,'' the commission said.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINSIDE F.E.R.C. via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   ELCON OFFERS STRANDED-COST RECOVERY PLAN; NO THANKS, SAYS EEI CHIEFBy:Craig S. Cano   Asserting that it's time to drop the posturing by utilities that seek100% stranded-cost recovery and customers that argue for no recovery, theElectricity Consumers Resource Council with some trepidation last weekproposed a formula that would permit utilities to recover up to 50% ofcosts associated with uneconomic assets. The decision to put astranded-cost proposal into play stemmed from a desire to ``kick this thingalong,'' said ELCON Executive Director John Anderson, despite lingeringconcern that the proposal might be interpreted as a signal that industrialcustomers are willing to negotiate an even higher recovery figure.   At a Wednesday press briefing to release ELCON's ``Road Map for theTransition'' to a fully competitive market, the group's Director ofTechnical Affairs John Hughes noted that uneconomic assets are ``veryclearly defined'' by the document. ``We are restricting what we want to puton the table'' in the first place, he said. The result is that what ELCONcalls 50% recovery may indeed be much less than half in the eyes ofutilities.   But the investor-owned utility industry trade group is not prepared tobudge from its insistence on the right to seek full cost recovery. ELCON'scomplex formula for calculating and allocating stranded costs is ``designedto ensure that there would be very little, if any, cost recovery,'' saidEdison Electric Institute President Thomas Kuhn. Speaking at a Thursdaylunch sponsored by the Washington International Energy Group (see story onpage 10), Kuhn asserted that the proposal ignores the fact that Ferc andmany states, like California, believe a utility's right to seek full costrecovery is in the public interest. ``We really think it is a road map fullof ruts and potholes,'' he added.   Asked if he sees the ELCON proposal as a bargaining issue to which anEEI counteroffer will be made, Kuhn said that ``we already have come upwith our own proposal. We are sticking with it.'' EEI supports Ferc'sproposal to allow utilities to seek full recovery, he said, adding, ``Idon't see a bargaining chip here at all.'' Furthermore, ``I don't think[the ELCON proposal] is going to be adopted by anybody,'' Kuhn said.   The road map identified certain costs that would not be eligible forrecovery. For example, utilities could not recoup the above-market costs ofpurchased-power agreements and/or fuel-supply contracts that the utilityhas with affiliated companies. Also, ``no utility shall be allowed to seekrecovery of any costs associated with uneconomic assets that were committedto subsequent to the enactment of the Energy Policy Act,'' said the roadmap, which is a companion document to ELCON's ``Blueprint for CustomerChoice'' (IF, 9 Oct, 3).   Utilities also would be required to engage in mitigation measures,including writing off or writing down assets. Finally, during thetransition period to competitive markets, utilities would not be permittedto earn a return on any uneconomic asset.   Costs that could be recovered as uneconomic assets would include thosefrom purchased-power agreements and/or fuel-supply contracts withnonaffiliates that exceed a market-clearing price; properly allocatedoverhead expenditures associated with the uneconomic assets; some costsassociated with the deferred recovery of certain investments orexpenditures as a result of regulatory decisions; and the rate base valueof uneconomic generating assets in excess of their fair market value.   However, stranded costs for generating assets would be reduced by twofactors. First, utilities would deduct from the calculation thedifferential between fair market value and any generation assets below thatvalue. Second, the uneconomic asset costs would be offset by deferredaccounts that ``constitute outstanding utility obligations to theirratepayers and are owed to their ratepayers,'' ELCON said.   Having defined the eligible costs, the proposal then identified afive-step process for recovering them. Step one would be to determine theexact amount of the uneconomic assets through either a regulatoryproceeding or the utility's voluntary divestiture of the assets as a meansof determining their market value, which Anderson described as ``the lastgreat rate case or divest.''   In step two, the state commission would determine a shareholder/customersharing mechanism. First, the utility would be required to commit tomitigate costs to the ``maximum extent possible'' or the state could set a``minimum mitigation threshold'' designating a level of expectedmitigation. The nonmitigable costs would be split between the utility andcustomers based on a formula that would allow the company to recover nomore than 50% and could give even less based on the imposition of whatELCON called a ``responsibility factor.'' That factor, to be developed byeach state commission, would reflect: the portion of the utility'sportfolio of uneconomic assets that were due to management discretion andthose that were due to government mandates; the utility's mitigation of themitigable costs; and the ``quality of the utility's management at the timethe uneconomic assets were incurred.''   Essentially, an extremely well-managed and efficient utility that``aggressively opposed'' any government mandate -- e.g., New York's 6 centsavoided-cost law -- that created the uneconomic asset would get to recoverthe full 50%. Conversely, a poorly run utility that did not fight suchgovernment mandates could be denied recovery of any costs, ELCON said.   In the rest of the process, step three would involve allocation ofrecoverable costs to each customer class ``on a pro-rata basis usingcost-causation principles''; step four would be to determine a set recoveryperiod of three to five years; and step five would involve a true-upmechanism to annually re-evaluate the level of the recoverable costs.   That is an ``absolutely ludicrous way to go about things,'' Kuhncommented. And in a prepared response, EEI said the proposal ``sets up aregulatory nightmare, where utilities will be involved in proceedings foryears, arguing every point of legitimate stranded-cost recovery andrelitigating prudence, already determined by state commissions, withELCON's members.''   EEI further asserted that the road map ``suffers from the same fatalflaws'' that the trade group saw in the blueprint. ``It is an attempt toadvance ELCON's goal of imposing a one-size-fits-all `federal structure' onthe U.S. electric system which will deliver any benefits of restructuringprimarily to its members at the expense of everyone else.''   Anderson revealed ELCON's intent to issue the road map at the NationalAssn. of Regulatory Utility Commissioners' annual meeting, where he cameunder sharp criticism from state regulators for the blueprint's lack ofdetail about transition issues (IF, 20 Nov, 15). As he did at that time,Anderson last week stressed that the blueprint was a ``vision'' documentmeant to describe where the electric business should end up and was neverintended to address the transition period. The road map should ``dispel theuncertainty of not knowing'' how to get to full competition, Hughes added.   Stranded cost is just one part of the road map. Overall, it envisionsthe transition as a three-year process to end on a designated day. Halfwaythrough the transition, customers would be allowed to choose their newpower supplier.   Looking at market power, ELCON asserted that while customer choice ``isa powerful weapon, . . . there must also be full enforcement of laws andregulations to protect consumers against anticompetitive practices andantitrust violations.'' Market entry is another check on market power, so``no undue prohibitions should exist to entry in any market segment such asgeneration, grid operation, ancillary services, transmission, localdistribution, merchant or customer service,'' it said.   ELCON embraced the concept of operationally unbundling generation,transmission, distribution and merchant functions into separate corporateentities. That's the approach put forth by the Dept. of Justice in itscomments on Ferc's notice of proposed rulemaking on open-accesstransmission (RM95-8). The road map also detailed the pricing andregulation of interaffiliate transactions that would be necessary to ensuresuccess of operational unbundling. So while ELCON did not call formandatory divestiture, market pressures may bring about that result asutilities find ``it isn't worth the hassle to stay under the regulatoryreach,'' Anderson said.   But EEI countered that there is ``no need to `require' unbundling or toencourage divestiture.'' The group said its NOPR comments demonstrated that``the competitive market and the threat of competition will mitigate marketpower. The establishment of [regional transmission groups], which EEI hasbeen advocating for years, can further help mitigate market power if somefeel it still exists.''   On the issue of decontrol of generation, ELCON said that by the end ofthe transition period all generation should be removed from rate base.During the transition, and for some additional period if a fullycompetitive market still has not emerged, the generating company wouldcontinue to sell power to the affiliated or previously affiliateddistribution company under ``transition contracts at rates based onembedded costs or other state-approved rates, terms and conditions,'' itsaid.   The transition contracts also would provide for ancillary and backupservices ``to all producers and consumers who had or achieved [PublicUtility Regulatory Policies Act] qualifying status by the beginning of thetransition period.'' ELCON said repeal or reform of PURPA should not beginuntil those contracts are in place and enforceable.   That provision was panned by the PURPA Reform Group, which comprisesutilities seeking to repeal the mandatory-purchase requirement of section210. ``Although ELCON purports to support `real competition' in electricpower, it seems bent on using PURPA for every subsidy it can possiblyget,'' the group said in a statement. ``Utilities would be denied recoveryof prudently incurred costs associated with uneconomic assets committed toafter passage of the Energy Policy Act -- and yet they would be required tocontinue buying PURPA power for the indefinite future.''   Anticipating that criticism, Anderson asserted at the briefing that thedebate over repeal of section 210 is misdirected in its focus on themandatory-purchase requirement. He maintained that no new PURPA contractsare being signed at above-market costs and that the utilities' problem iswith older high-cost contracts. What is lost in the debate, Andersoncontinued, is that section 210 also requires that backup and ancillaryservices be provided to QFs. And until QFs are assured of being able toobtain those services on a competitive basis, Congress should not pull thesection 210 rug out from under them, he said.   In other sections of the road map, ELCON supported private ownership oftransmission and distribution lines, independent system operations andcoordination, and a federal/state joint board on universal services.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINSIDE F.E.R.C. via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   ISOS, CAPACITY RELEASE, ALTERNATIVE RATES HIGHLIGHT FERC'S 1996 AGENDABy:Chris Newkumet   The coming year at Ferc should be eventful indeed with the commissionplanning to make major progress on a series of initiatives spanning itsgas, electric and hydropower responsibilities. But the big enchiladaclearly is the open-access transmission rule, Chair Elizabeth Molerindicated last week, vowing that a final rule will be out sometime thisspring. And a critical element of the rule may well involve independentsystem operators, a concept that has caught the commission's attention tothe extent that it is planning a Jan. 24 public conference to furtherexplore the idea.   In an interview with Inside F.E.R.C. last Thursday, Moler also vowedthat this year will bring: guidelines for reforming power pools to ensurenondiscriminatory operation; a new merger policy that accommodates thechanging nature of the electric industry; substantial progress indeveloping alternative pipeline rate structures and guidelines forincentive rates; formalized information and business practice standards forthe pipeline sector; and possible revisions to the commission'shydropower-relicensing regulations.   What's more, Moler revealed that the commission is quickly narrowing thefield of potential changes to the capacity-release program designed to makesuch transactions ``easier and more equitable,'' with final revisionsexpected well before the end of the year. Still near the intractable end ofthe spectrum of Ferc issues, however, is capacity turnback; Moler allowedthat no one has hit upon a ready solution to the growing dilemma, with thecommission and the industry continuing to feel their way.   The highest-profile generic proceeding at the commission, theopen-access transmission notice of proposed rulemaking (RM95-8), likelywill cross the finish line ahead of all others. ``We're beginning veryserious staff work and commissioner work'' on the final rule, Moler said,characterizing the recent holiday break as the ``seventh-inning stretch''in the mega-NOPR game.   Part of that work will examine how ISOs may fit into the final rule,Moler noted, asserting that the concept has ``great potential'' in thescheme of things to come. With three major power pools telling Ferc thatthey plan to install ISOs, and the California Public Utilities Commissionincluding the concept in its restructuring plan, it was not hard for Fercto notice that ``the industry seems willing to embrace them,'' the chairsaid.   ``The issue before us now is how do we evaluate ISOs,'' Moler continued.``What are the essential elements and operating characteristics of an ISO?How do we make sure that ISOs, if they are created, are nondiscriminatory?Are ISOs necessary? Is functional unbundling enough, or do we have tomandate ISOs?'' At the public conference, ``we will benefit from someadditional dialogue on the issues as we work toward a final rule,'' shesaid.   ISOs have potential not only in tight pools, Moler continued.``Individual companies or two or three companies doing a strategic alliancecould set up an ISO,'' she suggested. What an ISO should not become is ``areincarnated pool where only the utilities can play . . . and have thepotential to discriminate in favor of their own generation.''   The commission has learned much by watching the individual staterestructuring proceedings, the chair said, emphasizing the interfacebetween the new state programs and what Ferc has in mind for the wholesalemarket. ``Individual states are beginning to make their decisions about thenature of their local distribution and the way they want their utilities tobe structured,'' Moler observed. Open access at the interstate level``clearly facilitates that . . . it is an essential prerequisite to furtherprogress at the state level.''   For instance, the CPUC ``has decided to go to direct access,'' she noted(IF, 25 Dec, 1). ``So be it, great. And in order to do that, they decidedthey need a power pool . . . [and] a power exchange. And they recognizedthe power pool and power exchange are jurisdictional to this commission. Sothere is absolutely a link between'' wholesale and retail open access.   Anything to report on the Ferc/state jurisdictional split? ``The ballnow is in our court to come out with a decision and define what we mean byinterstate transmission,'' Moler acknowledged. ``Obviously, we've been verycognizant of the states' concerns about it, but it's our turn to issue afinal rule'' and go on from there.   The rules of the game for power pools also are on Moler's mind. ``Ianticipate major work this year on reforming power pools,'' she revealed.During the recent conference on the topic (IF, 11 Dec, 1), poolrepresentatives ``all said they are reforming themselves,'' the chairrelated. Even so, Ferc will give the matter ``a lot of attention thisyear'' under the mantle of its notice of inquiry on alternativepower-pooling institutions (RM94-20). ``What do power pools have to do interms of new membership and new structures and split-savings rates in orderto be nondiscriminatory?'' she wondered. ``That's a big deal,'' and Fercwill issue new guidelines this year.   A new policy for utility mergers will be next up, Moler said, notingthat ``lots of companies seeking to merge are very anxious about what wewill do. It's very topical.'' She observed that ``some of the measures ofbenefits that we have used historically'' to judge mergers ``will not beappropriate'' in an open-access environment. For instance, in recent casesutilities have been required to provide open access as a merged entity.``Well, everybody will be open'' after the final rule is issued, ``so wehave to re-examine our merger policy.''   In the area of hydro relicensing, ``we're making slow but steadyprogress'' in working through the mountain of applications filed at the endof 1993, Moler said, noting that the commission is ``encouragingsettlements, and we have lots of settlement activity going on in severalbasins.''   Looking ahead to the next major flood of relicensing applications due atthe turn of the century, the chair seemed to agree with the NationalHydropower Assn. that Ferc's regulations could use some upgrading. Thecommission recently invited comment on NHA's petition for rulemaking (IF, 6Nov, 4), and Moler said she would ``love to be able to move the processfaster at less cost to the project sponsors. And if changing our regs isthe way to do that, I'm happy to figure out what to do.''   On the gas agenda for 1996 is reforming the capacity-release program.Asked whether it makes sense to develop strict rules that the marketroutinely evades, Moler insisted that the best approach simply is to ``makecapacity release easier to do,'' a task that she vowed to complete thisyear.   And the existing price cap clearly will be on the table. ``I'm certainlyaware that the capacity-release issue has evolved in the past year,'' andone new element involves state regulators, Moler explained. ``As more andmore states are looking at competitive markets behind the city-gate, thenature of the capacity-release program is going to change.'' One of her``personal hesitations in terms of releasing the price cap'' has revolvedaround the existence of workable competition. And ``if there are majorchanges at the state level where there is full competition behind thecity-gate, I won't be as worried about the price cap.''   Commissioner James Hoecker's idea of setting an annual revenue cap (IF,25 Dec, 1) ``is one of a variety of things we're looking at,'' said Moler,acknowledging that she is moving closer to the realization that the pricecap can be lifted under certain circumstances. ``The industry's changing,the market's changing,'' Moler reasoned.   Moler also will be targeting the relationship between capacity-releasedeals and interruptible transportation, which she characterized as out ofwhack. ``I think we should have some parallel requirements'' for capacityrelease and IT transportation, the chair suggested, asserting thatpipelines tend to ``make it really easy to do interruptible, because theymake the cash, but much more difficult to do capacity release, because theydon't.''   This dichotomy ``appears to be trivial, but it's not,'' Moler said. ``Itabsolutely tilts the playing field'' in favor of pipeline IT service. ``Idon't think we can pretend that pipelines will be indifferent'' to whethercapacity release or IT transactions are conducted on their systems, ``but Ihope to make it easier'' for shippers to release capacity.   Moler also has great hope for the commission's ongoing study ofalternative rates, maintaining that progress in this area could answerrecurring complaints about pipelines' earnings. Wall Street analysts andpipeline executives have argued time and again that rates of return onequity simply are not high enough in large part due to the discounted cashflow methodology used by the commission, but Moler sought to shift thefocus of the debate. ``My belief now is that what we really need toconcentrate on is finding mechanisms that will allow the pipelines rateflexibility, particularly as they seek to serve new markets or as theircustomers want to package things differently.'' Developing new criteria forincentive rates is another high-priority item.   ``If we can do a better job than we have to date in those two areas,''pipelines ``will have an opportunity to earn a better return. And we'reworking on that.'' While some in the industry still complain about the DCFmethodology, ``the people who have made the most impassioned pleas to merecently on this issue'' have asked for ``a way that we can be moreflexible.''   Pointing to the recourse rate plan floated by the Interstate Natural GasAssn. of America (IF, 13 Nov, 7), Moler explained that the idea is for apipeline to protect traditional, captive customers while having the rateflexibility to offer attractive terms to new customers. Ferc is ``veryseriously looking at what we can do in that area,'' the chair related. Shecautioned, however, that there are ``lots of questions about what kinds offlexibility you should give pipelines. . . . I don't want to give them rateflexibility in a way that will result in deterioration of open-accessservice.'' That having been said, ``it's difficult to figure out how to dothat,'' she admitted.   Moler predicted that within the next year or so, the ``with-it''pipelines, ``those that want to offer new services, offer new deals,'' willbe in a position to earn higher returns due to improvements in rateflexibility and incentives. This approach ``is much more promising thanspending a great deal of time looking at the DCF methodology,'' Moler said,adding that ``there is clearly more enthusiasm in the industry foralternative ratemaking approaches than there is in fiddling around with RORanalyses and the DCF methodology.''   An issue that does not elicit such optimism from Moler is capacityturnback. ``The commission and the industry seem to be feeling their way''in this area, she acknowledged, noting that none of the major players inthe debate as yet has come up with ``a solution'' to the problem. ``Thebest solution is growing the marketplace,'' she offered, while admittingthat certain markets where turnback is an acute problem, like Chicago andCalifornia, show no signs of imminent growth. ``Where markets are notgrowing, it's a very difficult issue.''   Referring to the recent order involving Natural Gas Pipeline Co. ofAmerica (IF, 16 Oct, 1), Moler noted that ``all we've been able to come upwith to date'' in terms of a potential solution ``is basically rateflexibility. That's what the Natural order stands for -- rate flexibilitybut don't zap your captive customers'' by shifting excess costs their way.She conceded ``that is not a final solution in any way, shape or form. Idon't pretend it is.'' Natural responded that Ferc ``can't possibly thinkthis is enough,'' she related. But the pipeline and its customers arebusily pursuing a settlement, she said, suggesting that the longgive-and-take process may be the only way out for pipelines like Naturaland El Paso Natural Gas Co.   And it could get worse, Moler allowed. Would the commission stand by andwatch a pipeline suffer severe financial hardship, even bankruptcy, due toturnback costs? ``I certainly hope'' that doesn't happen. ``Anybody in thisposition would hope not. But it could happen.''   Ferc is feeling some financial pressure of its own these days, due tobudget authorization that orders a 20% reduction in oil-and-gas staff overthe next two years (IF, 20 Nov, 4), and Moler is none too pleased. ``I'mnot happy,'' she said of the budget cut. ``We went in with a voluntary andvery significant cut, and they cut us even further. No manager . . . wouldbe happy in those circumstances.'' But ``it's a fact of life'' now, and``the fact that they gave us two years'' to make the cuts ``certainly makesit easier to deal with.'' Through attrition and transfer of staff to theelectric program, Moler is hoping that ``we don't have to lay too manypeople off'' as a result of the budget directive.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINSIDE F.E.R.C. via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   COMMENT DEADLINE EXTENDEDFerc is beginning to feel the impact of the partial shutdown of the federalgovernment. Noting that a number of agencies closed due to the budgetimpasse were unable to file comments on the draft environmental impactstatement (IF, 20 Nov, 13) for the open-access notice of proposedrulemaking (RM95-8), the commission last week lifted the comment deadline.``In order to accommodate this unusual circumstance, notice is hereby giventhat an extension of time for the filing of comments by all parties on theDEIS is granted for a reasonable period after the agencies have reopened.''The comments had been due today (Monday); a new deadline will be set in afuture notice, Ferc said.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINSIDE F.E.R.C. via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   NAME CHANGEPanhandle Eastern Corp. has decided to change its name to PanEnergy Corp.to reflect its expanding role in the energy industry and commitment toprovide all forms of energy. The board of directors has approved the use ofthe name, and the company will seek stockholder approval at its 1996 annualmeeting. The company's pipeline subsidiaries will continue to operate asAlgonquin Gas Transmission Co., Texas Eastern Transmission Corp., PanhandleEastern Pipe Line Co., Trunkline Gas Co., Trunkline LNG Co. and TexasEastern Products Pipeline Co. The PanEnergy name and logo will replace theAssociated name currently used for some subsidiaries. The company's majornonpipeline subsidiaries will operate under the following new names:PanEnergy Services Inc.; PanEnergy Field Services Inc.; PanEnergy Tradingand Market Services Inc.; PanEnergy Gas Services Inc.; PanEnergy PowerServices Inc.; PanEnergy Risk Management Services Inc.; PanEnergy Transport& Trading Co.; PanEnergy LNG Sales Inc.; PanEnergy Services UK Ltd.; andPanEnergy International Development Corp.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINSIDE F.E.R.C. via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   EQUITRANS AGREED TO BE PLACED AT RISK FOR ITS STORAGE EXPERIMENT involvingEQUITRANS AGREED TO BE PLACED AT RISK FOR ITS STORAGE EXPERIMENT involvingthe injection of nitrogen to replace a certain amount of base gas at itsShirley reservoir in West Virginia. Equitrans Inc. ``believes that thisproject is important both for itself and for the industry and is willing toassume the risks of the project to see it move forward,'' the pipeline saidin a Dec. 29 amendment to its application (CP95-565).   One of the contested elements of Equitrans' certificate request was acondition that if the project fails, the pipeline will be guaranteedrecovery of the net book value of the facility, along with a return on itsinvestment (IF, 31 July, 15). After another look at the risks and remediesin case the nitrogen mixes with other gas to damage the facility, Equitranssaid it would bear all costs associated with such an event.   However, the likelihood of that occurring is less than 1%, according toEquitrans. Under a worst-case scenario, Equitrans said costs to restore thestorage field to normal operations would amount to $1.7 million. It addedthat it would use the revenue generated from the sale of the withdrawn basegas to fund the restoration efforts.   Furthermore, Equitrans assured customers that the terms of all existingstorage contracts would be met regardless of any adverse effects resultingfrom the project. ``This commitment is being made in order to render mootthe security-of-supply concerns'' expressed by customers and to limit thenumber of issues to be addressed by Ferc, Equitrans said.   The pipeline also specified how much base gas it intends to replace withnitrogen. Although it plans to inject 300,000 Mcf of nitrogen, Equitransproposed to withdraw up to 400,000 Mcf of base gas to allow the pressurewithin the reservoir to push the nitrogen away from working-gas parts ofthe facility. The net reduction in base gas ``will ultimately reduceEquitrans' storage rate base to the benefit of customers, while havingvirtually no impact on storage operations,'' the pipeline said.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINSIDE F.E.R.C. via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   AVOCA'S CERTIFICATE AMENDMENTS WERE APPROVED WITH ONLY A FEW adjustments,AVOCA'S CERTIFICATE AMENDMENTS WERE APPROVED WITH ONLY A FEW adjustments,most of which involve environmental conditions. Sponsors of Avoca NaturalGas Storage sought four changes in its certificate to operate the facility,including installing a header that would allow connections with twopipelines in addition to its approved link with Tennessee Gas Pipeline Co.(IF, 23 Oct, 15).   Ferc's Dec. 29 order (CP94-161) approved the header, designed toaccommodate connections with CNG Transmission Corp. and National Fuel GasSupply Corp., along with the other three amendments.   The commission dismissed the concerns of Rochester Gas & Electric Corp.,which has unused storage and transportation capacity on CNG Transmissionand argued that a connection is not needed because of its unsubscribedcapacity. The commission said it is not approving an interconnect yet, butis simply allowing the installation of the header. ``Rochester Gas shouldintervene and raise its concerns when an application is filed to constructthe interconnect between Avoca and CNG,'' Ferc suggested.   The order approved the use of electric compressor motors rather than thegas-fired engines originally planned, noting the reduced emission and noiselevels. Ferc also found no problems with Avoca's switch to six cavernsinstead of five, since there will be no change in the working-gas capacityof 5 Bcf. Lastly, the commission approved Avoca's request to take waterdirectly from the Cohocton River to supplement its withdrawals of waterfrom the storage caverns.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINSIDE F.E.R.C. via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   PLEASE LET US FINISH CONSTRUCTING OUR FACILITIES, EGAN TOLD FERC in anPLEASE LET US FINISH CONSTRUCTING OUR FACILITIES, EGAN TOLD FERC in anemergency motion for clarification. Egan Hub Partners L.P. was in themiddle of construction under Ferc's prior-notice procedures when thecommission issued its order asserting jurisdiction over Egan's operations,it explained in a motion (CP96-21) late last month.   Although its storage facilities in Louisiana have been operating sincesummer, Egan filed a prior-notice request in October to build 6.7 miles of24-inch pipeline and related equipment to connect with Columbia GulfTransmission Co. The notice said that Egan would operate the facilitiesunder section 311 of the Natural Gas Policy Act, and construction began onDec. 4, Egan related.   Then Ferc issued its order (PR95-11) finding Egan's interstate storagefacilities subject to its jurisdiction under the Natural Gas Act anddirecting Egan to seek NGA section 7 authority (IF, 18 Dec, 1). Egan haltedconstruction in order to seek clarification of Ferc's ruling.   Even though Ferc said it should continue storage service using its ratesin effect, Egan asked Ferc to interpret the order to allow the section 311construction to continue. ``Egan believes that the order was not intendedto penalize Egan or its customers for those actions initiated prior toissuance of the order,'' it said. ``Justice requires either clarificationor a stay in order to allow Egan to complete construction of thefacilities,'' the company asserted. No environmental benefit would begained by delaying the construction, it added.   And Ferc recently stayed its decision asserting jurisdiction overpipeline systems run by Kansas Pipeline Operating Co. (IF, 18 Dec, 2) toavoid potential hardship and inequity, Egan said in claiming that itssituation is almost identical to that of the Midwest pipeline systems.   If Ferc does not grant the relief, ``customers will not receive theservice they expected during the winter heating season,'' Egan said,enclosing affidavits from three customers that signed up for servicethrough the Columbia Gulf interconnect. With prompt approval from Ferc,Egan said it could complete the facilities and initiate service for thecustomers by Feb. 1.   ``Without the requested authority, Egan, and ultimately its customers,will incur additional and unnecessary costs,'' it said. Egan noted that itis currently paying standby costs for contractors and equipment totalingalmost $17,000/day -- ``an amount which is significant for a company ofEgan's size.''Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINSIDE F.E.R.C. via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   SHIPPERS CAN CHOOSE TO PAY KOCH GATEWAY DIRECTLY FOR FUEL USED to transportSHIPPERS CAN CHOOSE TO PAY KOCH GATEWAY DIRECTLY FOR FUEL USED to transporttheir gas now that the commission has approved the pipeline'scash-reimbursement plan. Koch Gateway Pipeline Co. had offered to allowcustomers to select the cash-reimbursement option once it posts a price forsuch deals on its electronic bulletin board (IF, 11 Dec, 13), and thecommission late last month turned thumbs up on the proposal.   In a Dec. 28 decision (RP96-58), Ferc dismissed arguments that the saleof fuel gas should be made by a separate arm of the pipeline and complywith the commission's affiliate standards. Noting that it has approvedsimilar tariffs for other pipelines, Ferc reasoned that thecash-reimbursement option is analogous to imbalance cash-out programs. Thecommission said Koch Gateway's plan ``is not a marketing service, but is anextension of its transportation service, and it is not necessary for thesale to be made by Koch Gateway's marketing affiliate.''   Once a customer selects cash reimbursement, Koch Gateway will offer thesame deal to similarly situated shippers while retaining the right to denyrequests, according to the order. Rejecting protests that the tariffprovides Koch Gateway too much discretion in who would qualify for cashreimbursement, Ferc said the pipeline needs some operational flexibilityfor situations when it needs to have the fuel in-kind. ``We find that theterms of the tariff and the commission's regulations afford customersadequate protection against arbitrary action by Koch Gateway,'' Ferc said.   Shippers will still have the option of reimbursing Koch Gateway bysupplying gas in-kind, the commission noted. It accepted the change with aneffective date of Jan. 1.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINSIDE F.E.R.C. via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   AFTER FIVE MONTHS OF ACTIVE NEGOTIATIONS IN THE EL PASO RATE CASE, ``thereAFTER FIVE MONTHS OF ACTIVE NEGOTIATIONS IN THE EL PASO RATE CASE, ``therejust does not appear to be present the necessary give and take, at least atthis point,'' to produce a settlement anytime soon, the commission's headadministrative law judge commented late last month in appointing an ALJ tocommence a formal hearing.   While rejecting El Paso Natural Gas Co.'s proposed exit fee to recovercosts of turned-back capacity last summer, the commission directed partiesto pursue a settlement of other elements of the rate case (RP95-363),setting a Dec. 31 deadline. Parties recently offered differing views on theprogress of those negotiations (IF, 18 Dec, 7), and Chief ALJ Curtis WagnerJr. apparently agreed with the darker view held by Southern CaliforniaEdison Co., which earlier last month called on the commission to appoint ahearing judge.   The parties ``have now had some five months of active negotiations,including unprecedented conferences before a settlement judge'' both in andoutside Washington, said the scheduling order. ``With the number ofconferences that have been held and the enormous effort that has been putforth, everything that could have been said by the parties has been saidmany times and everyone's desires have been fully considered,'' Wagnerobserved. Even so, ``it does not now appear that a unanimous settlement oreven a unanimous partial settlement is possible.''   Accordingly, the case should go to hearing ``on an expedited basis''under the hand of ALJ Joseph Nacy. The order directs Nacy to issue aninitial decision within 18 months.   And while ALJ David Harfeld was relieved of his duties as settlementjudge, ``there is no reason the parties cannot continue to meet amongthemselves to try to work out their differences and dispose of this ratherdifficult case through an agreed-upon settlement,'' Wagner observed. Infact, the parties are scheduled to meet again in Washington Jan. 10-11.   Separately, El Paso on Dec. 28 filed to place into effect as of Jan. 1 amodified version of the June 30 rates accepted and suspended by thecommission last summer.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINSIDE F.E.R.C. via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   ANR IS DOUBLE-CHARGING FOR SERVICE TO A PLANT IN OKLAHOMA, Amoco ProductionANR IS DOUBLE-CHARGING FOR SERVICE TO A PLANT IN OKLAHOMA, Amoco ProductionCo. asserted late last month. Based on the pipeline's misclassification ofits own facilities behind the Mooreland processing plant, ANR Pipeline Co.is collecting both transportation and gathering charges, Amoco told thecommission.   In its complaint (RP96-92), the producer asked Ferc to classify ANR'sfacilities behind the plant as gathering and make the pipeline refundtransportation charges previously collected on plant fuel and shrinkagevolumes. ANR operates several compressor stations in the area, with someattached to its transportation system and others connected to gatheringlines, Amoco related. ANR operates its Mooreland station, however, as botha transportation and gathering facility, according to Amoco.   The pipeline's intent is to create a way to charge both gathering andtransportation fees for gathering service, Amoco asserted. After applyingFerc's modified primary-function test to ANR's Mooreland-area system, Amocosaid ``none of ANR's behind-the-plant facilities performs a transportationservice with respect to field production delivered to the inlet of theMooreland plant and are therefore improperly classified as transmissionfacilities.''   As operator of the Mooreland processing plant, Amoco explained that itusually provides plant fuel and shrinkage volumes by sourcing gas upstreamof the plant. But ``ANR's classification of behind-the-plant facilities hasinhibited Amoco's ability to obtain upstream gas supplies because ANRbundles together transportation and gathering rates on such gas,'' Amocosaid. So when ANR charges the Mooreland plant owners for downstreamtransportation, it receives double charges on volumes of gas equivalent tofuel and shrinkage, Amoco asserted.   The producer noted that Ferc ordered Williams Natural Gas Co. to stopcharging both gathering and transportation rates on fuel and shrinkagevolumes in a similar case. The ANR proceeding deserves the same treatment,Amoco said, asserting that Ferc should order refunds, with interest, on allimproper transportation charges collected since ANR unbundled its gatheringand transportation rates.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINSIDE F.E.R.C. via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   FERC WILL DETERMINE RATE TREATMENT FOR NORTHERN BORDER'S proposedFERC WILL DETERMINE RATE TREATMENT FOR NORTHERN BORDER'S proposedexpansion/extension project in the pending certificate proceeding, it madeclear in a Dec. 29 rate order. Northern Border Pipeline Co. had filed proforma tariffs showing a change in its depreciation rate schedule that itemphasized would be made only if the project is built.   Competitor Natural Gas Pipeline Co. of America had urged the commissionto reject the pro forma sheets (IF, 4 Dec, 15). But Ferc said it considersthe tariff sheets ``to have been provided for demonstration purposes only''and neither accepted nor rejected them.   The commission suspended the rate filing (RP96-45) until June 1 and saida number of issues raised by shippers -- including Northern Border'sexisting depreciation rates -- can be thrashed out in a hearing. But itrejected up front two changes sought by Northern Border.   First, Ferc said Northern Border can't drop its minimum revenue creditfor interruptible transportation. Under the pipeline's cost-of-servicetariff, firm shippers pay all of its costs and receive credits forinterruptible transportation. The minimum credit was put in place whenNorthern Border began open-access transportation because the pipeline coulddiscount IT without bearing any economic consequences itself.   ``This reasoning is equally applicable today and will remain so for aslong as Northern Border maintains this form of tariff,'' the commissionsaid, adding that the cost-of-service tariff ``gives Northern Borderadvantages which other pipelines do not enjoy, their [straightfixed-variable] rate design notwithstanding.'' Since other pipelines baserates on projected costs and billing determinants, they face underrecoveryof their cost of service when they discount, the order noted.   Second, Northern Border asked to eliminate a tariff requirement for atriennial review of its equity rate of return. Again, though, Ferc citedNorthern Border's unusual cost-of-service rate structure. The three-yearreview requirement has applied since the pipeline was built and ``wasconsidered an essential part of the regulatory bargain that was originallyaccepted by Northern Border and still prevails,'' the order said. NorthernBorder ``has not presented a basis for a departure'' from the policy, itadded.   On another point, Ferc set for hearing Northern Border's request toraise its allowance for charitable donations from $20,000 to $100,000.Commissioner James Hoecker dissented on that issue, as he has in other ratecases, saying he would ``summarily find that charitable contributionsshould not be included in rates'' but nevertheless hopes Northern Border``would continue charitable giving regardless of the rate treatmentpermitted such costs.''Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List WT02-B35-27IA086-000616-B011-311http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/ey66.html 205.156.212.5 19970122000114 text/html 9952HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Tuesday, 21-Jan-97 23:59:23 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:40:50 GMTContent-length: 9768Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ey66.html Sample Issue Copyright INSIDE F.E.R.C.'S GAS MARKET REPORT via NewsNet January 3, 1996 SPECIAL REP SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES SPECIAL REPORT (196 words) PRICES OF SPOT GAS DELIVERED TO PIPELINES, JANUARY 1 (415 words) CITY-GATE PRICES IN EFFECT JANUARY 1 IN SELECTED GAS MARKETS (266 words) DELIVERED SPOT-GAS PRICES (55 words) HENRY HUB (13 words) WAHA/WEST TEXAS (12 words) CORRECTION RANGE OF REPORTED SPOT PRICES (DEC. 1, 1995, ISSUE) (40 words) CopyrightINSIDE F.E.R.C.'S GAS MARKET REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996   SPECIAL REPSPECIAL REPORTIf you had gas to sell in Louisiana for Jan. 1, 1996 likely is shaping upto be a pretty good year. Jan. 1 index prices in Louisiana -- with a fewexceptions -- posted gains of $1.01 to $1.24/MMBtu over Dec. 1 indexlevels. The exceptions were for Louisiana deliveries into Koch GatewayPipeline Co. (up 40 cents/MMBtu), Natural Gas Pipeline Co. of America (down2 cents/MMBtu) and Texas Eastern Transmission Corp. in West Louisiana (up63 cents/MMBtu).Sellers in Appalachia also found significantly higher index prices for Jan.1 over Dec. 1: CNG Transmission Corp. was up $1.27/MMBtu and Columbia GasTransmission Corp., $1.20/MMBtu. Index prices on Mid-Continent pipelinesrose too (9 cents to 15 cents/MMBtu) but not by anywhere near as much.   Indexes for pipelines in Texas, where longhaul capacity was limited,ranged from minus 6 cents/MMBtu on Texas Eastern in East Texas to plus 8cents/MMBtu in Florida Gas Transmission Co.'s zone 1. Indexes in theRockies were down 4 cents to 6 cents/MMBtu from Dec. 1. Permian Basinindexes were up 15 cents and 18 cents/MMBtu, and the San Juan Basin indexrose a nickel.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINSIDE F.E.R.C.'S GAS MARKET REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996   SPECIAL REPPRICES OF SPOT GAS DELIVERED TO PIPELINES, JANUARY 1     PRICES OF SPOT GAS DELIVERED TO PIPELINES, JANUARY 1                        (per MMBtu dry)                                Range           IndexANR Pipeline Co.Louisiana$2.80 to $3.45  $3.25Oklahoma$1.90 to $2.10  $2.02CNG Transmission Corp.Appalachia$2.80 to $4.25  $3.80Colorado Interstate Gas Co.Rocky Mountains                 $1.12 to $1.31  $1.26Columbia Gas Transmission Corp.Appalachia (W.Va., Ohio, Ky.)   $2.86 to $4.20  $3.70Columbia Gulf Transmission Co.Louisiana$2.76 to $3.65  $3.35El Paso Natural Gas Co.Permian Basin                   $1.78 to $2.17  $1.92San Juan Basin                  $1.30 to $1.43  $1.39Florida Gas Transmission Co.Zone 1                          $2.02 to $2.35  $2.18Zone 2                          $3.23 to $3.58  $3.40Zone 3                          $2.94 to $3.55  $3.37Kern River Gas Transmission Co.Wyoming$1.21 to $1.32  $1.27Koch Gateway Pipeline Co. (formerly United)Louisiana$2.20 to $3.38  $2.52Texas$1.85 to $2.22  $2.06Natural Gas Pipeline Co. of AmericaOklahoma$1.90 to $2.15  $2.00Louisiana$1.95 to $2.40  $2.13Texas (Gulf Coast Line)         $1.92 to $2.20  $2.05NorAm Gas Transmission Co. (formerly Arkla)East$2.00 to $2.20  $2.09West$1.92 to $2.08  $2.01Northern Natural Gas Co.Texas, Oklahoma, Kansas         $1.87 to $2.10  $1.93Demarcation$1.95 to $2.15  $2.05Ventura, Iowa                   $1.93 to $2.10  $2.00                                Range           IndexNorthwest Pipeline Corp.Rocky Mountains                 $1.19 to $1.44  $1.25Canadian border                 $1.16 to $1.30  $1.24ONG Transmission Co.Oklahoma$1.91 to $2.12  $2.02Panhandle Eastern Pipe Line Co.Texas, Oklahoma (mainline)      $1.91 to $2.10  $2.00Questar Pipeline Co.Rocky Mountains                 $1.20 to $1.30  $1.26Southern Natural Gas Co.Louisiana$2.80 to $3.48  $3.38Tennessee Gas Pipeline Co.La. & Offshore (zone 1)         $2.80 to $3.52  $3.25Texas (zone 0)                  $1.98 to $2.25  $2.11Texas Eastern Transmission Corp.East Louisiana zone             $2.94 to $3.84  $3.50West Louisiana zone             $2.05 to $3.51  $2.85East Texas zone                 $2.00 to $2.13  $2.05South Texas zone                $1.90 to $2.60  $2.10Texas Gas Transmission Corp.Zone 1                          $3.02 to $3.55  $3.32Zone SL                         $3.01 to $3.59  $3.35Transcontinental Gas Pipe Line Corp.Zone 1 (pooling point)          $1.89 to $2.33  $2.15Zone 2 (pooling point)          $3.15 to $3.50  $3.29Zone 3 (pooling points)         $2.86 to $3.70  $3.38Mississippi, Alabama            $3.18 to $3.60  $3.44Transwestern Pipeline Co.Permian Basin                   $1.84 to $2.14  $1.89Trunkline Gas Co.Field zone (Texas, Louisiana)   $1.90 to $3.47  $3.15Louisiana$2.90 to $3.47  $3.20Texas$1.90 to $2.25  $2.05Valero Transmission L.P.Texas$1.87 to $2.18  $2.04Williams Natural Gas Co.Texas, Oklahoma, Kansas         $1.88 to $2.12  $2.03Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINSIDE F.E.R.C.'S GAS MARKET REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996   SPECIAL REPCITY-GATE PRICES IN EFFECT JANUARY 1 IN SELECTED GAS MARKETS        CITY-GATE PRICES IN EFFECT JANUARY 1 IN SELECTED GAS MARKETS                                (per MMBtu dry)NEW YORK/NEW JERSEYRange of reported spot prices                   $2.78 to $3.77NEW ENGLANDRange of reported spot prices                   $3.27 to $3.59WESTERN PENNSYLVANIALocal production                                $4.25 to $4.34Range of reported spot prices                   $2.30 to $4.96NORTHEAST OHIOLocal production                                $2.89 to $4.96Range of reported spot prices                   N.A. to N.A.SOUTHERN MICHIGANRange of reported spot prices to utilities      $3.25 to $3.95Range of reported spot prices to other buyers   $2.98 to $3.75NORTHERN ILLINOIS/NORTHERN INDIANARange of reported spot prices to utilities      $2.95 to $3.35Range of reported spot prices to other buyers   $2.95 to $3.55WISCONSINRange of reported spot prices                   $3.45 to $3.59MINNESOTARange of reported spot prices                   $2.04 to $2.16WESTERN TENNESSEERange of reported spot prices                   N.A. to N.A.PACIFIC NORTHWESTRange of reported spot prices                   $1.23 to $1.35CALIFORNIARange of reported spot prices*                  $1.36 to $1.59Malin, Ore., (PG&E Line 400)                    $1.36 to $1.43Other PG&E points (non-Malin)                   $1.45 to $1.59Southern California Gas Co.                     $1.43 to $1.54METHODOLOGY: This table represents prices paid for spot gas delivered atdistributors' city-gates on the first day of the month. Except where noted,the prices are those paid for spot gas by utilities. In California, therange is for prices paid by both utilities and other buyers. In NorthernIllinois/Northern Indiana and Southern Michigan, the ``other buyers''designation represents prices paid by large and midsized end-users andmarketers.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINSIDE F.E.R.C.'S GAS MARKET REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996   SPECIAL REPDELIVERED SPOT-GAS PRICES                        DELIVERED SPOT-GAS PRICES                                January 1996                                 (per MMBtu)Houston Ship Channel/Beaumont, Texaslarge packages (at least 3,500 Mcf/day)         $2.04 to $2.28index (large packages only)                              $2.17small packages (less than 3,500 Mcf/day)        $2.02 to $2.17Louisiana/Mississippi River Corridorpackages of at least 2,000 Mcf/day              $3.40 to $3.55index$3.47Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINSIDE F.E.R.C.'S GAS MARKET REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996   SPECIAL REPHENRY HUB    Henry Hub    Cash Price/Jan. 1, 1996$3.42/MMBtuCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINSIDE F.E.R.C.'S GAS MARKET REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996   SPECIAL REPWAHA/WEST TEXAS    Waha/West Texas    Cash Price/Jan. 1$1.95/MMBtuCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINSIDE F.E.R.C.'S GAS MARKET REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996   SPECIAL REPRANGE OF REPORTED SPOT PRICES (DEC. 1, 1995, ISSUE)The ``Range of reported spot prices'' for California published in the Dec.1, 1995, issue did not reflect the full range of the individual Californialine items. The correct range is $1.39 to $1.73.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List WT02-B35-28IA086-000616-B011-347http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/ey71.html 205.156.212.5 19970122000135 text/html 71244HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Tuesday, 21-Jan-97 23:59:35 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:40:49 GMTContent-length: 71059Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ey71.html Sample Issue Copyright INSIDE N.R.C. via NewsNet January 8, 1996 Vol. 18, No SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES SALP HISTORY REPORT (497 words) INDUSTRY CBLA SAVINGS NEAR $600-MILLION MARK THROUGH MID-DECEMBER (508 words) NRC APPROVES INDUSTRY GUIDELINE FOR MANAGING COMMITMENTS (262 words) NRC ORDER BARRING MAINE YANKEE RESTART COULD BE CLEARED THIS MONTH (810 words) WHISTLE-BLOWERS SAY AGENCY SHOULD SUSPEND PLANT OPERATING LICENSES (664 words) FOUR UTILITIES EXPECT SAVINGS FROM JOINT STANDARD TECH SPEC SUBMITTAL (606 words) DUKE POWER (250 words) NRC, FEMA, INDUSTRY WORKING TO DEVELOP MORE REALISTIC EP DRILLS (581 words) WORLD REGULATORS AGREE MORE WORK NEEDED TO LEAVE CIRC CRACKS IN PLACE (1233 words) GOOD MARKS FOR BEZNAU-1 AND -2 IN INTERNATIONAL ASSESSMENT (294 words) NEI WILL CONTINUE TO PUSH IN '96 FOR THERMO-LAG WAIVERS UNTIL NEW RULE (645 words) CRITICS FEAR ANOTHER `BROWNS FERRY' AS NRC OKAYS COMBUSTIBLE FIRE STOPS (1280 words) DICUS TO ASSUME DUTIES AS COMMISSIONER IN FEBRUARY, RESTORING QUORUM (960 words) NRC LAST MONTH TURNED DOWN A SUBMITTAL (157 words) SALP REPORTS . . . NRC NOTES IMPROVEMENTS, PERSISTENT PERSONNEL ERRORS AT FITZPATRICK (145 words) NRC FINDS `SIGNIFICANT IMPROVEMENT' IN OPERATIONS AT COMANCHE PEAK (214 words) NRC FOUND CONTINUED STRONG PERFORMANCE (159 words) BRIEFLY . . . COOPER COMPLETES OUTAGE 22 DAYS LATE (264 words) THREE UTILITIES SLAPPED WITH $50,000 FINES (230 words) CopyrightINSIDE N.R.C. via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Vol. 18, NoSALP HISTORY REPORTNote: NRC's SALP program was revised July 14, 1993 (NRC Management directive 8.6). NRC says that ``the final rating for each functional areawill be a composite rating of the performance based on a knowledgeablebalancing of the issues in a functional area and their safety significance.Statistical or numerical balancing of data is inappropriate.'' With thisrevision NRC has reduced the number of functional areas to four: plantoperations, maintenance, engineering, and plant support. This last areaincludes activities such as radiological controls, emergency preparedness,security, chemistry, and fire protection.FOOTNOTES:RPT - date report issuedASSMT. PERIOD - assessment periodOPS - plant operationsRCON - radiological controlsMNT/SURV - maintenance, surveillanceEP - emergency preparednessSEC - securityENG/TS - engineering/technical supportSA - safety assessment/quality verificationPLSP - plant supportN - not ratedCategory 1--Licensee attention and involvement have been properly focusedon safety and resulted in a superior level of safety performance. Licenseeprograms and procedures have provided effective controls. The licensee'sself-assessment efforts have been effective in the identification ofemergent issues. Corrective actions are technically sound, comprehensive,and thorough. Recurring problems are eliminated and resolution of issues istimely. Root cause analyses are thorough.Category 2--Licensee attention and involvement are normally well focusedand resulted in a good level of safety performance. Licensee programs andprocedures normally provide the necessary control of activities, butdeficiencies may exist. The licensee's self-assessments are normally good,although issues may escape identification. Corrective actions are usuallyeffective, although some may not be complete. Root cause analyses arenormally thorough.Category 3--Licensee attention and involvement have resulted in anacceptable level of safety performance. However, licensee performance mayexhibit one or more of the following characteristics. Licensee programs andprocedures have not provided sufficient control of activities in importantareas. The licensee's self-assessment efforts may not occur until after apotential problem becomes apparent. A clear understanding of the safetyimplications of significant issues may not have been demonstrated. Numerousminor issues combine to indicate that the licensee's corrective action isnot thorough. Root cause analyses do not probe enough, resulting in theincomplete resolution of issues. Because the margin to unacceptableperformance in important aspects is small, increased NRC and licenseeattention is required.Category N--Insufficient information exists to support an assessment oflicensee performance. These cases include instances in which a ratingcannot be developed because of insufficient licensee activity orinsufficient NRC inspection. The category is normally used for constructionphase reactors only.SALP HISTORY REPORTREGION: IPLANT NAME: FitzPatrick        RPT     ASSMT. PERIOD   OPS     MNT     ENG     PL SP        5/94    4/93-4/94       2       2       2       2                                OPS     MNT     ENG     PL SP        12/95   4/94-11/95      2       2       2       2REGION: IVPLANT NAME: Comanche Peak        RPT     ASSMT. PERIOD   OPS     MNT     ENG     PL SP        6/94    5/93-5/94       2       2       1       1                                OPS     MNT     ENG     PL SP        12/95   5/94-11/95      1       1       2       1Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINSIDE N.R.C. via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Vol. 18, NoINDUSTRY CBLA SAVINGS NEAR $600-MILLION MARK THROUGH MID-DECEMBERBy:Kathleen Hart, Washington   The nuclear utility industry estimates total savings of $590-million inaverted costs from NRC's cost-beneficial licensing action (CBLA) programthrough mid-December, 1995.   Industry interest in the agency's CBLA program was about the same in1995 as during the previous year, with utilities submitting 116 CBLArequests through December 14, 1995 compared with 123 requests in 1994,according to NRC's semi-annual report on the program. But industryestimates of the savings gained through licensing actions approved by theNRC dropped significantly from the previous year.   In 1995, NRC approved 115 CBLA requests for a total estimated savings of$235-million. During 1994, the agency approved 52 CBLA requests, totalling$335-million in expected savings over the remaining operating lifetimes ofthe affected nuclear power plants. In 1993, the first year of the program,utilities projected $20-million in savings from 33 approved CBLA requests.   The declining value of the estimated savings ``likely reflects [thefact] that the licensees initially submitted CBLA requests with thegreatest value,'' Office of Nuclear Reactor Regulation (NRR) DirectorWilliam Russell said in a December 28, 1995 memorandum to ExecutiveDirector for Operations James Taylor. Russell suggested that futureamendment requests will continue to show declining savings.   However, Russell said that the economic impact of the CBLA program isdifficult to assess because utilities are ``not very specific'' with theircost savings information. He cautioned that the industry's projected$590-million total lifetime savings are based on conservative estimates byutilities and could actually reflect higher savings.   ``We believe that the combined lifetime industry savings is a veryconservative estimate because some licensees have not provided totalestimated savings but rather have simply indicated that savings realizedfrom the CBLA would exceed the $100,000 criteria,'' he said. ``Foruniformity, cost data submitted by licensees are presented as savings overthe remainder of the 40-year plant design life.''   The CBLA program, which has been institutionalized in NRR, grew out of atask force established in April 1993 as part of an NRC effort to helpnuclear utilities control operations and maintenance costs. The CBLA taskforce was one of several groups established within the agency to work onstreamlining the regulatory process and reducing regulatory burdens onindustry.   Two years ago, the Nuclear Energy Institute (NEI) forecast thatutilities would submit 400 CBLA requests a year during 1994 and 1995--farmore than have actually been submitted. Of the 272 CBLA requests submittedby utilities so far, the NRC has approved 173 and denied 11. Utilitieswithdrew three requests, and 85 submittals are still under review.   During the six-month period ending December 14, the NRC denied one CBLArequest, a submittal by Northeast Nuclear Energy Co. for Millstone-1. Theutility had requested a revised exemption from Appendix R to eliminatereliance on maronite boards as radiant heat shields in the cable vaultarea. The NRC decided that the proposal would not provide an ``equivalentlevel of fire safety to that required by Section III.G of Appendix R,'' thememorandum said.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINSIDE N.R.C. via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Vol. 18, NoNRC APPROVES INDUSTRY GUIDELINE FOR MANAGING COMMITMENTSBy:Kathleen Hart, Washington   Executive Director for Operations James Taylor signed a Secy informationpaper December 20, approving a commitment management program developed bythe Nuclear Energy Institute (NEI).   Secy 95-300, a Secy paper that does not require commission action,finalizes the agency's approval of NEI's guidance for managing NRCcommitments, said Gene Imbro, head of the Office of Nuclear ReactorRegulation (NRR) regulatory review group and cost-beneficial licensingaction (CBLA) program. The Secy paper caps more than 20 months of jointindustry-NRC work to develop a way to help utilities manage the thousandsof commitments on the books and eliminate those no longer deemedsignificant to safe plant operation.   About half of the industry is already using the guidance, and they aresaving money, according to Stephen Floyd, NEI manager of special projects,who developed the guidance document. Floyd said that some utilities haveestimated ``a couple million dollars already in direct savings,'' whileothers have projected several million dollars in soft savings (INRC, 13Nov. '95, 1).   Imbro said the commission paper contains a letter that the agency plansto send to NEI endorsing the use of the industry commitment managementguideline. NEI intends to send a copy of the letter to all nuclearutilities, along with the guidance document.   The average nuclear power plant has between 8,000 and 10,000 commitmentsper unit. Currently, there is no uniform method used by utilities fordetermining how to change or drop commitments, NRC staffers noted. Adoptionof the NEI guidance document would be entirely voluntary.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINSIDE N.R.C. via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Vol. 18, NoNRC ORDER BARRING MAINE YANKEE RESTART COULD BE CLEARED THIS MONTHBy:David Stellfox, Washington   A restart of Maine Yankee Atomic Power Co.'s Maine Yankee could stillcome this month, plant officials say, despite an NRC order January 3barring restart of the unit.   Office of Nuclear Reactor Regulation Director William Russell issued theorder blocking Maine Yankee from restarting until it has satisfied certainconcerns about the safety analyses for the plant's emergency core coolingsystem (ECCS) and containment.   Once documentation is submitted to NRC addressing those initialconcerns, Maine Yankee will be allowed to start up. However, operation willbe restricted to 2,440-MW thermal, about a 10% derating, while NRC isreviewing the material provided and until a new safety analysis for theECCS and containment is provided for operating at higher thermal powerlevels.   The plant's originally licensed thermal power is 2,440-MW thermal, butNRC had granted it two power uprates in the 1980s. The unit was lastoperating at 2,700-MW thermal.   Maine Yankee spokesman Marshall Murphy said January 4 he expected theplant would restart in ``the January time frame.''   A planned restart in late December--after a one year outage to repairsteam generators--was derailed when an anonymous allegation was made thatthe plant's safety analyses for ECCS and containment design were faulty(INRC, 25 Dec. '95, 1).   In its January 3 order, NRC said that it approved the use of the YankeeAtomic Electric Co. (YAEC) version of a computer code, Relap5-YA, foranalyzing Maine Yankee's ECCS in 1989, but with ``twelve conditions,including specifications for future plant specific licensing submittals,justifying options taken and sensitivity studies performed.''   NRC never followed up on the demands for information until after theallegation was made December 4, 1995 and it found ``(t)his licensee has notprovided the justifications or submittals specified....''   At a December 18 meeting at NRC, YAEC President Andrew Kadak said thatthe material was held on site because, although the staff's safetyevaluation report called for submittals, a related NRC letter at the timespoke of NRC audits. However, Maine Yankee spokesman Murphy could notconfirm that last week. Murphy said plant officials were still reviewingthe entire order, including ``taking a look at that language.''   NRC noted that its order addresses only future operation and does notaddress allegations related to violations of NRC requirements in the past,including allegations of wrongdoing, which will be dealt with separately.   According to the order, Maine Yankee must supply the following materialprior to restart:   -- A description of evaluations that have been completed that providejustification for the use of the current cycle's operating limits, asestablished in the Cycle 15 Core Operating Limits Report, using methodsapproved for Maine Yankee and without reliance on the Relap5-YA computercode for small break loss-of-coolant accidents (SBLOCA) analysis andassuming a reactor thermal rating of 2,440 MWt. Details related to analysesperformed, significant assumptions, and conclusions drawn shall beprovided.   -- A description of all other applications where Relap5-YA is relied onfor Cycle 15 operation identifying the details of the application, andconclusions drawn with respect to any facility modifications or procedurechanges. For each application, document the determination that operability,as defined in Maine Yankee Technical Specifications, of affectedstructures, systems and components is maintained. For plant proceduresrequired by Maine Yankee Technical Specifications that rely on Relap5-YAanalysis for operator action, document the determination as to why theaffected operator action continues to be appropriate or, if necessary,evaluate the affected procedures in accordance with 10 CFR Section 50.59and provide a summary of that evaluation. If any procedures are changed,confirm that appropriate training has been provided.   -- A description of measures taken to limit reactor operation to amaximum thermal power of 2,440 MWt (90.37% of 2,700 MWt).   -- A description of measures taken to limit containment internaloperating pressure to a maximum of 2 psig.   Also, according to the order, Maine Yankee has 30 days to supply thefollowing information:   -- A SBLOCA analysis that is specific to Maine Yankee for operation atpower levels up to 2,700 MWt. The analysis must meet the requirements of 10CFR Section 50.46, ``Acceptance criteria for emergency core cooling systemsfor light water nuclear power reactors,'' and NUREG-0737, ``Clarificationof TMI Action Plan Requirements,'' Items II.K.3.30 and 31, ``SBLOCAMethods'' and ``Plant-specific Analysis,'' respectively, and NUREG-0737,Item II.K.3.5, ``Automatic Trip of Reactor Coolant Pumps During LOCA.''   -- An integrated containment analysis, accounting for relevant changesto the facility (e.g., spray system changes, power uprates, and containmentmaximum temperature and pressure changes), during a design basis accident(DBA) that demonstrates the maximum calculated DBA containment pressuremeets the design basis pressure for Maine Yankee (55 psig). Assumptionsused for these analyses that are different from those specified inNureg-0800, the NRC Standard Review Plan, Section 6.2.1.1.A, shall bedescribed.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINSIDE N.R.C. via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Vol. 18, NoWHISTLE-BLOWERS SAY AGENCY SHOULD SUSPEND PLANT OPERATING LICENSESBy:Dave Airozo Washington   Two whistle-blowers locked in years-long battles with Georgia Power Co.and the Southern Nuclear Operating Co. over alleged harassment want NRC toimmediately suspend the companies' nuclear plant operating licenses andfine them more than $20-million because, the whistle-blowers say, thediscrimination by senior management continues.   Late last week the whistle-blowers, Allen Mosbaugh and Marvin Hobby,were expected to file a so-called 2.206 petition with NRC in which theyargue that the agency's own regulations require that the drastic action betaken and the hefty fines meted out. They contend that senior managers ofthe companies have repeatedly violated NRC whistle-blower protectionprovisions and that the agency must escalate enforcement action.   Last year, both Mosbaugh and Hobby won Department of Labor (DOL) casesagainst the companies over alleged retaliation for whistle-blowing. In bothcases, Secretary of Labor Robert Reich directed the companies to reinstatethe men and ordered payment of other damages.   In mid-December, Georgia Power filed a motion with DOL's Office ofAdministrative Appeals asking that the record in the Mosbaugh case bereopened and further hearings be held. In the motion, Georgia Power notedthat during the DOL proceeding, NRC's Office of Investigations had held onto 76 tape recordings Mosbaugh had surreptitiously made of fellow employeeswhile he was assistant general manager of the Vogtle nuclear plant. OI usedthe tapes recordings as part of its own investigation into Mosbaugh'sallegations of wrongdoing by Georgia Power management. The tapes were notgiven to Georgia Power until after the record in the Labor proceeding wasclosed, and Georgia Power now claims that the tapes contain significantinformation that would have affected Reich's decision.   Georgia Power also plans to appeal Reich's decision in the Hobby casebut the proceeding is in limbo at DOL because of the federal government'sbudget crisis and resulting government employee furloughs, Georgia Powerspokesman Tal Wright said January 4.   NRC is already considering ``escalated enforcement action'' because ofthe Mosbaugh harassment case.   In a draft of the 2.206 petition, the whistle-blowers note that Reichspecifically identified A.W. Dahlberg, former Georgia Power president andnow president, chief executive officer and chairman of the board ofSouthern Co. as having had an ``active role'' in the ``illegal'' firings ofHobby and Mosbaugh. They charge that the discrimination against Hobby andMosbaugh, and Georgia Power's refusal to reinstate them, continues to havea ``chilling effect'' on Georgia Power and Southern Nuclear workers andthat the NRC should fine the companies $200,000 a day for each day thatHobby and Mosbaugh are not reinstated.   With the meter running from the date of Reich's decisions, the finewould total $20-million as of January 4.   In their petition, the whistle-blowers also note that George Hairstonand Kenneth McCoy, both Georgia Power senior managers, were involved inproviding NRC with inaccurate or incomplete information regarding theequipment performance and test results following a 1990loss-of-offsite-power incident at Vogtle (INRC, 20 Feb. '95, 8).   The whistle-blowers suggest that the repeated involvement of seniorofficials in these cases reveals a pattern of noncompliance with NRCregulations and that the agency must impose strong sanctions, including thesuspension of the operating licenses until the alleged management problemis corrected.   NRC regulations (10 CFR Part 2) do call for progressively stifferenforcement actions for repeated violations of the same requirements withina two-year period. The agency has already hit Georgia Power with a SeverityLevel II violation and a $200,000 fine for supplying inaccurate andincomplete information related to the Vogtle incident and, as noted above,is considering more in response to the Mosbaugh case.   Under the NRC guidelines, if a licensee is slapped with two SeverityLevel II violations within the two-year period, suspension of affectedoperations should be considered.   ``The actual progression to be used in a particular case will depend onthe circumstances,' the regulations say. ``Enforcement sanctions willnormally escalate for recurring similar violations.''Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINSIDE N.R.C. via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Vol. 18, NoFOUR UTILITIES EXPECT SAVINGS FROM JOINT STANDARD TECH SPEC SUBMITTALBy:Wilson Dizard III, Washington   Four Region IV utilities expect savings that could range into themillions of dollars from their banding together to submit their standardtechnical specifications applications to NRC.   Pacific Gas & Electric Co. (PG&E), Texas Utilities Electric Co. (TUEC),Union Electric Co., and Wolf Creek Nuclear Operating Corp. (WNOC) joinedforces late last year to coordinate their joint standard tech specconversion. The utilities presented their plans to NRC staff at a November14 meeting.   Roger Walker, manager of nuclear licensing for TUEC, told Inside N.R.C.that the savings from the standard tech spec conversion process could runbetween $1- and $4-million a year.   Alan Passwater, licensing manager for Union Electric's Callaway, saidhis utility earlier planned to conduct a joint standard tech spec submittalwith WNOC, because Wolf Creek and Callaway were built to the standard SNPPS(Standardized Nuclear Power Plant System) design devised by Westinghouse inthe mid-1970s. Passwater said extending the joint standard tech specapplication to four utilities would likely save his utility $200,000.   The four utilities all operate one nuclear station each. All of theunits are in NRC Region IV, and all are two-train, four-loop Westinghouseunits.   Managers for the four utilities see the joint tech spec application asthe first of what could become several joint efforts in dealing with NRC.   NRC has been pressing nuclear plant operators to adopt standardtechnical specifications (INRC, 15 May '95, 8). NRC staff estimate that upto 40% of the surveillances required under existing tech specs could beeliminated under standard tech specs. By mid-1995, close to 50 plants hadcommitted formally to standard tech spec conversion.   Walker said that the four utilities plan to submit their jointapplication in December 1996. ``It's a long, elaborate process,'' Walkersaid, noting that the application would run well into the hundreds ofpages.   ``We did an economic estimate before we started,'' Walker said. ``Weestimated hard savings and soft savings.'' The hard savings flowed fromrequirements that would be dropped, and the soft savings were estimated tocome from avoided plant shutdowns.   ``The soft savings were much stronger than the hard savings,'' Walkersaid.   Walker noted that some procedure changes that would require tech specchanges under current conditions could be handled through NRC's 50.59process under the standard tech specs.   Walker also expects faster service from NRC in any future tech specchanges after the standard tech specs are adopted.   Steve Wideman, supervisor of licensing for Wolf Creek, said the impetusfor the joint standard tech spec submittal flowed from senior managementmeetings among the four utilities last summer. He noted the joint submittalwould also save the utilities some of the NRC review fees associated withthe process.   Pat Nugent, tech spec supervisor for PG&E's Diablo Canyon, said, ``Webelieve there is some economic benefit. Also, NRC has been pushing theindustry hard to go to standard tech specs.''   The four utilities expect that NRC will take four to six months toreview their standard tech spec application, which takes the schedule outto mid-1997. The new tech specs will be implemented in the middle of anoperating cycle at each unit, but the utilities have not reached that pointin their planning yet.   Some of the utilities are in the process of seeking line item changes totheir existing tech specs, a process that NRC staff said would continuewhile the joint standard tech specs are developed.   NRC staff told the utilities at the November 14 meeting that theapplication process could be accelerated if the applications were sentelectronically.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINSIDE N.R.C. via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Vol. 18, NoDUKE POWERBy:Kathleen Hart, Washington   DUKE POWER EXPECTS TO SAVE $2.7-MILLION AT THE OCONEE NUCLEAR PLANT bychanging the qualified life of pressure transmitters installed in thereactor containment buildings of the three units.   The 105 pressure transmitters inside the containment buildings all had a10-year qualified life, based on the assumption that they would be subjectto ambient temperatures of 120 degrees F. Robert Smith, an engineer atDuke, who for years had been pushing to install temperature devices in thecontainments to determine the real temperature, last year installedtemperature monitoring data loggers at Oconee.   The actual ambient temperature level in the basement was only 80 degreesF, which allowed Duke to change the qualified life of the transmitters, andobviated the need to replace them for the remaining operating life of theunit, Smith said. The idea to install the temperature devices grew out of aprogram instituted at Duke Power three years ago to review theenvironmental qualification (EQ) of electrical equipment coming up for achangeout before each outage, he added.   Duke is continuing to analyze electrical equipment based on the actualtemperatures in which they run and expects to save several hundred thousanddollars--maybe close to $1-million--on replacement costs for changing otherelectrical equipment, such as level switches and solenoid valves, saidSmith.   The utility also ``is looking at installing temperature monitoringequipment at Catawba and McGuire, where greater savings are projected,''according to Duke spokesperson Rick Zuercher.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINSIDE N.R.C. via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Vol. 18, NoNRC, FEMA, INDUSTRY WORKING TO DEVELOP MORE REALISTIC EP DRILLSBy:Tom Harrison, Washington   The NRC is working with the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA)and industry organizations to develop more realistic emergency planning(EP) drill scenarios that participants say will improve training and reducecosts for plant owners.   Members of the Realism in Scenarios Working Group includerepresentatives from the NRC, FEMA, the Institute of Nuclear PowerOperations (INPO), the Nuclear Energy Institute (NEI), and the Conferenceof Radiation Control Program Directors (CRCPD).   The idea originated with NRC senior management, who saw room forimprovement after participating in EP drills, said Aby Mohseni, NRCemergency response coordinator.   ``There are some good scenarios out there, but there are some that arenot as logical and coherent as others,'' he said.   For example, a scenario might involve a plant having significant coredamage without major problems with core cooling, which is not possible.   Or to test various parts of the plant in the drill, events could includea plane crash, an earthquake, an on-site fire and several employeessuffering heart attacks--all within the space of a few hours.   The NRC is searching its database to develop criteria for what makes agood scenario, Mohseni said, and wants to have those attributes identifiedwithin a couple of months.   After that, the group, which held its first meeting in December, plansto have a plant volunteer to test the criteria in an upcoming drill.   The criteria aren't intended to become a regulation or increase costs,and may eventually save money for utilities, he said.   After the group develops a repository of scenarios, utilities will beable to reuse them instead of having to come up with their own, he said.   Every other year, each plant is required to hold a graded drill, whichis overseen and assessed by NRC officials. These biennial drills alsoinvolve state and local governments, whose performance is evaluated byFEMA.   ``We've had 15 years of experience since TMI in doing the majorexercises,'' Mohseni said. ``Those 15 years have shed some light on wherewe could get more benefit in training.''   Plants also hold at least one emergency plan drill a year involving theNRC and other outside agencies and conduct several drills annually on theirown.   Costs for drills range from thousands of dollars to tens of thousandsdepending on the number of people involved and the scope of the exercise.   The biennial drills traditionally involve the release of enoughradioactivity to require several miles around the plant to be evacuated,which allows FEMA to meet its requirements.   Emergency planners say the scenarios are unrealistic because they haveto meet objectives set by the NRC and FEMA.   ``You've got to break things in the plant that are almost beyondbelief,'' said Jim Weeks, manager of emergency planning at Wolf Creek.   The scenarios also don't allow operators to be successful in solvingproblems, he said.   ``Operators know no matter what they do, they're going to go to ageneral emergency,'' he said. ``From the operations people's point of view,they're not getting much value out of it because they know they're notgoing to be successful.''   That results in negative training, said scenario group member RonFraass, a public health physicist with the state of Kansas.   ``It keeps control room operators from taking some ideas and runningwith it,'' he said.   Many utilities develop their own scenarios in-house. Paying a consultantto devise a scenario can cost $60,000, according to industry estimates.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINSIDE N.R.C. via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Vol. 18, NoWORLD REGULATORS AGREE MORE WORK NEEDED TO LEAVE CIRC CRACKS IN PLACEBy:Ann MacLachlan, Paris   Significant improvements are needed in plugging criteria and cracksizing before circumferentially cracked steam generator tubes can be leftin service, a group of experts from the nuclear industry, research andregulatory bodies agreed late last year.   Those improvements depend, in part, on a much broader base of experienceof past degradation, better understanding of why and how flaws develop, andmore robust nondestructive examination (NDE) tools and analysis methods.   As for criteria used to determine response to axial cracking, theexperts found present voltage-based criteria acceptable for now, but saidthe criteria have weaknesses that may be offset in the future by improvedtechnology for sizing cracks.   In any case, the experts said, international collaboration is needed todevelop more realistic plugging criteria based on examination of pulledtubes and laboratory-produced cracks.   At an international workshop devoted to steam generator tube integrity,sponsored by the OECD Nuclear Energy Agency (NEA) and hosted by the NRC'sOffice of Nuclear Regulatory Research at the Argonne National Laboratorynear Chicago, 100 experts from 15 countries explored the extent ofknowledge on different types of steam generator degradation.   Much has been learned since the NEA's last steam generator meeting inBrussels in 1991. But participants decided that because of the evolvingnature of tube degradation any definitive conclusions would be premature,according to Jean-Pierre Clausner, the NEA staffer responsible for theworkshop.   Reports on the meeting were presented late last year to the NEA'sCommittee on Nuclear Regulatory Activities (CNRA) and to its Committee onthe Safety of Nuclear Installations (CSNI), sponsors of the workshop. Theexperts' findings and recommendations were numerous and detailed, giventhat they met in parallel sessions covering tube degradation, inspection,integrity, preventive and corrective measures, and operational aspects ofrisk analysis.Group Recommends Pulling More Tubes   According to a summary prepared for the CNRA/CSNI, several of theworkshop sessions highlighted the need to pull and examine for analysismore tubes and tube/tube support plate assemblies from both operating andretired steam generators. The examinations are considered key to definingthe precise conditions of crevice chemistry, developing better NDEstandards, providing prototype flaw specimens for integrity testing, andevaluating such repair techniques as sleeving.   The CNRA did not follow a recommendation from the Argonne meeting todevelop an international data base on tube pressure and leakage testing anddestructive examinations, Clausner said--not because it isn't needed, butbecause the committee members felt such data would be very difficult forregulators to gather because it belongs logically to the nuclear industry.   On the other hand, he said, the committee recommended that the CSNI'sworking group on component integrity intensify its monitoring of thephenomena involved in steam generator tube degradation, permitting a morecomplete review of the international situation within the next two years.   The Argonne workshop agreed that circumferential and axial cracks insteam generator tubes should continue to be treated separately with respectto their impact on safety, according to the NEA summary. In general, betterinspection tools for early detection of stress corrosion cracking (SCC),more experimental data on outer-diameter SCC crack initiation and growth,improved monitoring instrumentation, and better understanding of localstress/strain conditions are needed, as is a better correlation ofchemistry and microstructure with SCC susceptibility, the experts found.   They agreed that periodic NDE is not very useful in detectingfatigue-induced cracks, for which plants must depend on leak-before-breakmethods to manage degradation. Greater attention is needed to processesinitiating at regions of mild deformation, such as denting and scratches,they said, and the impact of tube support plate ligament cracking--nowobserved at several plants, notably in France--is ``not thoroughlyunderstood,'' they said.   Officials agreed that reliable crack detection and sizing are importanteven if circumferentially cracked tubes are plugged on detection. Thedetection threshold for circumferential cracks with eddy current testing isonly about 50% throughwall, pointing to the need for other NDE methods.Ultrasonic techniques (UT) have potential, but ``there are problems withfalse positive calls, and improvements are clearly needed,'' officialssaid.   Accurate sizing information is needed to develop data on crack growthrate. However, sizing cracks is more difficult than detecting them, theysaid.   Robert Comby of Electricite de France's Central Laboratories (GDL), saidthat only two of the countries participating in the Argonne workshop usetube plugging criteria for circumferential cracking based on analysis, notmere detection. They are Belgium and Canada. The Canadians plug the tubesall the same, he said. Comby said very intricate work is used to analyzeouter-diameter circumferential cracking, which is ``very diverse'' innature and evolves in a way that is still poorly understood.   One of the French participants, Guy Turluer of the Institute of NuclearSafety & Protection (IPSN), said that the dilemma highlighted by theArgonne meeting was that ``few countries have feedback from operatingexperience'' concerning circumferential cracking. ``We don't know thenature of the corrosive environment. It's hard to reproduce in thelaboratory,'' he said.No Consensus On Continued Use   The Argonne workshop could reach ``no consensus on the question ofleaving tubes with circumferential cracks in service,'' the NEA summarysaid. But the experts discussing tube integrity agreed that ``regulatoryrequirements should be flexible to allow adapting to changing technologyand operating experience,'' for example to allow implementation ofdegradation-specific management.   Another group considered the status and efficacy of preventive andcorrective measures used to mitigate or overcome tube degradation. On theissue of mechanical mitigation, they found that successful tube sleeving``requires development of qualification guidelines and a procedurechecklist,'' observing that ``many early failures were associated withapplication outside of the process window.''   While sleeves can generally be adequately inspected, the group said thatintegrity validation requires that sleeved tubes be removed and examined. Nickel-plating of the tubes, as used for example in Belgium, can be appliedat almost all tube locations. However, inspection of those tubes requiresUT rather than eddy current techniques.   Direct tube repair by remelting and welding can be applied primarily attube support plate intersections, the group said, but it complicatessubsequent inspections because eddy current tests are not effective and therough surface makes UT more difficult. Shot- or roto-peening before serviceguards well against primary water SCC, but post-service peening can at bestdelay the onset of cracking, they said. The group recommended cold-legpeening where PWSCC is the primary mode of tube degradation.   To prevent degradation, workshop participants said, ``good sludgecontrol is essential.'' Steam generator crevice chemistry is stillinadequately characterized, ``making it difficult to evaluate waterchemistry remedies,'' they said. They recommended a significant steamgenerator tube sampling program to increase knowledge about crevices.   The ultimate remedy for tube degradation, steam generator replacement,should be effective, they said, since new steam generator designs minimizestresses and sludge buildup, and new alloys--690 and 800--should providesufficient protection against corrosion.   Finally, the Argonne workshop agreed on the need to improve humanreliability information and methods used in probabilistic analysis of steamgenerator tube rupture events. They approved the implementation of on-lineleakage monitoring, but called for improved correlation between leakage anddegradation for various tube degradation modes as well as for a morerefined technical basis for operational leakage limits. They also said therole of steam generator tube degradation in overall plant risk should bebetter appreciated.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINSIDE N.R.C. via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Vol. 18, NoGOOD MARKS FOR BEZNAU-1 AND -2 IN INTERNATIONAL ASSESSMENTBy:Laura Pilarski, Zurich   Switzerland's 364-MW Beznau-1 and -2 have achieved an ``excellent''record, said an IAEA Operational Safety Review Team (Osart) which completeda three-week review December 1.   Osarts compare performance to best international practices. The auditwas made at the request of the Swiss government in a general effort toenhance operational nuclear safety and not because of any specific safetyconcerns. An official Beznau report will be submitted to Bern in a fewmonths.   Nordostschweizerische Kraftwerke AG (NOK), owner of the two PWRs, wascommended for several areas of performance, including having an experiencedand capable staff with a strong apprenticeship program; a commitment tohighest work quality standards, with good condition and cleanliness ofplant equipment; imbuing station management and staff with high goals; andutilizing state-of-the-art safety analysis techniques to ensure high safetystandards are maintained.   Among the Osart's proposals for improvement were: conducting reviews ofabnormal operating events in more depth and giving more attention to humanperformance factors contributing to these events; providing improvedguidelines to examine plant conditions before returning to power operationfollowing reactor trips; strengthening management safety policies andguidance to the staff; fostering a more self-questioning attitude amongstaffers in performing plant activities; and increasing managementexchanges with nuclear power plants internationally.   An Osart team will return to Beznau for a follow-up visit sometime in1997. The Swiss review was the 86th plant reviewed in the Osart program.The cost, which the owner and plant assume, is estimated at more than1-million Swiss francs and includes all internal costs of special reports,documentation, and files.   Nuclear opponents in Switzerland tend to disparage Osart reviews, sayingthey are not concerned with possible technical problems and plant design.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINSIDE N.R.C. via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Vol. 18, NoNEI WILL CONTINUE TO PUSH IN '96 FOR THERMO-LAG WAIVERS UNTIL NEW RULEBy:David Stellfox, Washington   A Nuclear Energy Institute (NEI) executive says the industry lobbyorganization will continue to push NRC to waive certain fire protectionrequirements on Thermo-Lag fire barriers until a new rule can bedeveloped.   NRC Chairman Shirley Jackson told Inside N.R.C. November 15, 1995 thatshe opposed the idea. It is an idea that has been floating around for along time, but was resurrected formally with NRC staff on November 8, 1995by Bill Rasin, NEI vice president for technical issues.   Despite Jackson's apparent opposition, NEI Executive Vice President JoeColvin said his organization would continue to push for that option in1996.   ``We have not given up on that approach,'' Colvin said. ``I think thestaff at the leadership level is receptive to this approach because they'respending a lot of resources and we are too.''   NEI would have to ``have communication with Chairman Jackson andCommissioner Rogers and the senior staff'' about the issue, Colvin said inremarks prior to Commissioner Greta Dicus' Senate confirmation.   NEI is due to have a meeting with NRC senior staff on the issue thismonth and a staff paper to the commission on Thermo-Lag resolution isoverdue.   The problem of unqualified Thermo-Lag fire barriers dates back to1991-92 and still remains, according to some estimates, years away fromresolution.   The problem with the fire protection issues, Colvin said, particularlyThermo-Lag is that ``it's not just a technical issue. It's not just alicensing issue. It's got political overtones.''   He said ``everyone agrees'' that the fire protection regulations requireadjustment so if the agency is going to change the regulations anyway, whyforce compliance with the old ones in the interim when compensatorymeasures taken are adequate to insure safety.   Looking ahead to 1996, Colvin said he sees the industry-NRC relationshipas positive. He said a dialog has been opened up. The two parties arecomparing notes as to what their respective priorities are to make best useof both industry and NRC resources. One of the most positive signs, Colvinsaid, is that the dialog with NRC is now ``engaged at the EDO level'' andincludes the office heads.   One of the most often cited past successes of industry/NRC cooperationhas been the maintenance rule. When it came to developing the regulatoryguidance for the maintenance rule, which takes effect in July, seniorindustry officials and senior NRC officials sat down to iron out theguidance. The result was considered a success by both sides and yet ``themaintenance rule approach'' has been unsuccessful when applied elsewhere.   It was first tried on the license renewal rule and ``it didn't work,''there, Colvin said. Then, it was tried on the maintenance rule and ``itworked tremendously (well).''   Then it was tried on graded quality assurance (QA) and it didn't work,Colvin said. ``It's people and perception driven.'' All these issues,particularly the QA, is ``talking about changing the way people do things.That makes people nervous--at both utilities and NRC,'' he said.   One advantage with the use of the approach on the maintenance rule, wasthat NRC didn't use outside contractors and high-level staffersparticipated in themeetings and made decisions, Colvin said. It was thestrong leadership from both the industry and agency side that made thedifference, he said.   He said NEI would be continuing to try to use the maintenance rule modelof looking at systems, structures and components and their risk and try toapply that in other contexts in 1996.   The failure, so far, of the graded QA effort Colvin said it is ``verydifficult to get the mindset changed. The QA infrastructure runs long anddeep in the industry and in NRC. It's almost sacred. There's a lot ofemotion you got to get through before you can get down to details.''Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINSIDE N.R.C. via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Vol. 18, NoCRITICS FEAR ANOTHER `BROWNS FERRY' AS NRC OKAYS COMBUSTIBLE FIRE STOPSBy:David Stellfox, Washington   A silicone foam or elastomer sealant material--used to block the spreadof fires at the soon-to-be licensed Tennessee Valley Authority (TVA) WattsBar plant--is combustible and prone to ``deep-seated fires,'' NRC says.   Nonetheless, the agency said the material is an ``acceptable deviation''from requirements limiting fire stops to noncombustible materials.   The antinuclear group Nuclear Information & Resource Service (NIRS) anda private fire protection engineer contend that the NRC violated federallaw when it authorized the use of the admittedly combustible fire seals atWatts Bar.   Four years before the 1979 accident at Three Mile Island-2, TVA's BrownsFerry plant had a near meltdown after a fire started in a penetration sealmade of combustible urethane. Penetration seals are used to stop a firefrom spreading from one room or fire area to another.   But at Browns Ferry, the fire quickly spread through electrical controlequipment, disabling systems needed to safely shut off the nuclear chainreaction. That near disaster led to the creation of NRC's current fireprotection requirements that call for the use of noncombustible materials.   The NRC staff decision that Watts Barr could use combustible siliconematerials to seal penetrations through fire walls and floors has alarmednuclear watchdogs. NIRS wrote to NRC Chairman Shirley Jackson saying thatWatts Bar should be denied a full-power operating license because it doesnot meet fire protection requirements. The commission is expected to issuethe full-power license to Watts Bar within a few weeks.   Jackson would not comment on the issue, and staffers in her officereferred inquiries to the NRC Public Affairs Office. Agency spokesman JoeGilliland said that, as of January 4, no official response had been made toNIRS.   In a letter to Jackson in late December, NIRS said it was ``ironic''that NRC would consider licensing a TVA plant with combustible penetrationseals 20 years after a fire at another TVA plant prompted the agency toadopt fire protection rules specifically to bar the use of such material.   Equally ironic, nuclear watchdogs said, is that the argument NRC staffused to justify use of the seals is remarkably similar to an argument itrecently rejected for an unrelated fire protection material.   That fire barrier material, known as Thermo-Lag, is used to protectelectrical cables and components used to shut down reactors.   The Nuclear Energy Institute (NEI), the nuclear industry tradeassociation, tried unsuccessfully to claim that Thermo-Lag wasnoncombustible using arguments similar to what NRC used to accept thecombustible penetration seals.   Gerald Brown, a Minneapolis-based fire protection engineer, claimed thatby waiving requirements on penetration seals, NRC is trying to avoid anexpensive drain on both industry and NRC resources.   Other industry sources say privately that NRC treated Thermo-Lag morestrictly because Thermo-Lag had become a political problem for them,particularly after a congressional hearing in 1993. Problems with firebarrier penetration seals have not gotten the same level of publicattention.   It was Brown's 1991 allegations on Thermo-Lag that prompted a wholesaleupheaval in nuclear industry fire protection programs. His 1991 allegationswere confirmed by NRC and led the agency to disqualify all prior testing ofThermo-Lag and to declare all those barriers inoperable--a matter stillunresolved five years later.   As a fire protection consultant, Brown potentially stands to gainbusiness from utilities upgrading fire protection programs and equipment.   Brown said the nuclear power industry, in attempting to requalifyThermo-Lag in the last five years, wanted to claim that the material was``noncombustible.'' They did so with the argument that given the difficultyof igniting the material, the location in the plant, and the absence of anyother combustibles to start or feed a fire, Thermo-Lag was ``effectively''noncombustible.   NRC rejected that argument (INRC, 3 April '95, 3), but then turnedaround and used a remarkably similar approach to justify the use ofcombustible fire penetration seals at Watts Bar, Brown said. ``That'sludicrous. It's a double standard, and it's against the law.''   NRC's Conrad McCracken, the plant systems branch chief in the Office ofNuclear Reactor Regulation, doesn't deny that the silicone seals arecombustible. McCracken couldn't be reached for comment, but in a December21 response letter to Paul Gunter of NIRS, McCracken wrote: ``The NRC staffacknowledges that silicone foam and silicone elastomer penetration sealmaterials are combustible as defined by NRC fire protection guidance.''   However, McCracken wrote Gunter that the seal material does provide someprotection; it acts as a sacrificial material and is accepted in manynon-nuclear applications. Incidentally, the same is true of Thermo-Lag.   The seal material ``make up a relatively small contribution to theoverall combustible load...are usually distributed throughout the firearea, as opposed to representing concentrations of combustibles, and aredifficult to ignite,'' McCracken wrote. Finally, McCracken concluded theuse of the silicone seals ``is an acceptable deviation from the penetrationseal guidance in Nureg-0800.''   In a separate response to an e-mail allegation from Brown, McCrackenacknowledged that a fire ``may become deep-seated within the penetration.''Brown says this makes it appear the fire has been extinguished when deepinside the seal it is still burning.   The NRC's fire protection requirements are prescriptive, Brown said. Isthe material combustible or isn't it? he asked. To say it is combustiblebut that's an acceptable deviation is not prescriptive regulation, Brownsaid. ``That's a performance-based answer,'' he said. NRC has so farrefused industry attempts to resolve problems with Thermo-Lag by usingperformance-based approaches, Brown noted, and now the NRC is turningaround and using a performance-based approach for penetration seals.   Besides the apparent double standard, Brown maintained NRC cannotlegally make an acceptable deviation on the penetration seals. He said thatunlike the situation with Thermo-Lag, penetration seals are specificallyaddressed in the federal Code of Federal Regulations. Brown added that NRCdoes not have the right to waive federal law but can only promulgate new,superseding law. For Thermo-Lag, the requirements are in subsidiaryguidance documents giving NRC greater flexibility in interpretation andenforcement.   But penetration seals are specifically addressed in 10 CFR Part 50,Appendix R, Section M, which says, in part: ``Penetration seal designsshall utilize only noncombustible materials and shall be qualified by teststhat are comparable to tests used to rate fire barriers.''   Brown, who also filed allegations over the penetration seals, claimedNRC has been ignoring problems with the seals. Many of the problems relatedto seals with voids and gaps and other issues are contained in NRC's ownfiles, and others were documented in a series of Inside N.R.C. articles in1994 (INRC, 19 Sept. '94, 1 and INRC, 17 Oct. '94, 1).   Thousands of similar silicone foam or elastomer seals are installed innuclear units across the country.   In addition to their combustibility, questions have been raised aboutthe effectiveness of the seals. Penetration seal problems related toinstallation, testing, documentation and poor maintenance, go back at least15 years and rival problems associated with the controversial Thermo-Lagmaterial.   In 1987 NRC drafted guidance on penetration seals intended to clarifywhat was needed to qualify a seal. The guidance was leaked to industryofficials, then mysteriously dropped from the regulatory agenda and wasnever issued (INRC, 6 March '95, 1). NRC officials have claimed thepenetration seal requirements in the leaked document were incorporated intoother NRC regulations, but industry sources have strongly disputed that.The question has never been resolved.   Brown said the NRC simply doesn't want to face up to the problems withpenetration seals so ``they are carefully selecting regulations (toenforce) to suit the industry. This is the most flagrant and fraudulentexample.''Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINSIDE N.R.C. via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Vol. 18, NoDICUS TO ASSUME DUTIES AS COMMISSIONER IN FEBRUARY, RESTORING QUORUMBy:Kathleen Hart, Washington   The Senate confirmed Greta Joy Dicus as an NRC commissioner December 22,paving the way for restoring a three-person quorum to the commission.   Dicus, who is director of the Division of Radiation Control & EmergencyManagement at the Arkansas Department of Health, said that she hopes to beready to assume her duties as commissioner in early February. ``I have alot of goals I hope to accomplish in my time on the commission, but I wantto get up there and get a staff together before I get into those goals,''she told Inside N.R.C. January 4.   Dicus' term runs through June 30, 1998. No date has been set yet for anofficial swearing-in ceremony.   The commission has been acting without a quorum since July 1, 1995 whenGail de Planque left after her five-year term as a commissioner ended andIvan Selin quit as chairman a year early. Currently, Chairman ShirleyJackson is making commission decisions--in consultation with CommissionerKenneth Rogers--under an arrangement of ``delegated authority'' approved bythe commission when it still had four members.   Clinton nominated Dicus July 14, 1995 to fill a third seat on thecommission. Dicus faced no opposition in the Senate Environment & PublicWorks Committee, which approved her nomination September 19 (INRC, 2 Oct.'95, 15). The fast-track nomination process stalled, however, when SenateMajority Leader Robert Dole (R-Kan.) made it clear to the White House thathe would not schedule a confirmation vote until President Clinton sent tothe Senate an intent to nominate a Republican to the five-membercommission.   Ultimately, Dole relented and allowed the confirmation to go forward. AWhite House staffer said January 2 that the administration is ``looking atother candidates'' to fill the remaining two seats on the commission, buthas sent no names to the Senate since the Dicus nomination.   Dicus was among more than 65 executive nominations cleared for a Senatevote on December 22. Charles William Burton of Texas was confirmed as amember of the board of the U.S. Enrichment Corporation (USEC) for a termthat lasts only until February 24. Kathleen McGinty of Pennsylvania wasconfirmed as chairman of the Council on Environmental Quality.   There had been speculation on the Hill that Dole let the nominations gothrough to avoid the need to have the names all renominated in the secondsession of the Congress. Because of the ongoing budget problems, however,the first session of the 104th Congress was declared over, sine die, at11:55 a.m. January 3. The second session began at noon.   Dicus served as a member of the USEC board for a one-year term thatended in March 1995. She is a member of the Conference of Radiation ControlProgram Directors (CRCPD) and was elected chairman of the CRCPD in 1993.Dicus, who has served as Arkansas liaison to the NRC, received her B.A.from Texas Woman's University in Denton, Texas in 1961 and an M.A. inradiation biology from the University of Texas Southwestern Medical Schoolat Dallas in 1967.Number Of Secy Papers, Commission Meetings Down   The commission continued a downward trend in the number of Secy papershandled in 1995. The staff produced 310 Secy papers last year, downslightly from the 315 papers in 1994, and down significantly from the 360papers produced in 1993.   Also, there were fewer commission meetings last year than in theprevious year, according to Andrew Bates, senior level adviser to thesecretary of the commission. There were 86 commission meetings held in1995, compared with 92 meetings in 1994. Fifty-two of the 86 meetings tookplace in the first half of 1995, and 34 meetings in the second half.   Part of the reason for the decline in the number of meetings can beattributed to the fact that there have only been two commissioners sinceJuly 1, 1995, and the staff has tried not to schedule commission meetingswhen one of them is away or on leave.   The schedule for commission briefings for the month of January is verylight. Except for one briefing on industry restructuring scheduled forJanuary 5, the calendar is empty until the end of the month. On January 30,a briefing by DOE on the high-level waste program has been tentativelyscheduled. The periodic briefing on operating reactors and fuel facilitiesmeeting on is tentatively set for January 31.Watts Bar-1 Full Power License Briefing Still On Hold   A commission briefing on the Tennessee Valley Authority's Watts Bar-1full power license--one of the most important decisions facing thecommission in some time--could be put off until after Dicus is sworn in asa commissioner and a legal quorum is restored.   The NRC announced December 20 that a planned January 5 commissionbriefing on the license would be rescheduled.   NRC staffers said January 2 that a commission briefing on the WattsBar-1 license had been set tentatively for January 31, three days afterRogers returns from a personal trip, but before Dicus's presumedswearing-in at the beginning of February (Nucleonics Week, 4 Jan., 3).However, NRC spokesperson Joe Gilliland said January 4 that a commissionbriefing had not yet been set--even tentatively--on the matter. ``That datemay have just been set as a working assumption for the staff,'' Gillilandsaid.   Delaying a vote on the license would avoid a possible legal challenge toa commission decision approving Watts Bar's full-power operation. A lawsuitalready is pending challenging the delegated authority procedure underwhich Jackson has exercised the full power of the commission for sixmonths. In that case, intervenors challenging the Trump-S nuclear researchproject at the University of Missouri sued over the procedure (INRC, 13Nov. '95, 5).Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINSIDE N.R.C. via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Vol. 18, NoNRC LAST MONTH TURNED DOWN A SUBMITTAL   THE NRC LAST MONTH TURNED DOWN A SUBMITTAL BY PENNSYLVANIA POWER & LIGHTCo. (PP&L) seeking a change in the quality assurance program. The changerequest was submitted as a cost-beneficial licensing action (CBLA), but NRCstaffers said that changes to the quality assurance plan under 10 CFR50.54(a) are not considered eligible for CBLAs.   ``The submitted change proposes an elimination of the biennial procedurereview requirements for plant emergency operating procedures, off normalprocedures, emergency operating procedures, and other procedures of whichusage may be dictated by event,'' Michael Modes, chief of civil, mechanicaland materials engineering branch in the Division of Reactor Safety, wrotein a December 15, 1995 letter to Robert Byram, senior vice president,nuclear, of PP&L.   Modes said the proposed change is a ``reduction in the commitmentpreviously accepted by the NRC,'' and added that if the change has alreadybeen implemented, ``you must cease implementation.''Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINSIDE N.R.C. via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Vol. 18, NoNRC NOTES IMPROVEMENTS, PERSISTENT PERSONNEL ERRORS AT FITZPATRICK   The New York Power Authority received Category 2 ratings in all fourfunctional areas in NRC's latest systematic assessment of licenseeperformance (SALP) at FitzPatrick. NRC Region I Administrator Thomas Martinsaid NRC found good coordination and communication between plant andcorporate groups. He said, however, that despite some improvements as aresult of a number of initiatives, ``persistent personnel errors acrossmultiple parts of the organization demonstrated the need for continuedmanagement attention.''   According to Nucleonics Week, FitzPatrick, an 849-MW BWR, had a grosscapacity factor in 1994 of 69.25%. Through October 1995, the capacityfactor was 61.27%.   In his letter to the utility, Martin noted the effectiveness of NYPA'sresponse to individual plant events and problems. He added, however, thatthere were continued instances of ``a lack of a broad approach to eventinvestigations and root-cause determinations.''Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINSIDE N.R.C. via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Vol. 18, NoNRC FINDS `SIGNIFICANT IMPROVEMENT' IN OPERATIONS AT COMANCHE PEAK   TU Electric received top Category 1 ratings in three functionalareas--operations, maintenance, and plant support--and a Category 2 ratingin the area of engineering in NRC's latest SALP review at Comanche Peak.   NRC Region IV Administrator L.J. Callan said the utility's ``superiorperformance in the operations area represented a significant improvementand was marked by a strong safety focus, clear management support foroperations, effective communication of management expectations, and strongmanagement involvement in operator training.'' Callan, however, also noteda decline in performance in the engineering area. The SALP board, Callansaid, ``considered the examples of less than thorough and timely evaluationof problems which affect operations and the instances where equipmentperformance information was not effectively tracked and used to improvereliability by predicting and preventing challenges to the plant, includingthose introduced from the balance-of-plant.''   According to Nucleonics Week, Comanche Peak-1 and -2, both 1,161-MWWestinghouse PWRs, had gross capacity factors in 1994 of 95.98% and 54.76%,respectively. Through October 1995, the capacity factors were 78.48% and94.40%, respectively.   In the area of maintenance, Callan said NRC found ``an improvement inplant material condition, the absence of significant maintenance workerinduced plant challenges, the reduction in the maintenance backlog, and ahealthy customer service philosophy.''Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINSIDE N.R.C. via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Vol. 18, NoNRC FOUND CONTINUED STRONG PERFORMANCE   NRC FOUND CONTINUED STRONG PERFORMANCE IN THE OPERATIONS AREA ATLIMERICK in a plant performance review (PPR) done December 5, 1995. NRC,however, said that it was concerned about four scrams between August 8 andSeptember 11, 1995, as well as other transients experienced during the lastsix months. In a letter to PECO Energy, NRC's Wayne Lanning, deputydirector of the division of reactor projects, noted that the utility's``reviews have not found common contributing root causes, but we have notedthat you have developed a Focus on Excellence Through People Program toaddress broad issues.''   The PPR process consists of a review of inspection findings, significantevents and other information related to the integrated performance at anuclear plant. The purpose of the PPR process, NRC says, it to assessperformance trends and to plan future inspection activities. Another PPRwill occur later in the SALP cycle at Limerick, NRC said.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINSIDE N.R.C. via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Vol. 18, NoCOOPER COMPLETES OUTAGE 22 DAYS LATE   Major modifications to emergency diesel generators at Cooper last monthadded another 22 days to the plant's refueling outage, costing the NebraskaPublic Power District (NPPD) roughly $2.2-million. The plant ended the77-day refueling outage, which also included an in-service inspection ofthe reactor vessel, on December 27.   Terrence Reis, acting chief of reactor projects in NRC Region IV, saidlast week that NPPD modified the diesel generators from a design thatneeded a continuous supply of air to run to one that only needed an airsupply to start, similar to those used at all other nuclear generatingunits in the U.S. Officials at both NRC and NPPD touted the modification asone that would enhance plant safety. Cooper, once considered atrouble-prone plant, is making a turn-around, according to NRC officials.Reis said that NPPD officials admit that they underestimated the complexityof the diesel generator modifications. He added that after some significantproblems with the work that NPPD quality assurance officials got very``aggressive,'' making the modifications on the second generator go a lotsmoother.   The diesel generator modifications, said Reis, are not related to theAppendix R fire protection work done earlier. In November, NPPD crews foundthat diesel generator modifications done in 1994 to meet NRC fireprotection rules actually would have made that equipment inoperable duringa control room fire (Nucleonics Week, 30 Nov. '95, 8). Crews hadincorrectly wired the control panel when they installed fuses in 1994 toisolate five of the diesel generator indications on the control roompanel.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightINSIDE N.R.C. via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Vol. 18, NoTHREE UTILITIES SLAPPED WITH $50,000 FINES   NRC started the new year by announcing $50,000 fines against each ofthree utilities: Commonwealth Edison Co. (CECO), Baltimore Gas & ElectricCo. (BG&E), and the New York Power Authority (NYPA).   NRC said that CECO had failed to correct a potential problem withcircuit breaker settings at Quad Cities. Managers at Quad Cities had beentold of a potential problem with the circuit breakers based on an incidentat CECO's Dresden plant, but failed to act, NRC said. The utility now isplanning plant modifications and procedure changes at Quad Cities.   NRC staff identified a violation at BG&E's Calvert Cliffs involving laxcontrols on unescorted access to the plant. A contractor employee wasgranted unescorted access to the plant even though security staff atCalvert Cliffs knew that the worker had been arrested under a differentname, NRC said. The worker's unescorted access permission later was revokedwhen federal officials told BG&E that he was an illegal alien who hadfraudulently applied for a U.S. passport under another false name.   NYPA was cited for four violations at Indian Point-3. The lapsesinvolved an October 15, 1995 incident in which the unit was taken from coldshutdown to hot shutdown while switches controlling recirculation andcontainment spray pumps were in the wrong position.   The utilities have until February 1 to pay or contest the fines.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List WT02-B35-29IA086-000616-B012-32http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/ey96.html 205.156.212.5 19970122000200 text/html 61499HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Tuesday, 21-Jan-97 23:59:56 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:40:39 GMTContent-length: 61314Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ey96.html Sample Issue Copyright INTERNATIONAL COAL REPORT via NewsNet January 5, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES ENEL DIPS BELOW $34.00 (305 words) TAIPOWER SEEKS AUSTRALIAN LOW (193 words) NATPOWER BUYS FOUR CAPES (106 words) PUBLICATIONS REVIEW TRY SPOT, JAPANESE URGED (279 words) NEWS EPDC REPLIES TO THE S. AFRICANS (69 words) TNEB AWARDS CONTRACTS (182 words) KARNATAKA SEEKS 250,000T (149 words) ANDHRA PRADESH COOLS TO IMPORTS (83 words) CHILGENER SETTLES 500,000T (107 words) CODELCO MAKES AWARDS (233 words) KIDECO SUPPLIES NEW INDONESIAN POWER PLANT (327 words) TMT WINS SAVANNAH ORDER (99 words) RBCT 1995 EXPORTS HIT 58.1MT (462 words) COLD WEATHER WARMS UK TRADE (398 words) PHIBRO SELLS TO EDF (88 words) KEPCO FIXES OVER 1MT (62 words) GERMAN IMPORTS ROSE 3% IN 1995 (318 words) BAYERNWERK PLANS 0.3MT IMPORTS. (159 words) ONE DELAYS TENDER (52 words) AL NASR BIDS SHOW RISES (327 words) COALARBED, ISCOR EXPAND TONNAGE (256 words) GERMAN COKERS TO IMPORT 1.3MT. (301 words) AUSTRALIA SHIPS 137MT (222 words) BSM NAME SAD COORDINATOR (69 words) CST STUNS SUPPLIERS (441 words) SHELL RINGS THE CHANGES (94 words) ATIC SERVICES GETS NEW BOSS (46 words) COALCORP WANTS UPGRADE (99 words) PUBLICATIONS REVIEW C&L SURVEY DETAILS COLLAPSE IN NSW PROFITABILITY (769 words) CONSOL, RHEINBRAUN TALK BUYOUT (296 words) CONSOL ANNOUNCES REORGANISATION (227 words) AEP, COGENTRIX FORM VENTURE (192 words) PEN OWNERSHIP CHANGES (196 words) RUHRKOHLE HOPES TO INCREASE STAKE IN GERMAN CREEK (78 words) NEWS BF IRON OUTPUT SLOWS (74 words) CHINESE COKE SALES REACH 7MT (176 words) FREIGHTS STAY QUIET (305 words) CSX APPOINTS EXECUTIVES (117 words) UMW INAUGURATES ROBERTS (84 words) CopyrightINTERNATIONAL COAL REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996ENEL DIPS BELOW $34.00Italy's ENEL has made awards to South African producers following itsrecent tender and has done so at much lower levels than most predicted.At what is believed to be $33.65 FOBT Richards Bay, basis 6,200kc GAR,the price not only covers the tonnages award to the two successfultenderers - Amcoal and Ingwe - but also the second year of two-yearcontracts awarded a year ago to Shell and, again, Ingwe.In all 2.5mt has been awarded plus 400,000t in options: under the newtender, Amcoal gets 1mt including options and Ingwe 300,000t includingoptions while under the terms of last year's two-year contracts, Ingwewill ship 700,000t and Shell 400,000t. Last year's prices were $32.50for Ingwe and Shell and $32.60 for other South African suppliers.Under the terms of the new awards, Amcoal will receive a two-yearcontract with 1mt earmarked for 1997 and Ingwe's tonnage under the twoawards will be rolled together for a similar 1mt volume for next year.Over the next two weeks ENEL will negotiate with the Colombianproducers it approached in its search for 500,000t. These include:Carbocol, Intercor, Carbones del Caribe and Drummond. The settlementprice is expected to be in a $36-36.50 range basis 11,700/11,800Btu/lb.When all the tonnage is booked from these tenders, purchases willproceed for Chinese, Polish and Venezuelan deliveries.US exporters told ICR New Year's Week they expect Enel's tender for 1mtof US coal "any day." It was originally scheduled for mid-December.Delays are related to a change in spec: Enel plans to cut the sulfurlimit from 1.0% to 0.8% and the Btu minimum from 12,500 to 12,000. Ashstays at 10%, which for southern Appalachian coals tends to correspondto the previous higher Btu level, raising the question of Btu premiums.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL COAL REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996TAIPOWER SEEKS AUSTRALIAN LOWTaiwan Power Corporation has started 1996 with a bang with two tendersout and a decision imminent for Australian coal which looks likesetting a new low benchmark for its long-term contract buy-ins. The twotenders include a second attempt to purchase a trial panamax of lowc.v. (4,500kc-5,500kc GAR), high moisture material for its Taichungstation, the tender closing on January 16. The second tender is forfive panamaxes for March and April delivery. Contact: Director of Fuel,Taiwan Power, 9th Floor, 242 Roosevelt Road, Section 3, Taipei 100,Taiwan. Phone: 886 2 366 6752; fax, 886 2 367 0597.But it is reports of very low prices in four bids into a tender for along-term supplies from Australia which created something of a buzzthis week. The bids are from Camberwell, Saxonvale, Ulan and Coal andAllied, spanning less than $2 from a low of just under $22.50 FOB. Noneof the companies contacted said they had heard from Taipower about thetender and suggested that prices quoted were lower than their actualbids. The prices will be for the first year of deliveries in a seven-year contract.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL COAL REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996NATPOWER BUYS FOUR CAPESNational Power of the UK has booked four capes from the US for firstquarter delivery, bringing to well in excess of 1mt the company hasbooked for 1996 delivery just from the US. The purchases, of mid-sulphur material, have all been done a few cents higher than similarpurchases by the company in the Fall of 1995. They have helped toproduce a drying up of supplies of this quality coal from some USsuppliers. One cape is from the East Coast from AMCI - which hadalready won 500,000t worth of business from NatPower; the balance iscoming through traders from the Gulf.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL COAL REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996TRY SPOT, JAPANESE URGEDJapanese utilities should ditch their dependence on contract purchasesand increase the amount of spot tonnage bought, according to a study*by the country's Institute of Energy Economics.The study, comparing Japanese utility buying practices with those inEurope, South Korea, and Taiwan, urges the utilities to become moreflexible for at least 1.8mt of their annual needs. This tonnage, 6% ofcurrent demand, represents the fluctuations in annual consumptioncaused by different weather conditions in recent years.Tonnage fluctuations are likely to increase as coal stations shifttowards mid-loading and consequently, says the study, spot purchasesshould move towards 10% of annual consumption.In comparison with virtually no spot purchases by Japanese powercompanies, European, Taiwanese and Korean powercos take 28-44%, 10-30%and 10% respectively of their coal needs from the spot market.The next few years will see Japanese coal stations drop theirutilisation from 65% today to about 59% in 1999 and even lower insubsequent years, bringing Japanese coal station utilisation close tothose of Europe.The IEE report sees no merit in current buying practices of includingoption tonnages since they bring no benefit in lower prices. SinceJapanese power companies burn high-quality coals of well-known origin,they are likely to enter the spot market initially through closedtenders for specific brands. "But, if they hope to procure the cheapestcoal, they have to make open tender-based spot procurement as Taiwandoes," buying coal on physical properties alone, and buying coal which,in some cases, has an unknown origin, says the IEE study.*Japan's Generating-Use Steaming Coal Procurement Forms Now and Future,by Shuji Yamada and Toshiro Doi.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL COAL REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996EPDC REPLIES TO THE S. AFRICANSThe price ideas requested by Japan's Electric Power DevelopmentCorporation - a request which led to demands for rises of $3 - have nowreceived a dusty response from the EPDC buyers for a c25 cut to $36.36FOBT Richard Bay. This price relates to Total's Ermelo supplies basis6,021kc NAR. The other offers range upwards from $33.80 for TCOA'sWitbank and include Total's Arthur Taylor and Shell's Rietspruit.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL COAL REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996TNEB AWARDS CONTRACTSIndia's Tamil Nadu Electricity Board (TNEB) has concluded 1996contracts for a total of 2.4mt, having succeeded in getting the biddersdown to a level of $59.45/t CIF. This is higher than the low bid of$49.00 submitted by PT Sarita Prima but significantly under all otherbids, which ranged from $64.85 to $73.25/t CIF Madras.Several of the contract winners appear to be affiliated, based on theiroffering the same coals. Glencore and Esteco each offered Cook,Tselentis, and Prima Comex Indonesia; and Emirates Trading and WesternShipping each offered Danau Mashitam, Shanxi, and Ensham. PT SaritaPrima offered Berau and Bukit Asam, while Alagendran Exports offered arange of Indonesian, South African, and Australian.The two "unknowns" who won contracts last year along with Alagendranand Emirates - Ocean Centre and Kerry Coal - have not reappeared on theline up this time around (ICR 366/1).Tamil Nadu Contract AwardsSupplier    Initial Offer*/TonnageAlagendran Exports  $64.70/800,000Glencore             69.00/400,000V.K. Esteco          65.10/200,000Emirates Trading     65.35/300,000Western Shipping     64.85/200,000P.T. Sarita Prima    49.00/500,000* CIF MadrasBack to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL COAL REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996KARNATAKA SEEKS 250,000TKarnataka Power Corporation (KPC) is once again entering theinternational market, this time looking for 250,000t. In its previousattempt to import in 1993, the utility found the offers in response toits 1mt tender technically and commercially unacceptable (ICR 353/13).Karnataka is passing through a severe power crisis because of a strikeat Singarani Collieries in neighbouring Andhra Pradesh state since mid-October. This has created shortages at Karnataka's only coal-firedpower station at Raichur. Hydro activity has also been poor.Bids can be submitted by January 18 for delivery before May 31.The bidders are being asked to quote in Indian rupees (the rupee hasdeclined 12% against the $ since October).Further information can be obtained from Superintending Engineer (MM),Karnataka Power Corporation Limited, 82 Shakti Bhavan, 3rd Floor, RaceCourse Road, Bungalore - 560001, Karnataka, India. Telephone: +91-(0)80-2203894 Fax +91-(0)80-2252144.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL COAL REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996ANDHRA PRADESH COOLS TO IMPORTSAndhra Pradesh State Electricity Board (APSEB) may not place orders forthe 500,000t quantity it put to tender in September. The utility foundthe offers it received at around Rs2,900/t cost three times the priceof domestic coal available from the coal mines in Andhra Pradesh.The sharp decline in the Rupee value against the dollar in October-November has further increased the delivery price of imports. Coupledwith the high price factor is the precarious financial position of theAPSEB board.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL COAL REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996CHILGENER SETTLES 500,000TChilgener has settled a third of its 1.5mt requirement for 1996,concluding with Colombian producers at competitive prices. Sources saythe buyer claims to have concluded at $34.00-35.00/t FOB basis 6,600kcGAR.The company plans to conduct talks with other suppliers over the nextmonth. It has inventories sufficient to last it until March and canwait to conclude until late February.Meanwhile, the Chilean utility has asked for bids on one or two trialcargoes of western US and western Canadian coals. Offers are dueJanuary 10. Observers say the company is looking to diversify supplysources, given the rapid growth in its consumption.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL COAL REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996CODELCO MAKES AWARDSChile's Codelco has awarded contracts for 1996 supplies for theTocopilla plant to companies in Canada, Australia, Colombia, andIndonesia. Prices are believed to be up $4-5 over the previous levels,but those prices were negotiated in September 1994, before last year'smarket upswing. Sources said prices for all suppliers are in the rangeof $40-42/t CFR basis 6300kc GAR. The price on the Indonesian coal isbelieved to be $36.20/t CFR basis 5,400kc GAR.Codelco officials told ICR they could not release any details untilcontracts are formally concluded. Codelco is acting as purchasing agentfor the new owner of the privatised Tocopilla Division, now calledCentral Termica Tocopilla.Although Codelco had originally asked for bids on 280,000t for 1996 and900,000t in 1997, it decided not to award any tonnage for the secondyear. The volume was set at a higher level for 1997 because severaldomestic contracts expire, leaving open the possibility of theirreplacement with imports. One observer comments that prices may besomewhat below market because bidders believed they were competing formulti-year agreements.Elsewhere in the Chilean market, P.T. Adaro has won an order for a testcargo for Chilgener's Guacolda plant.Codelco awardsSource/supplier     TonnageCanadaNova Solid Fuels/Fording                    60,000IndonesiaP.T. Kideco         30,000*P.T. Berau          60,000ColombiaIntercor/Cerrejon   60,000AustraliaBHP                 45,000Total              255,000** = plus 30,000t optionBack to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL COAL REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996KIDECO SUPPLIES NEW INDONESIAN POWER PLANTThe South Korean owned coal mine PT Kideco Jaya Agung, in EastKalimantan, has signed a long-term contract for supply to theIndonesian private power plant PT Jawa Power. It will be Kideco's firstdomestic supply contract. Currently all output is exported, mostly foruse by the South Korean power utility.PT Jawa Power is in the very early stages of developing 2x600 MW plantsat Paiton in East Java, alongside the existing 2x400MW the existing2x400 MW units now in operation and run by the state utility PTPerusahaan Listrik Negara (PLN), and the 2x615 MW units to be built bythe now celebrated private power company, PT Pation Energy Company.Kideco, wholly Korean owned, (80% of which is by Korean stateagencies), and operating under a production sharing contract with theIndonesian government, will supply 1.8mt/yr over 30 years to PT Jawa.This matches the term of PT Jawa's operation, for which a powerpurchase agreement with the PLN was signed in April 1995.It is not yet known where the additional coal needed will come from,but there are rumours that further supply may be secured from anotherKalimantan producer, PT Berau, which started production in 1994 fromits mines in north-eastern Kalimantan. Berau is a joint venture betweenNissho Iwai of Japan and PT United Tractors Indonesia.In 1995, Kideco produced about 2.5mt all exported to South Korea.Kideco said it would increase production to around 6mt by 1999. Kidecobegan production from its mine south of Balikapapan in the second halfof 1993. Coal is shipped by road 40k to the Kideco run seaport of TanahMerah, which can accommodate bulk carriers of up to 40,000DWT.PT Jawa is being built by a partnership made up of Siemens of Germany(50%) PowerGen of Britain (35%) and the Indonesian PT Bumi PertiwiTatapradipta (15%), a subsidiary of the Bimantara group, controlled bypresident Suharto's second son, Bambang Trihadmojo.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL COAL REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996TMT WINS SAVANNAH ORDERTMT Coal has won an order to supply 36,000t to Savannah Electric &Power for the purpose of testing the new unloading dock that is beingconstructed to serve the Kraft plant. Delivery will be between March 1and March 25.TMT will supply Venezuelan coal produced by Carbosurco in the state ofFalcon. As earlier reported, TMT recently signed a contract to take230,000t of Carbosurco's output for shipment out of Palmarejo on LakeMaracaibo (ICR 388/12). Approximately 60% of the volume is earmarkedfor one customer and the remainder is being sold on the spot market.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL COAL REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996RBCT 1995 EXPORTS HIT 58.1MTThe Richards Bay Coal Terminal (RBCT) pulled out all the stops duringDecember to shift 5.58mt of coal and bring the total throughout forcalendar 1995 to 58.12mt. That compares with the calendar 1994 totalthroughput of 53.5mt.The official throughput target for 1995 issued by the RBCT was 56mt,although members were told they6 could export coal up to theirrespective quotas of a total RBCT throughput of 59mt. Reason for thelower official target is that major exporters Ingwe and Amcoal - whichbetween them account for nearly two thirds of RBCT capacity - indicatedearly in the year they did not have the coal available to meetthroughput rates equivalent to 59mt. Both groups said that they wereaiming for their shares of a throughput level of 56mt.A number of the smaller RBCT shareholders made it clear they were notconstrained by such availability problems. It seems some have exportedat more than their proportionate share of 59mt by "buying-in" RBCTquotas from other members unable to utilise their full entitlements.Industry sources indicate the going rate for such deals varies betweenUS$1.5/t and $3/t, depending on market conditions.It's early days for predictions on 1996 but the feeling in the industryseems to be that a repeat performance of the 4.6mt growth shown in 1995is unlikely. Reasons for this are worries over constraints onproduction capacity at the various mines, most of which are at fullstretch already, combined with a degree of caution over the market.The official RBCT line on export growth is that ideally, the memberswould like to increase total throughput by about 2-2.5mt annually whichis also about the long-term average annual increase achieved in theirexports. Last year's 4.6mt jump in exports shows many SA exporters areprepared to go all out to take advantage of favourable marketconditions when they present themselves. A similar performance thisyear must, however, bring the RBCT to the limit of the capacity it canprovide through rationalisation and reorganisation of its operations atminimal capital cost.The RBCT's nominal capacity is currently stated at 60mt/yr. Theterminal's track record over the past few years has shown the RBCT's"nominal capacity to be as long as the proverbial piece of string.While the 60mt/yr number is therefore not a cap it is, however, veryclose to what can be achieved without having to make a major capitalinvestment in expanding the terminal.a decision on that unspecified investment by the members is pending topush the terminal's capacity to 70mt. Industry executives commentconventional wisdom is the RBCT should be exporting between 65mt and70mt by 2000. Judging by 1995's performance it could be sooner thanthat.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL COAL REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996COLD WEATHER WARMS UK TRADEFreezing conditions in North West Europe during December meant relieffor the beleagured UK house coal trade. After a run of mild winters,capped by an appalling 1994/95 in which trade fell by 20-30% to anannual rate of well below 2mt/yr, sales were very low throughout 1995.This reflected high carryover stocks from the winter and structuralchanges within the industry.The structural changes followed the privatisation of British Coal inDecember 1994. RJB Mining, the lead producer in the newly privatisedworld, made its priority in this sector a deliberate targeting ofimport markets, offering heavily discounted supplies in northernScotland to challenge longstanding Polish contracts. It also pursueddirect sales to merchants, which had traditionally been supplied byfactors. Merchants, confronted with increasing competition betweendifferent suppliers and between suppliers and factors, had anotherreason to hold back from purchasing.By October, which was the warmest in the UK on record, there were signsof panic within the industry because coal was still not moving andbalance sheets were already in the red. By this time, two of theleading factors were changing hands with Coal Products, itself newlyprivatised, buying Anglo Coal from Anglo United and the management ofBritish Fuels just about to secure their company from British Coal. Themanagement of the third biggest factor, PD Fuels which is owned byPowell Duffryn, gained exclusivity to bid for their company just beforeChristmas.After the bitterly cold weather of December, traders are now talking ofshortages developing for some grades. They point out that many effectsof the cold snap are yet to be felt because it hit in the middle of aholiday period when fires were on all of the time.Another cold snap will surely bring another surge in sales. There isalready a shortage of 50mm plus sized material and of singles. As onetrader put it, "if you had some Colombian product at the moment you'dsell thousands of tonnes of it, the trouble is none of us has". Given alead time of c. 35 days to bring in a typical 35-40,000t consignmentfor processing and the fact that the coldest months in the UK arenormally January and February, only those with coal already on the wayor at European stockpiles will be able to respond on time to meetdemand.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL COAL REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996PHIBRO SELLS TO EDFPhibro has sold two capes of Colombian to Electricite de France atclose to $37.00/t FOB basis 12,000 Btu/lb. One will be delivered ineach half of 1996. The purchase completes EdF's requirement for thefirst half.The price is $1.00 less than deals done two or three months ago for UScoal of equivalent quality to EdF. The French company bought fromExporting Commodities Inc. at $38.00 and, in a deal in which coal couldgo either to EdF or to CarboPego, from AMCI at $38.00-38.50.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL COAL REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996KEPCO FIXES OVER 1MTSouth Korean utility Korea Electric Power Co has booked eight, option aninth, capes with compatriot owner Samsun to trade from Newcastle. Itagreed a rate of $6.50 for shipments of 120-132,000t and expects themto be made over a year from February. Samsun is now in the market fortime charter tonnage to work the business on a consecutive voyagebasis.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL COAL REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996GERMAN IMPORTS ROSE 3% IN 1995Coal and coke imports into Germany increased by only around 3% in 1995to 18mt, according to the German Coal Importers Federation. The borderprice for imported steam coal into Germany averaged DM76t ($53.10)/thard coal equivalent during the first 10 months of 1995, just over onequarter of the price of German coal - DM291/thce - before subsidiestook effect.In 1996, the importers anticipate that, assuming there are nosignificant currency swings, imported coal prices will remain stableand cheap. It seems contradictory therefore that the volume of importsis expected to fall by around 10% in 1996. The reason is that manylarge consumer utilities have generous coal stocks, the hangover involumes from their obligation to buy German coal under the now-lapsedJahrhundert contract which were larger than their actual needs.These companies will draw down their stocks in 1996, reducing purchasesof fresh coal by as much as 10%. German and imported coal are expectedto be affected to the same degree.Ruhrkohle announced at the end of last year that sales would reach anaverage 27mt a year over the next three years, resulting in an excessproduction capacity of 2-3mt. Saarberg expects to sell only around 7mtin 1996 instead of the originally anticipated 8.2mt.The coal importers association warns against what it considers over-estimates of coal sales for this year and beyond by politiciansresponsible for German coal policy. The consultancy Prognos in Basel,in particular, is criticised as having given too optimistic a pictureof coal's future market position in its recent energy forecast for theFederal economy ministry. The development of steam coal use forelectricity generation is especially overrated, say the importers.German power station coal consumption 1992-2020 (mthce)Year           Tonnage1992           43.871993           45.172000           47.612005           48.952010           49.192015           49.432020           49.91Source: Prognos, BaselBack to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL COAL REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996BAYERNWERK PLANS 0.3MT IMPORTS.Saarberg, Germany's second largest coal producer, signed a five-yearcoal supply contract with major utility Bayernwerk on December 21 1995,just days before the 15-year Jahrhundert contract expired at the closeof the year. The deal covers 2.3mt, 0.46mt/a year.Bayernwerk signed up for coal from Ruhrkohle for 1996-2000 back in Julylast year. The contract was for nearly 4mt, a little under 0.8mt peryear. The utility has thus made a firm commitment to use around 1.26mtof German coal a year. Stocks standing at 0.5mt at the end of 1995 willalso be drawn down.Furthermore, after two years of using only Germany coal, in 1996Bayernwerk will import 0.3mt.Delivery of the imports by water is restricted due to the limitedunloading facilities at the power stations, so the utility buys onlypart cargos of 15,000t. Rail deliveries from Poland and the CzechRepublic are more or less continuous week-by-week throughout the year.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL COAL REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996ONE DELAYS TENDERMorocco's Office Nationale de l'Electricite has postponed the deadlinefor bids on its recent tender from December 27 to January 10. No reasonwas given. ONE is looking for combined firm and option tonnage of1,080,000t for the Jorf Lasfar and Mohammedia plants (ICR 388/15).Delivery periods run from May to October.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL COAL REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996AL NASR BIDS SHOW RISESOpening bids into Egypt's Al Nasr Company of Coke and Chemicals tenderfor Australian coals show 5-6% increase on last year's prices. BHP(Blackwater) and South Blackwater - who supplied under the previouscontract - have bid $47.75 and $47.20 FOB respectively, compared withlast year's price of around $46.Two newcomers bidding for the Al Nasr "standard high vol" areGlencore's Cook and KCC's Tahmoor - Glencore close to the traditionalsuppliers' prices, KCC for substantially more. All bidders are goingfor the full 400,000t on offer which in the case of Cook shows aremarkable turnaround; only a year ago it was producing just 275,000t.A second blend is being called for by Al Nasr for 100,000t of lowervol, lower ash material. One explanation for this development is thatthe buyer is seeking an alternative to one of its US coals. MIM (OakyCreek) and BHP (Saraji blend) are both going for the full 100,000toffered.Traditionally, Al Nasr has come back seeking better prices, althoughthe fact that it is tendering in the middle of the JSM negotiationswould suggest that few are going to oblige with lower offers with somuch at risk. Decision expected in February. The new contracts will runfor four years commencing on April 1 this year.The CIF Alexandria prices reveal a wide range of freight estimates ($11-16.40) suggesting that some suppliers are very keen to get the businesswithout posting damaging FOB numbers. Alexandria takes panamaxes withthe alternative cape port, El Dikela, sometimes being used.Al Nasr's Australian offersCompany     Brand         Offer      FOB      C&F AlexandriaGrade One - Standard HVBHP         Blackwater    400,000t   $47.75      $64.90Glencore    Cook          400,000t   $47.50      $65.25KCC         Tahmoor       400,000t   $50.50      $69.90Grade Two - lover vols, lower ashBHP         Saraji blend  100,000t   $54.00      $71.15BHP non-conforming A      100,000t   $50.25      $67.40BHP non-conforming B      100,000t   $49.75      $66.90MIM         Oaky Creek    100,000t   $55.00      $73.00Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL COAL REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996COALARBED, ISCOR EXPAND TONNAGECoalArbed has won new multi-year contracts to supply 250,000t/yr out ofBaltimore to South Africa's Iscor. The tonnage is in addition to themore than 700,000t that CoalArbed supplied in 1995 under long-termdeals.CoalArbed will supply mid-vol coking coal from two Pennsylvaniaproducers, Bradford Coal and K & J Coal. Neither company has beenactive in direct sales to export customers in recent years, althoughBradford formerly supplied Pakistan Steel through Hansen Coal.Both companies have operations in Clearfield County, Pennsylvania,served by Conrail for shipment through the Consol Coal Pier. They arestrip operations in the Kittanning and Freeport seams with typicalvolatile content of 26-27%, according to sources.Representatives of Iscor were in the US in December to visit mines. Thesteel company has been increasing its import tonnage because ofdeclining reserves at the captive Hlobane colliery and because it wantsto improve coke quality when it adds pulverised coal injection thisyear (ICR 365/7). At the moment, the company would take higher importvolumes but is reportedly held back by capacity limitations of itsdischarge equipment.CoalArbed has been supplying Iscor with southern Appalachian coals fromproducers such as Consol and Pittston for shipment out of HamptonRoads. The new contracts represent the first deals out of Baltimore.But although Iscor's import requirement could rise to nearly 2mt/yrafter 2000, it is expected to cut its US take when it goes ahead withdeveloping an operation in Queensland at Moranbah, where it iscurrently undertaking exploration work.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL COAL REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996GERMAN COKERS TO IMPORT 1.3MT.Backdated to the beginning of 1995, a deal was finally signed shortlybefore Christmas by German steel companies and Ruhrkohle allowing theimport of an additional 1.3mt of coking coal a year (ICR 385/2).The steel companies which operate coking plant - Thyssen Stahl, HKM andPreussag Stahl will together import between 0.7mt and 0.8mt of cokingcoal annually. Thyssen will probably have an import entitlement ofaround 0.5mt with the other two mills sharing the rest. Ruhrkohle willimport about 0.5mt, rather more than the figure of 0.32mt circulatingin November last year.The volumes have been fixed only verbally as they depend on the amountof coke breeze produced in each company's coking plant. This in turncan be varied under various technical conditions. Also, for a limitedperiod, Thyssen will give up a part of its share to the other twomills.(The link with coke breeze hinges on the fact that the coking coalequivalent to the breeze is not eligible for subsidy under the rules ofthe Huette Contract.)The steel companies now allowed to import coking coal will, it seems,derive no significant financial benefit from the deal as Ruhrkohlealready supplies all coking coal at more or less world market prices.However the mills will have the opportunity to "practise" with worldmarket coking coal in preparation for the moment when the door isfinally opened to unrestricted coking coal imports.This could be in 2002 when the Huette contract expires or earlier ifthe German government decides to screw back coking coal subsidiessooner.Backdating the agreement to beginning 1995 means that imports byThyssen, HKM and Ruhrkohle last year will be covered by the deal.Preussag however will start importing this year for the first time.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL COAL REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996AUSTRALIA SHIPS 137MTA survey of port throughput in Australia shows that the country liftedexports from 131.2mt to 136.7mt. Port Kembla was the only port to see asignificant fall, dropping 1.5mt to 10.8mt. Four ports moved over 20mt - Gladstone, Hay Point, Dalrymple Bay and Newcastle which rose 3.4mt to48.9mt.The stock situation tightened during November, largely throughindustrial action, cutting exports stocks from 11.5mt to 11.5mt. Afurther fall was predicted for December because of production problemsin Queensland caused by high rainfall. All the fall was in coking coalwhich dropped 1.2mt.Australian 1995 exportsPort              Dec 95        1995Abbott Point      498,000    4.801mtHay Point       1,752,000   23.838mtDalrymple Bay   1,673,000   22.951mtGladstone       1,981,000   22.517mtBrisbane          187,000    2.967mtQueensland      6,091,000   77.074mtNewcastle       4,084,000   48.884mtPort Kembla     1,020,000   10.909mtNSW             5,104,000   59.793mtAustralia      11,195,000  136.862mtAustralian export stocksGrade        Oct (mt)    Nov (mt)Metallurgical  5.0             3.8Of which: -High vol      1.8             1.6Mid volNSW           1.1             0.8Q'land        1.0             0.7Total mid     2.1             1.5Low vol       1.1             0.7NSW total     2.9             2.5Q'ld total    2.1             1.3Thermal       6.5             6.6NSW           4.2             4.2Q'ld          2.3             2.4All coalsNSW           7.1             6.8Q'ld          4.4             3.8Total        11.5            10.5Source: Department of Primary Industries and EnergyBack to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL COAL REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996BSM NAME SAD COORDINATOROnce again, the Brazilian steel mills have nominated Helio Sad ofUsiminas as the chief negotiator for this year's coking coal contracts.Talks are expected to start in late February after Carnival.It should be noted that although the mills do much of their negotiatingas a bloc, the recent moves of CST to modify or cancel existingcontracts were the actions of that company on its own.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL COAL REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996CST STUNS SUPPLIERSBrazil's CST has astonished the industry by sending out a letter to allof its coal suppliers asking for a price reduction on existingcontracts. In the case of certain suppliers, CST has followed up with asecond communication saying it is cancelling its contracts with thosecompanies.The initial letter went out mid-December from CST's new chief rawmaterials buyer, Coletano Abreu. It asked for price cuts of $4.00/t oncoals priced more than $40.00 and cuts of $3.00 on coals between $30.00and $40.00, both to be effective January 15. At the same time, CST sentletters to iron ore producer CVRD asking for a 10% cut and to shippingcompany Doce Nave also asking for 10%.The company said it was forced to take the measure because of a 25-30%drop in sales of steel slabs, its only product. CST is believed to beunder pressure from its leading bank which, like many banks in Brazil,is going through a bad period due to the lack of inflationary gainsunder the new currency system.Suppliers have universally responded to this message by saying it isnot possible. One major supplier told ICR, "We sent back a very politeletter saying that we appreciate where they're coming from, but when werun into bad times we bite the bullet and we expect the customer to dothe same."The informal reaction, however, has been far from polite. Theimplications of such a move are obvious, as the modification of formalcontracts in progress would call into question the whole framework ofagreements in the market. CST's action has reportedly been as unpopularelsewhere in Brazil as it has with the suppliers, as buyers at theother mills worry their credibility will be undermined. According tosources outside CST, it is also highly unpopular with members of thecompany's raw materials purchasing staff whose experience in the coalmarket is far more extensive than that of the newcomer Abreu.As mentioned above, the initial price cut request was followed by amessage to selected high-vol suppliers indicating their contracts wereactually being cancelled. This message, sent out December 28, stated:"Due to substantial changes in our coal blending, as a consequence ofdrastic administrative measures because of declining slab prices in theinternational market, we are cancelling the balance of our contracts."   It wasn't clear at press time which companies were the luckyrecipients of this second message. Some sources said, however, theybelieved CST was attempting to cut back on US high-vol because it hadrecently taken increased volumes of high-vol from Canada's Devco.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL COAL REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996SHELL RINGS THE CHANGESShell Coal International has replaced Peter de Wit in his position asvice president, supply and trading, with Mike Sweeney, previouslygeneral manager for Asia, America and for metallurgical coal. De Witmoves to a new post involving coal and gas supplies.Meanwhile, in Australia, Shell is advertising for two traders. One isto join its Shell Australia team in Sydney under Lindsay Flint, theother to work with David Heap, the Shell Coal International executivebased there. The latter is effectively a relocation of a London-basedjob, probably to Sydney or Jakarta.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL COAL REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996ATIC SERVICES GETS NEW BOSSATIC Services has appointed Thierry Arnold as chairman, replacingPierre Verbrugghe. Michel Margnes has been reappointed as president,Michel Bellissant as CEO and Gilbert Join as secretary.  ATIC Serviceswas set up early last year when the ATIC's monopoly for coal importsinto France was abolished.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL COAL REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996COALCORP WANTS UPGRADECoal Corporation of New Zealand is negotiating with Tranz Rail and theLyttelton Port about the provision of transport services to meetCoalCorp's planned export growth targets. The company has alsocommissioned engineering consultants Connell Wagner to undertaketechnical analysis regarding the construction of a deep-water jetty inBuller Bay, chairman David Stock said last month."Our directors are concerned about delays in the Coal Export Project todate and are progressing developments that will allow export growthtargets to be met in the event that the negotiations with Tranz Railand the LPC are not concluded satisfactorily."Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL COAL REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996C&L SURVEY DETAILS COLLAPSE IN NSW PROFITABILITYFiscal 1994/95 was a monetary disaster for the New South Wales coalindustry with the aggregate after tax profit falling by A$100m ($74.4m)from the previous year to just A$98m, according to the annual surveyconducted by Cooper & Lybrand. However, it is expected that theperformance of the industry will show a marked improvement this year,and in 1996/97 with the expectation of further price rises this year.There is now a degree of optimism in the industry, given the higherprices and continuing increases in productivity, the director of theNSW Minerals Council and CEO of Peabody Resources, Bob Humphris, said.Although the latest Coopers & Lybrand survey is now just over sixmonths out of date, (it covers the 1994/95 FY), it does show theimmense damage caused by the savage price cuts forced by the Japanesebuyers for JFY 1994.Twenty one companies took part in the survey representing about 80% ofNSW production. This grew by 8% to about 67.5mt in the year, of which alittle more than 50% was won from underground operations. Domesticdemand remained static and all of the additional 5.1mt found its wayinto export markets which increased to close to 50mt. Operating profitafter tax but before abnormal and extraordinary items averaged onlyA$1.45/t less than half the A$3.19/t profit for the previous financialyear.If extraordinary and abnormal items are included, the meagre profit isall but wiped out. The aggregate bottom line result for last financialyear for all the companies surveyed was only A$3m which suggests that,in all probability, a relatively large percentage of the respondentstraded in the red.The Minerals Council, as always, has been quick to point out that thegovernments' take of coal industry revenue was much higher than thatreceived by the producers. Total government revenue grew from A$12.14/tin 1993/94 to A$12.43/t. The figure includes services provided, notablyrail freights, as well as income tax. A breakdown of the total paymentsto the state and federal governments suggest that NSW is getting itsact together on becoming a more efficient provider of services.Provision of government services fell from A$396m in 1992/93 to A$336min 1993/94 and to A$312m last financial year - a 24% drop in threeyears. This was achieved despite the fact that tonnages moved rose byalmost 9% last year. Capital investment in 1994/95, mirroring industryoptimism, rose to A$625m from $485m the year before and it is estimatedthat it will rise further to around A$700m this financial year. It isalso likely that capital expenditure will remain strong for theremainder of this decade as producers gear up for the anticipatedincrease in demand. Most of this will be met through brownfieldsexpansion, Humphris said. The survey also includes a comparison of datafrom a constant group of respondents whose production rose from 60.9mtto 61.8mt in the last couple of years although employment levels fellby almost 800 from 12,064 to 11,272. The constant group also performedbetter financially than all the respondents with the after taxoperating profit before abnormals and extraordinaries being A$106mcompared with A$210 the previous year.The Minerals Council has also released data compiled by the Joint CoalBoard and the Reserve Bank which shows that employment levels for theentire industry continue to fall. These dropped 8.6% in 1992/93 to14,458, a further 5.2% to 13,701 in 1993/94 and a further 0.6% to13,612 last financial year. At the same time, output per employee isrising steadily - up 7.7% three years ago to 5,580t a man year followedby a 6.5% rise in 1993/94 to 5,940t and a further 6% increase last yearto 6,440t.Consequently, the labour cost per tonne produced dropped 4.5% in1992/93, 4.2% in 1993/94 and 2.5% last year to A$10.39.NSW Coal Industry 1992 - 1995                           1992/93       1993/94       1994/95Operating profit1$/t                          2.87          3.18          1.45% return onshareholders' funds           9.2           9.7           4.7Government revenueTotal $/t                   12.80         12.14         12.43Excl. PAYE tax $/t           8.66          8.31          8.31Royalties, company taxes     2.93          2.92          3.69Net profit after taxExcl. abnormals andextraordinaries ($m)         198            198            98Total ($m)                   149            201             3Debt to equity ratio        0.53           0.56          0.50Capital expenditure          331            485           625Survey coverage% production2                 82             74            77No. of respondents            21             19            211 After tax but excluding abnormal and extraordinary items.2 % of industry production covered by survey.Source: Coopers & Lybrand financial survey - summary of major results.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL COAL REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996CONSOL, RHEINBRAUN TALK BUYOUTDuPont is negotiating with Rheinbraun parent RWE to sell its remaining50% share in leading US producer Consol, according to reliable sources.The two sides held a series of pre-Christmas meetings in London to workout the details of the buyout, but are still talking over valuation,ICR understands.The crux of the matter, apparently, is that Rheinbraun does not expectto pay as much for the second half of the company as it did for thefirst half. The German company paid an estimated $1.25bn for itsinitial share in 1991 (ICR 270/6).A Consol spokesman said he could not comment on acquisition rumours.From Germany, RWE chief Dietmar Kuhnt issued a statement confirmingthat DuPont wants to sell its stake in Consol and saying that RWE willlook for another partner or partners to replace DuPont.Expectations have been high this fall that DuPont would soon sell itsshare in Consol. The company has made no secret that it considers coalto be a non-core asset. One source points out that reports of adivestiture have been widespread since former DuPont chairman EdgarWoolard said the company intended to buy back shares owned by Seagramand to fund that with a sale of Consol.In connection with the RWE-DuPont negotiations, there have also beenrumours that a third party will take a minority share in Consol. Thename of Cyprus Amax has come up in this connection, but it should beremembered that Cyprus has been mentioned as a prospective buyer ofvirtually every property on the block for the past six months. Oneobserver notes that a part-ownership of Consol by Cyprus Amax would beillogical from an operational point of view as it would "paralyse" thetwo competitors.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL COAL REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996CONSOL ANNOUNCES REORGANISATIONConsol will eliminate three regional mining offices in a majorreorganisation resulting in the loss of an estimated 200-300 jobs. Alsoat Consol, company president William Karis will take over Bobby Brown'sposition as CEO, while Brown will stay with Consol to focus on"strategic issues."In the reorganisation, Consol will shut down its mining offices inWashington, Pennsylvania; Morgantown, West Virginia; and St. Louis,Missouri. Functions handled at these mid-level offices will betransferred either to company headquarters in Pittsburgh or to themining operations themselves, a spokesman told ICR."We are trying to update our structure to reflect the character of ourcompany in 1995," the spokesman said. "The structure was put in placein 1975, but we mine fifty percent more coal than we did 20 years agowith fifty percent fewer mines."The change will be effective as of February. There have also beenrumours that some of Consol's regional sales offices will close, butthe spokesman said he was not aware of any such plan.Regarding Brown's new role, the company did not define the "strategicissues" he will deal with, but his responsibilities may be related toan upcoming change in ownership. The shift of the CEO position fromBrown to Karis follows a transfer of the president position from theformer to the latter in 1995.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL COAL REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996AEP, COGENTRIX FORM VENTUREAmerican Electric Power, the largest coal-burning power company in theUS, has formed a joint venture with independent power company Cogentrixand with Zurn Industries of Erie, Pennsylvania. The venture, calledIndustrial Energy Partners, will focus on building IPPs sellingelectricity beyond AEP's own service area, possibly including overseas.The announcement was made in December at a power conference inCalifornia. It reflects a decision by Ohio-based AEP to take advantageof the deregulation of the US electricity industry. The ventureinvolves a non-utility subsidiary called AEP Resources, one of severalunregulated entities recently formed by AEP to pursue new power-relatedmarkets. The parent company controls utilities in seven states in themidwest burning about 45m short tons (st)/yr.Cogentrix is headquartered in Charlotte, North Carolina, and operatespower projects in the US and overseas. It operates 10 plants in the USand is currently working toward development of a $1.4bn power plant inMangalore, India.Zurn is a manufacturer of equipment for power generation. It hasdesigned and built more than 40 generating stations over the past 10years that are fuelled by natural gas or waste products.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL COAL REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996PEN OWNERSHIP CHANGESThe evolution of an independent US producer continues with PenHoldings' announcement this week that controlling interest in thecompany's common stock was sold to William Beckner January 3. Becknerhas been the company's president and chief executive officer since 1993and has held various executive positions since 1982.Pen, a privately held company located in Brentwood, Tennessee, wasoriginally formed in 1971 by Eddie Pen, who died February 6, 1993. Hiswife, Grace Pen, has served as chairman of the company's board ofdirectors since his death. The sale was effected by Grace Pen and theother co-executors of Pen's estate.The company was originally known as P&C Bituminous Coal and was createdby Pen largely to do business with Taiwan Power. However, the company'slong-term contract supplies to Taipower have declined in volume at thesame time it has shifted toward domestic markets as well as exportmarkets outside Taiwan.Pen has total revenues of more than $200m per year and employs 500people. Its two largest subsidiaries are Pen Coal Corp. and Elk HornCoal, which control about 200m short tons of reserves in east Kentuckyand southern West Virginia.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL COAL REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996RUHRKOHLE HOPES TO INCREASE STAKE IN GERMAN CREEKRuhrkohle International, a subsidiary of Ruhrkohle Handel, the tradingarm of German coal producer Ruhrkohle, wants to increase its share inAustralia's German Creek from around 12% to at least 20%.Ruhrkohle International continues to scout the world for otherinteresting investment possibilities. Any acquisitions are likely to besmall however after the investment of several hundred million DMs inVenezuela since "Ruhrkohle is not a company with enormous financialresources." Only those of the German state.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL COAL REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996BF IRON OUTPUT SLOWSLatest International Iron and Steel Institute blast furnace ironproduction figures show a sharp drop off in November in Europeanactivity rates. Indeed the institute's monthly analysis for the first11 months of 1995 indicates a slowing across the board of the 43industries surveyed. Although in Asia South Korea and Taiwan continueto show growth, India, and significantly, Japan are both down - thelatter by 5.9% in November compared with November 1994.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL COAL REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996CHINESE COKE SALES REACH 7MTThe rapid growth in Chinese coke exports could approach 9mt for thewhole of 1995, easily more than double 1994 sales. In October exportshit a new monthly record with 890,000t shipped, bringing to 7.05mt thevolume moved in the first 10 months of the year (3.13mt in JanuaryOctober 1994. Prices, according to Chinese customs authorities, reached$80.52/t FOB compared with $67.39 a year previously.Coal exports also look to be heading for another record year with22.44mt moved in the first 10 months compared with 18.34mt in the same1994 period.Chinese Coal & Coke Exports (1,000t)1994Exports        Coal           CokeJan            270            220Feb            2,200          320Mar            1,980          360Apr            1,730          230May            2,170          190Jun            1,740          330Jul            2,110          360Aug            2,780          370Sep            1,590          330Oct            1,770          420Nov            2,290          420Dec            3,680          4801995Jan            1,810          750Feb            2,260          480Mar            2,020          700Apr            2,260          750May            2,310          600Jun            2,540          730Jul            2,230          620Aug            2,540          730Sep            2,860          800Oct            1,160          890Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL COAL REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996FREIGHTS STAY QUIETDeep sea freight rates are drifting with very little activity reportedin any sector. The Baltic Freight Index has slipped to 1,589, from itspre-Christmas level of slightly over 1,600. Brokers report an"absolutely terrible" cape-sized market and a not much better panamaxsector. Of the few spot fixtures reported, since just before Christmas,capes from the US Atlantic to ARA ranged around $6.00. A cape in thePacific fetched $5.15 for a shipment from Queensland to South Korea.The only Colombian business reported was for a 60,000t shipment fromPuerto Bolivar to Wedel in Germany at $11.25, whilst there was noRichards Bay loading fixtures reported.Freight rates to January 5 ($/t)Voyage/Vessel size              RateHRoads/Rich.Bay-Japan*     12.40  (12.25)HRoads-ARA*                 6.10   (5.95)Q'land-ARA*                 8.00   (8.00)Rich. Bay-ARA*              5.75   (5.90)US Gulf-ARA**               9.00   (9.00)Rich. Bay-Spanish Med**     9.25   (9.75)Source: H. ClarksonFigures in brackets for 29/12/95* Cape** PanamaxRecently reported coal freight fixturesRoute                   Vessel      '000                                    dwctHR-Dunkirk              Mineral Dr.  110HR-IJmuiden             Carbonesti   110Baltimore-Rotterdam     Frontl. vsl  100Baltimore-Rotterdam     Jahre Rose   100Pto Bolivar-Wedel       Vessel        60Vancouver-Taranto       Vessel        60Roberts Bank-Taranto    Vessel        57Queensland-S. Korea     Ocean Conq.  130Banjarmasin-Rotterdam   Courageous   135N. China-Madras, coke   Vessel        25Charterer     Laycan         RateKlaveness     8-15/1/96      7.90Cobelfret     prompt         5.90Hoegh         20-30/1/96     6.25Preag         15-25/1/96     6.40Kleimar       5-20/1/96     11.25Deiulemar     12/95-1/96    13.50Sidermar      10-20/1/96    13.50Yukong        11-20/1/96     5.15Yukong        15-30/1/96     6.30Glencore      12/95         20.00Source: Lloyd's List, Brokers.Recently reported coal trip chartersRoute                      DWT     Charterer  Laycan         $/dayWC US/-/Cont.              65,767  Aimcor     12/95-1/96     9,500++Vancouver/-/Jorf Lasfar    65,357  Torm       mid-1/96       8,500+Sri Lanka/Richards Bay/Korea                 61,972  Hanjin     29/12-2/1/96  12,000Muroran/Queensland/ Pakistan                  52,370  Comar      15/12/95      10,500Kalimantan/-/Japan         68,676  Daiichi    6-10/1/96     12,600+ Plus $220,000 ballast bonus++ Plus $185,000 ballast bonusSource: Lloyd's List, Brokers.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL COAL REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996CSX APPOINTS EXECUTIVESCSX Transportation has appointed three executives to posts in its coalmarketing group, effective December 1. James C. Mitchell is the newdirector-export coal, replacing Dennis Damron, who has been nameddirector-river marketing and energy. Thomas Howard has been appointedassistant vice president-energy development.Mitchell will have sales and marketing responsibility for export coalmoving to East and Gulf Coast ports. Damron will have sales andmarketing responsibility for coal movement to river terminals as wellas dealing with issues such as the deregulation of the energy industry.Howard will handle cogeneration projects and marketing of industrialcoal.Mitchell and Damron will be based in Huntington, West Virginia, andHoward will be based in Jacksonville.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL COAL REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996UMW INAUGURATES ROBERTSThe United Mine Workers of America swore in its new president, CecilRoberts, December 22. Roberts succeeds Richard Trumka in leading the USminers' union and is expected to take an aggressive stance inattempting to reverse the union's declining representation in theindustry.Roberts has been active in the UMW since the 1970s and became aleading figure in the 1989 Pittston strike while serving as vicepresident of the union's District 17. He has worked as a coal minersince 1971.Back to Headline List WT02-B35-30IA086-000616-B012-105http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/ey95.html 205.156.212.5 19970122000317 text/html 166511HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 00:00:20 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:40:39 GMTContent-length: 166323Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ey95.html Sample Issue Copyright INTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNet January 5, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES DONG/AMERADA PROBE NEW DANISH N SEA GASLINE (495 words) BP/SONATRACH IN ALGERIAN GAS PUSH ON EUROPE (675 words) NIGERIA LNG SEALS MAJOR CONSTRUCTION CONTRACT (339 words) MAJOR ITALY-NORWAY GAS DEAL FLAGGED (249 words) PTT PLANS THAI WEST/EAST GASLINE (309 words) SYRIAN GAS OUTPUT POISED TO DOUBLE (190 words) GADONNEIX TAKES HELM AT GAZ DE FRANCE (432 words) NEWS POWER DEAL HOPES DASHED (49 words) HYDRO SEEKS 2000 OSEBERG GAS (159 words) GAS DELIVERIES HIT NEW PEAK (89 words) FINDS ADD 75 BCM OF GAS (58 words) EIB BACKS 'YAMAL' LINE (106 words) NORFRA GROUP URGES SHORT LOOP (123 words) STATOIL/HYDRO TAKE NV STAKES (85 words) CLYDE GETS TRIPLE GREEN LIGHT (95 words) RUSSIAN OUTPUT SLIDES 2% (27 words) TURKMEN OUTPUT SET TO RISE (108 words) COLD SPELLS GOOD/BAD BG NEWS (274 words) BG APPOINTS CONTRACTS GURU (302 words) HOMES COMPETITION 'ON COURSE' (190 words) MINISTER RESIGNATION HITS GAS TAX (281 words) EVN/BAYERNWERKE LAND KOGAZ (261 words) INDUSTRY CALLS FOR LPG TANK LAW (97 words) GAS TRADER REPORTS SUCCESS (126 words) TIGAZ BOARD BACKS $280M PLAN (102 words) THREE PIPE PRODUCERS FINED (98 words) GERMAN NORTH SEA GAS EYED AGAIN (253 words) REPSOL CONFIRMS T&T DEAL (455 words) NEW SWITCH TO GAS FUEL (162 words) GN QUITS TELECOMS PLAY (164 words) GN BOLSTERS TARRAGONA STAKE (66 words) PGNIG IN FRESH NORWAY MOVE (464 words) SUBSEA ROUTE FOR CADIZ GAS (119 words) CONFERENCE REPORT INTERCONNECTOR TRANSIT INTEREST (775 words) PUBLICATIONS REVIEW STORAGE WINS GRONINGEN TIME (1077 words) NOW TOTAL GAS DEAL CLOSE? (275 words) RASGAS AWARDS $200M CONTRACTS (114 words) NEWS QATAR/ITALY IN PIPELINE TALKS (74 words) QATAR IN PHILIPPINES TALKS (219 words) FIRMS PLAN AMMONIA PRODUCTION (183 words) SOUTH AFRICA GROUP EYES MOSSGAS (138 words) MORE GAS SET FOR PETCHEMS (133 words) UMC WELL COMES GOOD (121 words) MAGHREB LINE WINS NEW CREDITS (259 words) PRICE HITCH FOR PIPELINE PLANS (216 words) TWO BIDS FOR PAK-IRAN LINE (358 words) QATAR/TURKEY LNG DEAL 'CLOSE' (92 words) EGYPT-ISRAEL ACCORD FLAGGED (601 words) COST CUTS MAY FORCE MERGERS (240 words) SHIP CHARTER SLASHES COST (122 words) PETRONAS DETAILS NEW LNG PLANT (312 words) DUTCH FIRMS IN LPG PROJECT (70 words) TEPCO PLANS LNG CAPACITY BOOST (75 words) FLUOR/MITSUBISHI FORGE LNG LINK (38 words) UEA IN CHINA GAS VENTURE (83 words) TENNECO WINS GASLINE LICENCE (117 words) SANTOS TESTS RECORD GAS FLOW (96 words) WOODSIDE DECAMPS TO PERTH (89 words) CALTEX IN LPG STORAGE PLAN (133 words) YACHENG GAS FEEDS HONG KONG (243 words) CHINA 'CUTS LPG TARIFF BY 3%' (38 words) ALLIANCE FOCUSES ON GAS MARKET (49 words) SABAH GAS WORK UNDER WAY (54 words) FERTILISER FIRM UP FOR SALE (113 words) DABHOL D-DAY LOOMS - AGAIN (289 words) MOBIL IN LPG JOINT VENTURE (152 words) ESSAR/PREMIER LAND R FIELDS (182 words) GAIL SEEKS GAS PLAN PARTNERS (135 words) UNION TEXAS/OXY IN LPG PLAN (151 words) PAKISTAN SET FOR NEW ROUND (94 words) FIELD NARROWS FOR $700M PROJECT (335 words) UNIQUE/MITSUI CHASE MARKETS (738 words) PTT MULLS HIGHER BURMA TAKE (369 words) CAMBODIA MULLS PTT MODEL (336 words) HONDO WARNS GASLINE IN DOUBT (253 words) NEB DETAILS EXPORTS IMPACT (115 words) HANSON SELLS SUBURBAN PROPANE (182 words) FLYING START FOR MARITIMES LINE (320 words) CORPOVEN PLANS NGLS LEAP (151 words) SHV CALOR EXPANDS IN BRAZIL (165 words) CPUC SEEKS POWER COMPETITION (825 words) COLD SPARKS PRICE SPIKE (430 words) NEW PIPE TALLY 8,000 MILES (168 words) ENGINE IN SCHOOL BUS EXAM (254 words) ELTRON IN NEW SYNGAS R&D (157 words) BUYERS TO HOOK INTO US SYSTEM (128 words) NEW INDIANA PLANT ON STREAM (186 words) CMS BUYS PETAL STORAGE (151 words) BECHTEL LANDS LNG EPC CONTRACT (370 words) GASLINE PLANS 'MAKE PROGRESS' (573 words) GAS VEHICLE PRODUCTION OK'D (97 words) US INVOLVEMENT NOW LIKELY (111 words) CRISTOBAL NEEDS HIGHER PRICE (119 words) ATCO NEGOTIATING SALE OF ATCOR RESOURCES (42 words) AGAC BUYS ACIA, THE LOCAL REFUSE COLLECTION COMPANY (43 words) EL PASO BUYS PREMIER GAS (50 words) MCN BUYING CONSOL COAL'S COALBED-METHANE BUSINESS (60 words) NGC BUYS OKEENE GAS-GATHERING SYSTEM (56 words) BULGARIAN GAS FIND (69 words) DEMAND FOR CANADIAN NATURAL GAS (96 words) COPHILL PLUGGING WELL IN PHILIPPINES (37 words) AMMONIA PLANT AT CABO NEGRO (41 words) FINANCING FOR SUI NORTHERN GAS PIPELINE (50 words) INDONESIAN LNG SHIPMENT TO SOUTH KOREA (51 words) THAI LPG PROJECT (126 words) START-UP OF NORSK HYDRO'S PORSGRUNN COMPLEX (96 words) NEW YORK TO CONVERT SOME TAXIS TO COMPRESSED NATURAL GAS (80 words) INDIAN PETROCHEMICALS TO RAISE POLYETHYLENE CAPACITY (48 words) TAIWAN FACES A NEW WORRY: SUBSIDENCE (85 words) SIAM CEMENT AND DOW CHEMICAL JOINT VENTURE TO PRODUCE LLDPE (172 words) CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996DONG/AMERADA PROBE NEW DANISH N SEA GASLINEDenmark's state owned Dansk Olie og Naturgas (Dong) and Amerada HessA/S, local unit of US Amerada Hess Corp, are jointly investigating apossible DKr1.5-2.5bn ($270.7-451m) new gas transport system in theDanish North Sea, potentially tapping Norwegian and UK supplies as wellas Danish gas.  The move follows acceptance by Dong of an Ameradaproposal to participate in a joint study of the technical and economicfeasibility of building a new system.  Faced with rapidly growingnatural gas demand in Denmark Dong is currently investigating furthergas supplies.Dong already owns the existing pipeline system transporting natural gasfrom Central Graben fields in the southwestern Danish North Sea toshore on the west coast of Jutland.  Announcing the new investigationlate last month, Amerada noted the existing system has an annualtransport capacity of about 7.5 Bcm.  This corresponds to the totalamount of gas Dansk Undergrunds Consortium, hitherto Dong's solesupplier, is able to deliver to Dong from 1997.  "With these deliveriesthe existing gas transport system will be nearing its capacity," saidAmerada."From the turn of the century, Dong expects to be able to selladditional gas in the region of two billion cubic metres per annumwhich entails securing new gas supplies.  Taken together, this meansthat there is a need for a new system which will also give improvedsecurity of supply for the Danish market."  Amerada is an operator andparticipant in several exploration licences in the Danish sector whileDong is a part owner, with a typical 20% share in all licences awardedsince 1984.Amerada says it expects to start Danish sector production soon, withone discovery for which it has expectations being the South Arne fieldin licence 7/89.  This saw a promising production test earlier lastyear.  "A new gas transport system would be able to gather gas fromboth South Arne as well as other smaller fields and could also belinked to the Norwegian system," said Amerada.  Amerada and Dong would"in appropriate circumstances" seek cooperation with other fieldowners.Some of these smaller fields would not be economic if they had to bearthe costs of a transport infrastructure on their own, said Amerada."Apart from transporting gas from any smaller Danish fields there mayalso be a possibility to transport gas to Denmark from the UK, Germanand Norwegian sectors.  Depending on which technical solution is themost attractive, the transport system would require an investment ofapproximately 1.5-2.5bn Danish Kroner (C.#170-280 million)."The accompanying map (see hard copy) shows the existing transportsystems for oil and natural gas from Danish Undergrunds Consortium'sfields in the Central Graben in the southwestern Danish North Sea.  Thedotted line indicates a potential new transport sytem for natural gasemanating from the South Arne field in the western Danish North Sea.Amerada notes there are unutilised fields on Danish as well as onGerman, English and Norwegian territory.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996BP/SONATRACH IN ALGERIAN GAS PUSH ON EUROPEBP just before Christmas announced signing of a major potential $3.5bngas deal with Algerian state oil and gas firm Sonatrach which marks akey new strategic phase in Algeria's push for future gas sales inEurope and a major advance for BP's ambitions to boost itsinternational gas business. The two companies signed an agreement toexplore for and produce gas in the remote Sahara Desert and,particularly significantly, to market it jointly in Europe, notablysouthern Europe.Algerian industry and energy minister Ammar Makhloufi said the BP dealcould be a model for other similar projects; Exxon is reportedly tostart negotiations on a possible natural gas deal close to the BPlocation. Algeria's bloody struggle between Islamic militants andgovernment security forces has not so far deterred energy firms; whilethe bulk of oil and gas fields are in the south of the country mostviolence has been in the north.Commenting on the new deal, BP chief executive John Browne said: "Thisis a landmark agreement which could increase BP's worldwide gasproduction by 30%. It is the first major gas joint venture a foreigncompany has signed with Sonatrach, the sole gas producer in Algeria forthe past 30 years. It has the potential to open up a new area of gasproduction in Algeria and, from the next decade onwards, to giveEuropean consumers greater choice in their sources of gas supply."Under the deal, which follows two years of negotiations, BP willinitially appraise known gas finds and search for additional reservesin the In Salah region of District 3 some 1,200 km south of Algiers.The licence area is about 25,000 sq km or 20% of the total District 3area and BP said the area was believed to be capable of producing about10 Bcm/yr of gas by the early part of the next century; the area hasyielded no liquids to date and they are not expected.Present BP global gas output is about 13 Bcm/yr, most in the North Sea.Current estimates are that the Algerian licence area holds about 10 Tcfsplit equally between existing finds and future discoveries. Subject toproving sufficient reserves, gas would be transported north via a newpipeline (see map in hard copy) to link with Algeria's existingpipeline system and then onwards by pipe to Europe to be marketedjointly by a new company to be owned 50:50 by BP and Sonatrach. Firstgas is looked for about 2002-2003.BP said it was planning to spend about $100m on an initial two to threeyear appraisal and exploration programme and later investment decisionswould be needed for subsequent stages of the project. The deal requiresapproval of the European Union as well as ratification by Algerianauthorities. BP Exploration chief executive Rodney Chase said BP wouldshortly start seismic work in the In Salah region and was planning todrill nine appraisal and exploration wells to establish location andsize of known reserves and to find new fields. The licence area holdsseven known gasfields and 750 sq km of 3D seismic will be shot overthese, plus drilling of five appraisal wells. A separate explorationarea in the licence has a work programme of 2,000 sq km of 2D seismicand four exploration wellsDepending on success of this initial phase, full development wouldrequire construction of a 520 km, 48-inch diameter pipeline to take gasto Hassi R'Mel, Algeria's gas hub, linking up to the new Maghrebgasline to Spain and the TransMed system to Italy, and then on tomarket. LNG export is not envisaged. Pipeline construction could costup to $1,000m, with full cost of the project estimated at some $3,500mover a five year period. BP would fund 65% of this investment andSonatrach the remainder. BP is expected to get about 30% of net profitsover the full 20-30 year life of the project. The pipeline is bigenough to carry gas from other concessions.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996NIGERIA LNG SEALS MAJOR CONSTRUCTION CONTRACTNigeria LNG Ltd (NLNG) late last year turned a deaf ear to continuedinternational calls for reprisals against Nigeria's military regime forits execution of minority Ogoni activists (IGR 289/21) and kept thelong delayed Bonny LNG project on the rails with final award of themain project construction contract. The company said the move startedthe final phase of the project which main foreign partner Shell notedhas so far taken 30 years to bring to fruition. The lump sum turnkeycontract, reportedly worth about $3bn, has been confirmed to acontracting consortium of France's Technip, Italian Snamprogetti, MWKellogg of the US and Japan's JGC.It covers engineering, procurement and construction for theliquefaction plant at Finima, Bonny Island, together with associatedfacilities and the gas transmission system to collect natural gas fromproducers. NLNG said the contractors were "obliged to ensure maximumNigerian input during construction and to follow strict regulations toensure environmental impact protection". Shell, holder of 25.6% of theproject and technical leader, said until now there had been no way todispose of large volumes of associated gas produced with oil in theDelta region.If the construction contract had not been signed by end-1995 a complex,interdependent series of other contracts, including contracts forexport of Nigerian gas, would have collapsed, terminating the LNGproject with little hope of revival. It again stressed the benefits ofthe project for jobs and the environment - through cuts in gas flaring - and that no dividends would accrue to shareholders, which include theNigerian state, until after 2007.Shell Development Co of Nigeria managing director Brian Anderson said:"We recognise there have been calls for the project to be halted as agesture of political protest. We respect these views and understand theconcerns they reflect. But we cannot accept that this would-contributeto the good of Nigeria." Other partners in NLNG are Nigerian NationalPetroleum Corp with a 49% stake, France's Elf with 15% and Italy's Agipwith 10.4%.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996MAJOR ITALY-NORWAY GAS DEAL FLAGGEDAgreement appears imminent in negotiations on a supply deal toestablish Norway as a major source of natural gas for Italy. AntonioBadini, Italian ambassador in Oslo, is quoted in the weekly MondoEconomico as saying: "It's now a question of several weeks, the timefor settling the last details." The agreement was said by the magazineto provide for the Eni group's Snam to import 10-12 Bcm/yr from theNorwegian North Sea for an annual value of L1,500bn ($940m). It wouldrun for 20 years, from 1999/2000. The magazine added that Norwegiancommerce minister Gete Knudsen discussed the matter on a recent visitto Italy.The Eni group gives no further details than those already disclosed bySnam. The negotiations, Snam said last month, are with the GFUconsortium of Norwegian producers and the gas would be landed atDunkerque, France under arrangements with Gaz de France. A pipelinewould have to be laid across French territory to bring the gas toMontcenis on the Italian border. Little has been made known about thepipeline scheme and various aspects are reported still under discussionsuch as whether it would be owned by Gaz de France alone or jointlywith Snam.The advantage for Snam is that in Norway it will gain a secure majorsource, at much lower political risk than the two existing leadingsuppliers, Algeria and Russia. It already imports lesser quantitiesfrom a low risk source, Holland, but here the availability is limited.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996PTT PLANS THAI WEST/EAST GASLINEThe Petroleum Authority of Thailand (PTT) is embarking on a 7.27bn baht($290.8m) investment project for a new natural gas pipeline spanningfrom Thailand's western region to the east. The new gasline, 28 inchesin diameter and 200 km long, will be laid from Ratchaburi province tolink with PTT's existing gas grid at the Bangkok South Power plant inSamut Prakan and Wang Noi in Ayutthaya. According to PTT, the west-to-east line is geared to respond to greater natural gas demand byindustries and future power stations operated by independent powerproducers (IPPs) along the route.The gasline will form an integral part of the larger pipeline, 42inches in diameter and 300 km long, to be laid from the Thai-Burmeseborder at Kanchanaburi province to a 1,800 MW combined cycle plant tobe built by Electricity Generating Authority of Thailand (Egat). TheKanchanaburi-Ratchaburi gasline, estimated to cost 16.5bn baht, willtransport natural gas from Burma's offshore Yadana and Yetagungasfields to Thailand. PTT has just received Cabinet endorsement forinvesting in the two gasline projects. The west-to-east pipeline isscheduled operational in 1999, a year after expected completion of theKanchanaburi-Ratchaburi stretch.At present, PTT, the Thai state oil and gas firm, is selectingcompanies to provide engineering consultancy services for theKanchanaburi-Ratchaburi gasline project, PTT officials said. Meanwhile,the Cabinet has signalled a green light for PTT to proceed with a1.47bn baht investment in another gas pipeline scheme - a 24-inch, 100km stretch - from Tantawan gasfield in the Gulf of Thailand to tie inwith PTT's Gulf grid. The approval came after PTT sealed an agreementwith the group led by US-based Pogo Producing for long-term natural gassupply from Tantawan. The Tantawan gasline is scheduled complete at end-1997, before starting delivery of 100 MMcfd to PTT (IGR 287/18).Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996SYRIAN GAS OUTPUT POISED TO DOUBLEPlans have been put together that will see a doubling of Syrian gasproduction by 2000. A recent study into reserves and prospects leadsthe oil ministry to give the green light to projects aimed at utilisinga flow of over 16 MMcmd. Four schemes will make this possible, thebiggest being the start of production from fields near Palmyra. Theseare due to start up at 3 MMcmd when first-stage development iscompleted in 1996. A second stage development will double that to 6MMcmd during 1997.Also near Palmyra will be Marathon's oilfield development, expected toyield some 1.1 MMcmd of associated gas by 2000. Final scheme involvesexpansion of production and processing capacity at the Jbeissahgasfield, where output will rise from 1.7 MMcmd now to 2.5 MMcmd.Getting this new gas to market will involve laying of 1,160 km of newpipeline. Utilisation will come mainly from new power plants such asthat at al-Zara (IGR 289/22), fertiliser production, refinery use, ironand steel production and general industrial use. By 2000, these willabsorb 12.85 MMcmd. Distribution through domestic grids will take 3.5MMcmd.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996GADONNEIX TAKES HELM AT GAZ DE FRANCEPierre Gadonneix has succeeded Loik le Floch-Prigent as president ofGaz de France (GdF). The latter - who has socialist credentials as wellas a reputation for competent management - was sent in to pacify staterailway company Societe Nationale de Chemins de Fer (SNCF) whoseemployees were at the vanguard of the recent wave of French strikes. Itwas third time lucky for Gadonneix, appointed general manager of GdF inJuly 1987. In 1988, when Jacques Fournier left, Gadonneix saw FrancisGutmann get the top job. In 1993, le Floch-Prigent was appointed overhis head.Choice of the highly qualified Gadonneix - who has a doctorate from theHarvard Business School, as well as attending France's elite technicaluniversity Ecole Polytechnique, and the specialised Ecole NationaleSuperieure du Petrole et des Moteurs - also contrasts with the recentpolitically motivated appointment of Edmond Alphandery at the head ofGdF's sister organisation Electricite de France. But like Alphandery,Gadonneix will take part in nominating his deputy, which willstrengthen his presidential authority. Among names being mentioned forthe general manager's post are current deputy general manager JeanBalazuc, as well as director of the industry ministry's energydepartment Claude Mandil, and Michel Francony, director of EdF-GdFServices (which manages both utilities' distribution systems).It remains to be seen to what extent Gadonneix will pursue theinternationalist and market oriented policies of his predecessor. Hemust renegotiate the company's charter, which defines its activities.At home GdF faces challenges from both electricity and fuel oil andcould face challenges to its monopoly of gas distribution from suchestablished service companies as Generale des Eaux or Lyonnaise desEaux. Internationally, Gadonneix will have to manage assets alreadyacquired in Canada, Uruguay and US. Eventually, he will also have toface pressure from Brussels to deregulate, even if the EuropeanCommission has decided to focus its attention on deregulating theelectricity market in the first instance, and is taking its time.In his time at the industry ministry, Gadonneix worked with liberallyinclined ministers such as Michel d'Ornano, Rene Monory and AlainMadelin. But he will face fierce opposition from the trade unions toany proposals along the lines of le Floch-Prigent's plans to exchangeshareholdings with Russian gas company Gazprom, even if currentindustry minister Franck Borotra favours selling minority stakes to anElf or a Statoil, or to individuals.* GdF is to pay the state a dividend of FFr970m ($198.34m) for 1995,while Electricite de France is to pay FFr1.5bn, according to figurespublished in the official journal.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996POWER DEAL HOPES DASHEDForecasts of an accord by EU energy ministers on electricity marketliberalisation last month (IGR 289/16) proved unfounded. The thornyissue - with gas liberalisation even further away from agreement-- nowfalls in the lap of Italy which took over EU presidency from Spain on 1January this year.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996HYDRO SEEKS 2000 OSEBERG GASNorsk Hydro has now submitted a NKr3.6bn ($569.8m) plan to Norway'sindustry and energy ministry for development and operation of gasreserves at its North Sea Oseberg field, with start of gas exportstargeted at 2000. Development would be via a new steel gas process andexport platform linked to the Oseberg field centre with gas exportstied into the existing pipeline system in the Heimdal area. RecoverableOseberg gas reserves are put at 115 Bcm and average gas export at 4Bcm/yr during 2000-2010, rising to 10 Bcm/yr thereafter.Investment costs are estimated at NKr2.5bn for the field installationsand NKrl.lbn for the pipeline. Oseberg started oil production in 1988,now running at some 0.5m b/d. Meanwhile, Norwegian state oil and gasfirm Statoil has now submitted a development and operation plan to theministry for the mid-Norwegian Aasgard field. A verdict on whether gasfrom the project will be processed at Kaarstoe or Kollsnes remainsoutstanding.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996GAS DELIVERIES HIT NEW PEAKNorwegian gas deliveries to continental Europe hit a new peak in earlyDecember because of cold weather, according to state oil and gas firmStatoil. Daily gas delivery orders received by the gas sales centre atStavanger and the Bygnes operations centre set the record duringDecember 5-8. Almost 55 MMcmd was piped through the Europipe andStatpipe/Norpipe systems to Emden, Germany and the Zeepipe trunkline toZeebrugge, Belgium. With deliveries from Ekofisk on top, these salesensured maximum Norwegian deliveries in response to Europe's coldweather, said Statoil.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996FINDS ADD 75 BCM OF GASHydrocarbons were found in 64% of wells drilled on Norway's continentalshelf last year but most were small, according to state oil and gascompany Statoil. Proven reserves are put at roughly 320m bbls of oiland 75 Bcm of natural gas, it said. Figures are provisional as some ofthe biggest finds have yet to complete testing.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996EIB BACKS 'YAMAL' LINEThe European Investment Bank (EIB) is willing to finance up to 15% ofthe cost of the Polish section of the planned 'Yamal' natural gaspipeline from Russia to Germany, according to bank deputy presidentWolfgang Roth. The Polish section, to be built and operated by EuroPolGaz, a joint venture of Russian and Polish state firms Gazprom andPGNiG, is expected to cost $2.5bn. The EIB is already financing the$3.2bn Midal-Stegal gas pipeline system in Germany. Roth saidCommerzbank, which led commercial banks in a $940m funding of Midal-Stegal, was expected to play a leading role in arranging funds for thePolish line.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996NORFRA GROUP URGES SHORT LOOPA 15-20 km by-pass loop linking Norway's Statpipe and Norpipe gastrunklines around the Ekofisk centre, should replace the existingconnection via the North Sea field, according to state oil and gas firmStatoil. It has put the proposal forward as operator of the NorFrapartnership planning a gasline from Norway to Dunkirk, France. Agovernment decision is expected by 1 March.Costed at NKr500m ($79.14m), the short loop is preferred by NorFrapartners to a longer 150 km alternative, said Statoil. Due ready bysummer 1998, it will feed gas from fields including Statfjord andGullfaks into the Norpipe line to Emden. Completion will coincide withcompletion of new facilities at Ekofisk which will in future handle gasfrom Ekofisk alone.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996STATOIL/HYDRO TAKE NV STAKESStatoil and Norsk Hydro have each acquired 20% stakes in Naturgas Vestwhich aims to supply natural gas from the Troll gas terminal atKollsnes, near Bergen, according to Statoil. With share capital ofNKr680,000 ($107,627), the firm (name changed from Vestgas for theshare issue that brought in Statoil and Hydro) plans to deliver some 10-20 MMcm of gas a year to local industry and, in compressed form, to busoperators. Other shareholders include Hordaland county council, fourlocal authorities and local industry.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996CLYDE GETS TRIPLE GREEN LIGHTUK independent Clyde Petroleum has won Dutch authorities' approval forsimultaneous development of three satellite gasfields offshore theNetherlands, all via tie-back to the existing P/6-A process facilities.Total project cost for developing P/2-NE and P/2-SE, both Rotliegendesfields, is put at Fls165m ($102.9m). First gas from the former is duein early 1997 and from the latter in mid-1997. Total project cost fordevelopment of the P/6 South field is put at Fls40m. First gas here isdue by end-1996. Total base case reserves for the three developmentsare put at 112 Bcf gross.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996RUSSIAN OUTPUT SLIDES 2%Russian natural gas output for the first 11 months of 1995 was 539 Bcm,down 2% on the same 1994 period, according to the State StatisticsCommittee.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996TURKMEN OUTPUT SET TO RISETurkmenistan plans to produce 41.5 Bcm of natural gas this year,exporting 30 Bcm, according to a draft 1996 budget passed by parliamentearly last month. According to official Neutral Turkmenistan newspaper,however, the Central Asian republic could produce up to 64 Bcm thisyear. That would be back in line with the 1993 tally of 63.5 Bcm beforeRussia cut off Turkmen pipe access to Europe. Production in 1994slumped to 35.6 Bcm and was planned at 34.6 Bcm last year. An increaseis now expected in the wake of the recent deal setting up joint Russo-Turkmen gas firm Turkmenrosgaz including Gazprom on the Russian side.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996COLD SPELLS GOOD/BAD BG NEWSRecord low temperatures brought good news and bad news for beleagueredBritish Gas over the Christmas/New Year period. Gas demand hit newhighs with the previous peak in England and Wales exceeded by 2% whilein Scotland, where temperatures fell as low as minus 20 degrees Celsiusin Glasgow, demand was 10% up on the previous high. BG said it wasmanaging to meet demand in England from storage and higher North Seaproduction. In Scotland it was interrupting supply to businesses withinterruptible contracts. Bottled gas supplier Calor said it was selling50% more gas than a year earlier.Coming during a time of low industrial activity because of the holidayperiod, the demand rise was attributable virtually entirely to higherheating use. Spot natural gas prices firmed on the cold but the risewas modest, about 0.25p/therm to around 10.5p, as only theindustrial/commercial market is deregulated as yet. With the current UKgas glut posing major problems for BG, the higher cold weather demandwas welcome as one way of helping reduce the surplus.But this good news came hand in hand with bad as BG faced makingcompensation payments to thousands of customers for failure to respondswiftly when central heating systems broke down. The problem focussedon 3-star service contracts, for which customers pay over #100($152.3m) a year with an expectation of attention within 24 hours ofnotifying a breakdown. BG denied staff cuts were to blame for delaysand said weather conditions were exceptional. But the Gas ConsumersCouncil said it had tracked an increase in 3-star contract complaintsbefore Christmas and the cold snap.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996BG APPOINTS CONTRACTS GURUBritish Gas has now appointed a special negotiator to handle the take-or-pay gas contracts problem that has faced it with costly write-downs.At the same time it has indicated first producers to agree torenegotiate contracts with BG will get best terms. So far North Seaproducers have shown no inclination to revamp long term take-or-paycontracts to supply BG at prices well above current competitive marketlevels. Job of BG's new chief negotiator Kenneth Gardener, a directorof Charterhouse Bank, is to persuade producers to come to the table.Gardener, who took on his new post on 1 January, has given up executiveduties at Charterhouse but remains a director. On his appointment lastmonth he acknowledged producers would be reluctant to re-open legallybinding contracts but said he believed a "win win" position couldemerge from negotiations. He has agreed to give at least two years tothe problem. Meanwhile, BG has also indicated it will increase pressureon producers after 1 February when the supply contracts will betransferred to a new trading subsidiary.News of the troubleshooter appointment was one factor in a sharp pre-Christmas rally in BG shares which added some 9% in just a couple ofdays, the price rising to 250p ($3.88); other factors were record coldweather and renewed market speculation, so far unfounded, that a bidmay emerge for BG from the likes of Shell or BP. BG also underlined theincreased significance of legal issues in its affairs with appointmentof William Friedrich, formerly with international law firm Shearman &Sterling, as its general counsel. Other recent senior appointmentsinclude promotion of Harry Moulson, head of BG pipe unit TransCo, toexecutive director and of Dr Pierre Jungels, formerly with Belgium'sPetrofina, as managing director, exploration and production.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996HOMES COMPETITION 'ON COURSE'The UK government is pressing ahead with a pilot trial of domestic gasmarket competition this spring despite claims that necessary systemsare not ready. Some 0.5m household customers in southwest England aredue to be offered a choice of supplier, breaking the current BritishGas monopoly, from 1 April. BG pipeline unit TransCo sought delay ofthe trial, expressing concern over lack of time for computer testing.But in the run-up to Christmas industry and energy minister Tim Eggarrejected the move.Instead, it was agreed gas regulator Ofgas should appoint a'troubleshooter' or 'controller' to ensure problems are sorted out andthe timetable is maintained. Following the offer from Amerada Hess ofsavings of some 15% on current levels for households switching from BG,Total has waded in with announced savings of up to 16%, with Swebgas,regional electricity company in the southwest area, offering savings ofat least 17%. Texaco has also joined forces with LPG market leaderCalor to chase the domestic and small commercial natural gas markets.BG has yet to reveal its hand on how it will respond to the householdmarket challenge.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996MINISTER RESIGNATION HITS GAS TAXResignation and replacement of Austrian finance minister AndreasStaribacher last week [2 January] will likely cause a further delay inintroduction of a tax on gas (IGR 287/12), variously labelled as anenergy, CO2 or environmental levy. Petroleum products came under thetax last May, with gas, electricity and coal to follow. Originally theextended tax was expected at the start of this year but parties to thediscussion, ranging from government to electricity and industrialinterests, have been unable to agree a formula which would be fair toall consumers. Staribacher had argued in favour of the tax on gas ongrounds that the tax should be part of a general energy levy toencourage reduced consumption, not to promote a shift from one energysource to another.As finance minister, he had been under considerable pressure to imposethe broadened tax as part of a programme to ease an unbearably largebudget deficit projected for this year. Staribacher's replacement asfinance minister is Viktor Klima, who leaves his previous post asminister for state industry, transportation and communications. Beforejoining the government, Klima was finance chief at OMV and will likelybe sympathetic to demands of the energy industry in view of OMV'smonopoly over gas imports.The cabinet reshuffle as well as expected complications in forming anew government following an indecisive election last month will nowprobably postpone any possible introduction of the levy on gas and theremaining energy resources until after mid-year at earliest. Once agovernment is established, the issue of the amount of the tax and theexceptions (such as gas used for electricity generation) will stillhave to be resolved.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996EVN/BAYERNWERKE LAND KOGAZSuccess of a joint $87m bid by Germany's Bayernwerke and Austria'sEnergieversorgung Niederosterreich (EVN) in the second tender forHungary's Kogaz regional gas utility (IGR 289/4) has cemented apartnership which could have further consequences. The two concernsincreased their offer for Kogaz by some $20m to win in their bid for a50% plus one share holding in the utility which serves three provincesin the southwestern part of the country bordering on Slovenia andCroatia. EVN had hoped rather to gain a shareholding in a gas utilitybordering on Austria, making supply synergies possible, but had to becontent with the Kogaz award.The Austrian concern has had a co-operation agreement with Kogaz forsome time. Kogaz  supplies about 190,000 customers in a service areawith a population of over 1m. Annual sales of about 700 Bcm are worthabout $6.2m. While EVN was the only Austrian utility to share inHungary's gas privatisation, the deal will not bring pleasure to OMV,which holds a virtual monopoly over gas imports to Austria.The reason is the stronger relationship which EVN will achieve withBayernwerke, seen by OMV and federal electricity authority Verbund asan unwelcome intruder on the Austrian energy scene. Bayernwerke alreadyshares with EVN  a holding in Austria's one private gas and oilproducer, Rohol Aufsuchungs AG (RAG). The German concern has madeoffers on several Austrian privatisations but has been rebuffed by OMVand the Verbund with support from the government, which prefers to seecontrol of the energy sector remain in Austrian hands.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996INDUSTRY CALLS FOR LPG TANK LAWAlthough Austria's proposed new law governing fixed-location LPG tankswas published last August, the legislation has not yet been passed.Industry has urged that the oNORM M 7323 technical standard, virtuallyidentical to the German TRB 610 standard which took effect as of 1January 1996, be enacted immediately in Austria. Industry points outthat the German standard was developed at some expense due to extensiveresearch and testing and that there is no reason the law not be adoptedat once. The regulation would apply to tanks used by private as well asindustry gas consumers.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996GAS TRADER REPORTS SUCCESSGWH Gas- u. Warenhandelsgesmbh, a joint venture trading house owned byAustria's gas import monopoly OMV and Russia's Gazexport, has reporteda successful 1995 with a trading volume of Sch1.9bn ($190m). The firmwas set up in 1994 to expedite dealings between the two concerns and toovercome Russian currency problems. Under agreements which run until2012, Gazexport last year supplied about 1.7 Bcm of gas in exchange for4,000 tonnes (t) of lubricants, 2,000t of polyethylene and about 1.2msq metres of geotextiles, with the latter products supplied by OMV'splastics subsidiaries for use in the Russian gas industry. GWH was alsoinstrumental in expediting a long-term contract for transport of anadditional 500 MMcm of Russian gas through Austria to Bavaria via OMVpipelines.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996TIGAZ BOARD BACKS $280M PLANA board meeting of Hungarian utility Tigaz, whose control was recentlyacquired by Italy's Italgas and Snam (IGR 289/4 and see separatestory), has named Eugenio Lancellotta as chairman and approved a fiveyear, $280m business plan. Lancellotta is already deputy chairman andmanaging director of Turin-based Italgas. Among other appointments,Biagio Marino is Tigaz managing director and Enrico Monti financedirector, while Janos Szalai is operations manager. At the time ofpurchase of control last month, the Italgas-Snam consortium said itplanned to increase annual sales from 2.3 Bcm to 3 Bcm and the numberof customers from 800,000 to 1m.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996THREE PIPE PRODUCERS FINEDThree leading producers of steel pipe for pipelines have been orderedby Italy's Antitrust Authority to pay fines equivalent to 1% of their1994 sales because of price fixing. Tubi Dalmine Ilva will have to payabout L262m ($163,000); Arvedi Tubi Acciao, about L135m; and GeneralSider Italiana, about L124m. A statement said the three, which haveover 70% of the domestic market, "have falsified the play ofcompetition in a consistent manner". A fourth firm, Ilva Lamiere eTubi, had also been investigated but the authority found insufficientevidence of its involvement over any length of time.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996GERMAN NORTH SEA GAS EYED AGAINBEB and its partners in the German North Sea Group are taking anotherlook at development of gas reserves in the German North Sea. Alloptions are being looked at and results of a Norwegian Aker study areexpected "at the beginning of 1996". Early in 1995 BEB said it hadtaken a look at exploitation prospects for the gas and condensate in1994 "but with the present state of the Deutschemark and an oil priceof, say, $15/bbl, it is not economic to produce now". That study wasbased on a pipeline from the reserves, in blocks A/6-B/4, to Denmark,and BEB then reckoned "that we need $20/bbl to make the scheme viable".An offshore power station and a spur line to the Ekofisk-Emden Norpipetrunkline have been other options considered. Front-running scheme nowis a tie-back to Amoco's Valhall platform in the Norwegian sector. AkerEngineering is looking at a pipeline from A/6-B/4 via Norwegian, Germanand Danish territorial waters (see also separate story). At the fieldsa small wellhead platform would be sited in about 50 metres of water.BEB last drilled a well in the area, B/4-4, in 1992; B/4-3 in 1988 wasa suspended gas find and previous finds had been made in A/6. Oneproblem with the gas is high nitrogen content. Gas has also been foundin H/15-H/18. BEB tells IGR that a A/6-B/4 "development would requirethe drilling of more wells". No drilling elsewhere off Germany isenvisaged by the company in 1996.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996REPSOL CONFIRMS T&T DEALSpain's oil, gas and chemical conglomerate Repsol confirmed in mid-December it has bought the 20% stake in Trinidad and Tobago's AtlanticLNG Co that was offered to Spain's industrial gas distributor Enagas.Enagas will still buy 40% of the LNG produced at the Trinidad plant tobe built at a cost of $1bn and scheduled onstream in early 1999 (seeseparate story). Repsol, whose gas operations now account for 25% ofits profits - Pta42.2bn ($349m) in the first nine months of 1995, up26.6% - spent $200m on its share, which makes it the third biggestpartner in the 400 MMcfd LNG plant, after Amoco Trinidad LNG Co, anaffiliate of US Amoco Corp with 34%, and British Gas Trinidad LNG with26%.The other partners are Cabot Trinidad LNG, an affiliate of Cabot Corpof the US, and Trinidad's public National Gas Co, with 10% each. Theremaining 60% of the 3m tonnes (t)/yr of LNG that the plant willproduce will be bought by Boston-based Cabot. Enagas and Cabot signedan initial deal with Atlantic LNG in July and Enagas was given theoption to acquire 20% of the equity.Although insiders thought Enagas would acquire the share, Repsol's moveis part of its own gas expansion programme. Repsol owns 45.3% ofSpain's domestic gas distributor Gas Natural, which in turn holds 91%of Enagas. Repsol now has a foot firmly in Trinidad's important gasmarket and Enagas will import a further 14.6bn thermies a year of LNG,equivalent to 18% of Spain's current annual consumption, over a 20-yearperiod.Enagas is holding talks with an unnamed shipping company to rent a125,000t tanker to bring the LNG to Spain's regasification plants atHuelva and Cartegena, with an option to buy the ship. Enagas has forsome years pursued a policy of expanding and diversifying its supplysources, to give more flexibility and security to the Spanish gassector. A Repsol spokesman said its participation in the project"strengthens the company's upstream integration and consolidates thegrowing importance of natural gas in its activities". The investmentwas made through Repsol affiliate Repsol International BV.Meanwhile, the Spanish Treasury and state industrial holding companySEPI are negotiating the 'destiny' of the approximate Pta80bn that willbe gained from the sale of 7% of Repsol shares in the New Year. Thestate, through SEPI, owns 21% of Repsol and SEPI executives would likethe privatisation cash to help alleviate the Pta700bn debt it was leftwith when defunct loss-making holding company INI was closed down lastyear and partially replaced by SEPI. Treasury officials are said towant to use the capital gain to help reduce the public deficit.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996NEW SWITCH TO GAS FUELThe Basque engineering unit of Babcock Wilcox has singed a Pta2bn($16.5m) contract with southern Spanish utility Sevillana deElectricidad to convert the fuel oil-fired Bahia de Algeciras powerstation to gas use, only the second thermal plant to make the move sofar in Spain. After conversion, the station's boiler will be able touse fuel oil or gas, or a mixture of both in any proportion. Gas deEuskadi, owned by the Basque government's energy enterprise Ente Vascode la Energia (EVE) and national industrial gas distributor Enagas,recorded nine-month 1995 gross profits of Pta917m, which compares withgross profits of just Pta485m for the whole of 1994.Gas de Euskadi in mid-December inaugurated a new distribution pipelinein the Zalla district close to Bilbao. The consortium behind the futureZabalgarbi gas-fired incinerator, the largest energy project under wayin the Basque country, has increased its capital from Pta400m toPta1.4bn. The consortium includes EVE and Babcock & Wilcox.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996GN QUITS TELECOMS PLAYGas Natural has made a joint announcement with electricity utilitiesEndesa and Sevillana de Electricidad that they are pulling out ofSpain's third main paging company, Compania Europea de Radiobusqueda(Cersa), in which each holds a 9% stake. The three energy companieshave had this stake in telecommunications since 1992 through theconsortium Servicio de Radiotelefonia Movil (SRM), which holds 96% ofCersa. There are two main reasons for the apparent reversal of Spanishenergy companies' diversification into telecommunications.Late arrival of the paging service in Spain meant three large operatorswith important investors emerged in the same year, just as the moresuccessful mobile telephone sector was taking off. This meant thatCersa, with 25,000 clients, lost Pta420m ($3.5m) last year. One ofSpain's two leading paging companies is expected to buy the 27% ofshares to be put on offer - Mensatel, run by the semi-publictelecommunications giant Telefonia, or Sistelcom-Telemensaje, aconsortium which includes two utilities, Union Fenosa and Fecsa.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996GN BOLSTERS TARRAGONA STAKEGas Natural has acquired a further 18.39% of its affiliate GasTarraconense to bring its share to 96.61%. The acquisition of the stakein the Tarragona company in the northeastern Catalonia region is partof Gas Natural's policy of strengthening its position in itsaffiliates. In 1995, Gas Natural increased its participation in otheraffiliates such as Gas Vic, Gas Fenedes, Gas Lleida and Gas Navarra.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996PGNIG IN FRESH NORWAY MOVEPolskie Gornictwo Naftowe i Gazownictwo (PGNiG, Polish Oil and Gas) istaking a fresh interest in Norwegian gas from the North Sea. The Polishgas company sees construction of the 292 km, DM3bn ($2.20bn) Netrapipeline as a fresh opportunity to achieve some of its long standingambition of diversifying gas imports away from Russia. The pipeline -built by a consortium of BEB, Norsk Hydro, Ruhrgas and Statoil - linksthe German North Sea terminal at Etzel with the gas distributionnetwork of the former German Democratic Republic at Salzwedel. Thisbrings Norwegian gas to within 70 km of the Polish border, so puttingin an additional link to Poland would be a relatively simple matter.PGNiG hopes to start negotiations with owners of the Norwegiangasfields in the next three to four months, aiming for deliveries tostart in two or three years. Whether these talks will succeed remainsto be seen. But PGNiG was confident the Norwegians could produce thegas cheaply enough to deliver it at a price that would be attractive tothe Poles. That would be some $85-95/Mcm at the Polish border,preferably either in the region of Szczecin or Gorzelec (Goerlitz).Furthermore, Poland has made considerable economic progress in the lastfew years and has made its peace with the London Club of privatecreditor banks, thereby improving its credit rating. This shouldforestall the kind of difficulties the Poles experienced when theytried to buy gas from the British North Sea a couple of years ago.Those talks failed when the owners required payment for three yearsahead, and guarantees of quantities to be bought further ahead thanthat.At the same time, the Norwegian energy minister Jens Stoltenberg hasnoted Russian gas supplier Gazprom had grasped that its clients wantedto diversify supplies and now saw this as a normal condition of doingbusiness in Europe. France takes no more than 30% of its gas fromRussia and Germany has adopted a similar target after its supplies weredisrupted by a dispute between Russia and the Ukraine, through whoseterritory the pipeline feeding Germany runs.The Poles get nearly 60% of their supplies from Russia, which providessome 6 Bcm/yr out of a total Polish consumption of some 10.5 Bcm; theremaining 4.5 Bcm is produced in Poland. It is unlikely any Norwegiangas would get Poland's dependence on Russia quite as low as 30%. PGNiGis looking to import perhaps 2 Bcm to 3 Bcm a year from the North Sea,which would represent no more than 15-20% of demand by the time itstarted landing since Poland's gas requirements are expected to risesharply - to perhaps 27 Bcm by 2010, depending on growth and fuel mixassumptions made.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996SUBSEA ROUTE FOR CADIZ GASAllseas Marine Contractors has been contracted by RepsolInvestigaciones Petroliferas to carry out major work on Gulf of Cadizgasfields. Involved are the Poseidon North and Poseidon South fieldssome 40 km offshore. Allseas will design, fabricate and install threesubsea manifolds together with 63 km of 10-inch pipeline, split intothree sections. Tie-in work is also involved, both at wellheads andmanifolds. Control umbilicals will also be laid. The work, in up to 132metres of water, will be carried out early in 1997, using the Lorelayand Trenchsetter barges. Cost of the development, start-up andproduction rates have yet to be released. All gas will flow to shorefor processing in a plant yet to be contracted.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996INTERCONNECTOR TRANSIT INTERESTBelgium's Distrigaz will shortly invite companies to indicate interestin subscribing for transit pipeline capacity in Belgium linked to theproposed UK-Zeebrugge Interconnector gas pipeline project. Responseswill be required by February next year at latest. Distrigaz gas supplyand sales director Jean Vermeire last month said he wanted to "removesome uncertainties that may still exist with respect to our positionon, and the progress of, the planned enhancement of our transitcapacities". He told a Financial Times natural gas conference in Londonwork on Belgian grid reinforcements required for transit gas flowsassociated with the Interconnector was on course."I can assure you that all studies and preparatory work are on scheduleto put the required transit capacity in place by October 1998, or suchlater date as may be determined by the effective start-up of theInterconnector or the readiness of new onward connections in transitdestination countries (referred to as the Commissioning Date)," hesaid. "In order to determine which transit capacity the market mayrequire and hence to finalise design and size of new pipelines and gridreinforcements, Distrigaz will very shortly solicit formal expressionsof interest in subscribing for transit capacity with a view toconcluding long-term transit contracts."Vermeire said potential shippers willing to enter into such long-termcommitments by the end of second-quarter 1996 - the point at which pipeand other equipment orders would have to be placed - would then beassured of availability of the requested transit service from theCommissioning Date. Subsequent shippers would get different terms. Adetailed information memorandum on transit services on offer was beingmade available to potential shippers before end-1995. This wouldprovide relevant information for shippers to allow them to declaretheir interest by February 1996 at the latest. Earlier, he said the go-ahead decision for the Interconnector could double the gas transit flowthrough Belgium - an estimated 15 Bcm this year - by around the turn ofthe century.Dr Burckhard Bergmann, board member of major German gas supplierRuhrgas, told the conference many issues still remained open on theInterconnector (IGR 288/6). These included the destination of thevolumes and how they would be moved on from Zeebrugge. Outlets appearedfeasible which led to a higher netback than the current spot price atthe UK beach. But the question was to what extent it made sense forproducers to commit themselves to these prices on a long-term basis.There was a wide spectrum of driving forces.But what was unsatisfactory was that these forces were not gearedtowards sustainable developments. Instead, they originated in a UKdisequilibrium which had not ensued from a misjudgement of supply anddemand "but from permanent regulatory intervention. It would be naiveto assume that the currently low spot prices in the UK are the outcomeof liberalisation and the result of high efficiency gains. They areinstead the consequence of a supply overhang resulting largely from thepermanent regulatory corrections made once the privatisation structureof British Gas in 1986 was found to be unsatisfactory".Bergmann continued: "What disturbs us, therefore, is not that abalanced liberal gas market should have repercussions for the westEuropean Continent via the Interconnector but that there is exposure tothe disequilibrium of the current regulatory transformation and finallyalso a growing marginal cost approach to the Interconnector itself."One key issue, he said, would be whether producers who had participatedin the Interconnector increasingly viewed the investment as a sunkcost.Nevertheless, Ruhrgas expected the disequilibrium, and hence theeffects for the north-western part of Continental Europe, to be reducedvia the Interconnector. Although the spot market would not completelydisappear, it would most probably remain confined. The destination forInterconnector gas on the Continent was still unclear. "Many look tothe German market, the largest but also well-supplied market. A greatdeal will depend on whether a substantial quantity can be supplied toItaly via France. It remains to be seen whether a separate transitpipeline through Belgium to Germany also materialises."There are also other interesting transport opportunities for companieswishing to obtain gas for Germany from the Interconnector. It must beborne in mind when constructing a separate pipeline via Belgium - aswith the Interconnector - that the carrying capacity commitments willcover a longer period than the prospective duration of deliveries."Bergmann noted that Central European countries were also interested inobtaining gas from the UK continental shelf. "We support their effortsin this respect but the long distance makes it very hard to find aneconomical solution."Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996STORAGE WINS GRONINGEN TIMEDevelopment of DFL2.5bn ($1.59bn) worth of natural gas storage in theNetherlands will meet short to medium term supply needs but extensivecompression, possibly costing DFL4bn, will be needed on the giant DutchGroningen field in about a decade to meet future requirements. That isone of the conclusions of an assessment of Dutch gas storage needs byconsultant Wood Mackenzie*. Main driver is a decline in peak deliverycapacity of leading Dutch gas marketer Gasunie. Dutch oil and gascompany NAM and Amoco of the US are currently working to bring threepeak shaving storage facilities on stream in 1997 (IGR  288/14).WoodMac notes that with the exception of the Maasvlakte LNG facility,no dedicated peak shaving/gas storage facilities have been developed inthe Netherlands to date.This has been avoided by availability of large local gas reservestogether with high production capacity, flexible supply contracts and acomprehensive infrastructure. Seasonal and short term demand rises havegenerally been met through higher output directly from producingfields. With Dutch output dominated by Groningen, this field has beenconserved as a strategic reserve and swing producer. Last year 42% ofthe total annual gas volume (82.1 Bcm) bought by Dutch gas marketerGasunie was produced from Groningen. The rest came from other onshorefields (19%), offshore fields (35%) and imports from Norway (3.5%) andthe UK (0.5%). But during peak demand periods Groningen provides about75% of deliveries.As of 1 January 1995 some 2,070 Bcm of gas had been produced in theNetherlands but Gronigen still holds estimated remaining recoverablereserves of some 1,275 Bcm, says WoodMac. A further 700 Bcm is heldwithin other developed fields and future Dutch developments. At currentproduction rates, reserves are sufficient to supply domestic and exportmarkets for nearly a quarter of a century. Over the next five years theanalyst expects total gas sales in the Netherlands to rise 5-6% from 44Bcm in 1995 to 46 Bcm in 2000. With the Netherlands established as amajor gas exporter, Gasunie in 1994 exported 38.3 Bcm, 47% of totalsales; of this 59% went to Germany, 14% to Belgium, 13% to France, 14%to Italy and 1% to Switzerland. Overall exports are expected to stayrelatively flat in the medium term.WoodMac reckons domestic Dutch production will rise about 7% from some82 Bcm/yr currently to about 88 Bcm/yr in 2000. Current imports ofabout 3 Bcm/yr from Norway and the UK are expected to rise notably inthe next five years, although not to much over 6 Bcm/yr or 7% of totalDutch supply. However, these deliveries have relatively limitedflexibility in terms of swing to reflect demand variations. Importcapacity is also partly constrained by Gasunie's role as a transporterof some 10 Bcm/yr of gas for third parties, including Norwegiandeliveries to France and Belgium.Moreover, although Dutch output is expected to rise, output fromexisting offshore fields and onshore fields other than Groningen isexpected to fall in the late 1990s and after 2000. Consequently,greater demand will be placed on Groningen production. In the absenceof a major upturn in exploration/development activity, which theanalyst does not currently foresee, or substantially increased imports(such as could potentially arise through the UK-BelgiumInterconnector), output from Groningen, while falling in the shortterm, is expected to rise to about 40 Bcm/yr in 2000.At the same time, however, the flexibility provided by Groningen is nowbeing limited by the fall in reservoir pressure in the field and thisproblem will be compounded when the higher output levels are needed,says the report. Therefore, despite its access to more than sufficientgas volumes to meet projected overall demand for many years to come,Gasunie has had to initiate projects to maintain its delivery capacityin order to keep supply and demand in phase as the flexibility of olderfields, particularly Groningen, to provide necessary swing falters."This decline in delivery capacity could affect Gasunie's supplycommitments," says WoodMac; "indeed, without the provision of new peakshaving facilities there is a real possibility that Gasunie would beunable to supply sufficient gas during a severe winter from 1996."Of the three new gas storage facilities now planned (see table), twowill be operated by Shell/Esso joint venture NAM (50% holder ofGasunie) - one at the partly depleted Langelo/Norg gasfield in theDrenthe concession in the north of the country, the other at theGrijpskerk gasfield. Amoco will develop the third project at theAlkmaar field in the Bergen concession, strategically located close tothe large industrial market in the west of the country, notes WoodMac.The three are due to be phased in from 1997, becoming fully operationalby winter 2000/01, at which stage they should hold some 7 Bcm of gasand provide peak delivery capacity of 184 MMcmd, the additionalcapacity representing about 30% of expected peak demand for Dutch gasin 2000. In the longer term, Alkmaar could be extended to provide 500MMcm of storage and a maximum delivery rate of 36 MMcmd, says thereport.In overall terms, these developments will not boost total deliverycapacity substantially over recent levels, it says. But they will ingeneral compensate for the declining flexibility of producing fields.In addition, Gasunie's new export contracts incorporate a lower levelof swing than older contracts, helping relieve pressure on deliverycapacity. However, as gas to gas competition increases in Europe, adecline in delivery flexibility could cut the competitive advantageheld by Gasunie, warns WoodMac.The new facilities will provide a solution for the company's gasdelivery capacity problems in the short to medium term and provideextra flexibility in the longer term at a cost of about DFL2.5bn inmoney of the day (mod). Their development has allowed a delay ininstallation of extensive compression facilities at Groningen."However, this compression, which could cost around DFL4bn (mod), isexpected to be needed around the middle of the next decade in order tomeet future supply requirements and ultimately improve the recoveryfactor of the field." WoodMac also notes provision of gas storage inthe Netherlands is a new area of opportunity for upstream companies toexpand their role downstream and add value to the gas they supply.* Northwest Europe Report, October 1995, Wood Mackenzie, Edinburgh,Scotland; tel: +44 (0)131 225 8525; fax: +44 (0)131 243 4435).Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996NOW TOTAL GAS DEAL CLOSE?Total is reported to be close to signing a deal (possibly inpartnership with Spain's Repsol) to exploit the Tin Fouye Tabankort(TFT) field in the Algerian Sahara, southeast of Hassi R'Mel, near theborder with Libya. The field is estimated to contain 144.6 Bcm ofnatural gas, 15.6m tonnes (t) of gas which can be turned into LPG, and16.6mt of condensates. This deal would be based on the same legislationthat made BP's contract at In Salah possible (see separate story).Since gas is considered a national asset in Algeria, it took a speciallaw to allow Sonatrach to go into partnership with a foreign oilcompany. As soon as the BP deal was signed, Algeria's oil ministerAmmar Makhloufi said it should serve as a model for other deals.Algeria is keen to exploit its gas, which accounts for some 95% of itsexport revenues. Indeed, the country plans to increase liftings fromsome 30 Bcm in 1995 to 60 Bcm by 2000. That is why contracts are beingsigned. At the same time, signings are proof the recent electionvictory of President Liamine Zeroual has reassured western oilcompanies Algeria will enjoy a sufficient measure of politicalstability.Elsewhere, Total has announced it plans to invest some 15% of new fundsin Asia, with a view to making 20% of its operating profits in thearea. Gas will figure prominently. In particular, the natural gasliquefaction plant at Bontang in Borneo is to be extended with aseventh and eighth liquefaction line. The oil company also plans to getinvolved in building gas-fired electricity generating stations in theregion.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996RASGAS AWARDS $200M CONTRACTSQatar's Ras Laffan LNG Co Ltd has awarded three equipment contractsworth $200m to Japanese and American firms, according to Qatari and USofficials. Japan's Mitsubishi Heavy Industries has an LNG storage tankscontract. Air Products and Chemicals Inc has a deign, build, installcontract for a heat exchanger and fellow US firm Elliot will supplycompressors. No breakdown was given but Ras Laffan managing directorNeil Kelly said the contracts were together worth over $200m. Officialsadded the main $4bn engineering, procurement and construction (EPC)contracts for the project's onshore and offshore facilities wereexpected to be awarded in March. Nine international consortia arebidding. Closing date for EPC bids is 6 January.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996QATAR/ITALY IN PIPELINE TALKSQatar is in discussions with Italian companies on export of Qatarinatural gas via pipeline to Europe, according to Italian envoy to Doha,Ignazio di Pace. It had been agreed to set up a joint technicalcommittee representing Italian firms and Qatar General Petroleum Corp,he said. Italian energy group Eni had presented a pipeline study lastOctober and company officials were due to visit various countries whichmight be involved in the project.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996QATAR IN PHILIPPINES TALKSQatar is considering supplying LNG to First Gas Holdings Corp (FGHC) ofthe Philippines, according to FGHC officials cited by Reuters. Qatarenergy and industry minister Abdullah Bin Hamad Al Attiyah met withcorporation officials on a visit to the Philippines, it said. First Gasis a joint venture of First Philippine Holdings and British Gas and hasbeen planning gas fired power generation in the Philippines.Meanwhile, Qatar hopes to sign a $680m loan with international banks inMarch for offshore facilities for the Qatar Liquefied Gas Company(Qatargas) LNG project, the country's first, according to an energy andindustry ministry official. The loan would be a mix of buyers creditand commercial debt, covering 70% of the offshore portion of theproject, he told Reuters. Qatargas is to sell 4m tonnes (t)/yr of LNGto Japan's Chubu Electric over 25 years from January 1997 and another2mt/yr to seven other Japanese power and gas utilities for 25 yearsfrom mid-1998.A consortium of Japan's five major shipping firms is to invest Y250bn($2.42bn) to build 10 tankers to ship Qatari LNG to Japan, economicdaily Nihon Keizai Shimbun reported. The five are Nippon Yusen KK,Mitsui OSK Lines, Kawasaki Kisen Kaisha, lino Kaiun Kaisha and ShowaLine. The tankers will ship 6mt/yr starting in 1997.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996FIRMS PLAN AMMONIA PRODUCTIONMozambique's state owned National Hydrocarbons Company has signed anagreement with Canada's Scimitar Production and Zarara PetroleumResources of the United Arab Emirates to build an ammonia productionplant targeted at exports to Zimbabwe by end-1997, according to Maputodaily Noticias. It quoted Mozambique deputy energy and mineralresources minister Castigo Langa as saying the Zimbabwean market wasguaranteed and work would start "very soon".The plant, expected to produce 100 tonnes/day of ammonia for export toZimbabwe, will use natural gas reserves in Buzi district southwest ofport city Beira. A pipeline will also be built from Buzi to Beira wheregas will generate electricity for the city. Zarara's Shukri Salehcautioned, however, that known Buzi gas reserves would support ammoniaproduction for only eight years. He urged Mozambique to start searchingfor other gas reserves believed to exist in the area.Mozambique towards end-1995 separately signed an agreement with EnronCorp of the US for development of its Pande gasfield, targeted atfeeding markets in South Africa via a 1,300 km pipeline. Customers haveyet to be lined up.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996SOUTH AFRICA GROUP EYES MOSSGASSouth African chemical and synthetic fuel firms Sasol Ltd, AECI Ltd andSentrachem Ltd have set up a group to talk with the South Africangovernment about buying the financially troubled Mossgas oil-from-natural gas plant. The Department of Mineral and Energy Affairs latelydecided to seek a buyer (IGR 289/20). Mossgas has said that unless thecomplex is sold it will have to be mothballed when current gas suppliesare finished in 1997 or new offshore fields must be exploited.The government believes the $3bn plant could be sold for about $675m,then turned into an oil refinery or a methanol producer. A recentlyfinished study found methanol production from it was feasible atinternationally competitive prices. The bidding group reckons itsmethanol route would require only 25% of the gas needed to makesynthetic fuels.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996MORE GAS SET FOR PETCHEMSEgypt is prepared to supply more gas to Israel for use as apetrochemical feedstock but the exact amount will depend on needs.Potential customers had until end-December to provide the Israelienergy ministry with estimates of their demand, following meetingsbetween Israeli and Egyptian officials. Earlier last year Israelienergy minister Gonen Segev said he had received official confirmationfrom Egyptian General Petroleum Corp, Agip and Amoco on supply of 2.5Bcm/yr of Egyptian gas for 20 years (see also separate story). At thattime he said up to a fifth of the gas would be used for petrochemicals,mainly ammonia. Israel has long been pressing for a supply of naturalgas from Egypt, notably for production of electricity. For some yearsit has received a modest regular supply of Egyptian oil.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996UMC WELL COMES GOODUnited Meridian Corp (UMC) has sunk an eighth consecutive successfulwell in block CI-11 off the Ivory Coast. With six Lion field oil wellsand two Pathere field gas wells on stream, the company anticipatesproduction of 20,000 b/d of oil and 24 MMcfd of gas at start-1996. TheB-3 well followed recently successful sixth and seventh holes (IGR283/12).  The new wildcat flowed 5,970 b/d of oil and 4.6 MMcfd of gasthrough a 56/64-inch choke from 63 net ft of gas pay and 169 ft of netoil pay in a new fault block over a total depth of 10,419 ft. B-3 alsoconfirmed the presence of Senonian gas sands 4,000 ft southeast of theB-1 Lion discovery well.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996MAGHREB LINE WINS NEW CREDITSThe Maghreb-Europe natural gas pipeline from Algeria to Spain andPortugal won two new credit lines before the New Year. First theEuropean Investment Bank conceded a Pta22.2bn ($187m) credit to Spain'sindustrial gas operator Enagas to help finance the section that willrun from Tarifa on the southern coast into Portugal. Then Spain'sInstituto de Credito Offical (ICO) agreed a $200m credit to helpfinance the section of the pipeline being built in Morocco. Enagas, 91%owned by Gas Natural, is financing the Spanish section which will runfrom Tarifa via Cordoba to Portugal through the Spanish regions ofAndalucia and Extremadura.The guarantors of the loan are the Grupo Gas Natural, the EuropeanInvestment Fund and a banking syndicate. The Spanish stretch of thepipeline will cost $400m of the total amount of $2.6bn The ICO creditfor Europe Maghreb Pipeline Ltd, jointly owned by Portugal's publiccompany Transgas and Spain's Sagane, will help finance the 540 kmsection that runs from the Algeria-Morocco border to Moroccaninternational water limits in the Strait of Gibraltar.Meanwhile, oil, gas and chemical conglomerate Repsol - which owns 45.3%of Gas Natural - has agreed to change the route of a local pipelinewhich is to link two gasfields in the southwest province of Huelva tothe national network. The line would have passed through the Donananational park, one of Europe's most important wetlands for migratorybirds. Repsol's announcement, which will mean extending the line bynearly 30 km, followed protests from the park authorities andecologists.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996PRICE HITCH FOR PIPELINE PLANSMuch trumpeted plans to pipe Qatar and Iran gas to Pakistan have runinto further trouble with the two countries demanding a higher pricefor gas they plan to supply to Pakistan. This obstacle has been createdin the early stages of the project, sources close to the Pakistanigovernment said. An official of the petroleum and natural resourcesministry, speaking on condition of anonymity, said both Iran and Qatarhad come up with new demands for the gas price and expressed theirinability to sell at the previously agreed tariff. He said negotiationsbetween the three countries were, however, continuing.Chaudrhy Nisar Ali Khan, former minister of petroleum and naturalresources in the government of Nawaz Sharif, said the Bhuttoadministration had signed agreements for supply of gas from Iran, Qatarand Turkmenistan which provided for completion of feasibility studiesin 12 months. But three months had elapsed and they were still notcomplete. The question of gas tariff had also been sorted out at thattime but the government had allowed it to become an issue, he claimed.Sources close to the government said that besides the question of gastariff, there were other issues hampering implementation of memorandaof understanding Pakistan signed with Iran and Qatar. However, theydeclined to discuss them.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996TWO BIDS FOR PAK-IRAN LINEThe Pakistani government has so far received two bids frommultinational oil companies for construction of the planned 1,700 kmPak-Iran gas pipeline project for import of 1.6 Bcfd of gas from Iran.The companies bidding include a consortium of four firms comprisingBritish Gas, Gaz de France, Shell International and Calgery ofMalaysia. The other bidder is Australia's BHP. Industry sources saidlast date for submission of bids with proposals for import of gas fromIran to Pakistan was 30 November, but on the request of bidders thedate was extended to 12 December, as they were busy finalising issuesamong themselves.Sources in the petroleum and natural resources ministry said BHPsubmitted its bid on schedule - 30 November. Initially, the governmenthad issued letters of intent to six companies including Canada's NovaGas in September but that company pulled out of the project, while mostof the rest of the firms decided to establish a consortium. Theproposed Pak-Iran gas pipeline project would import 1.6 Bcfd of naturalgas at an estimated cost of $3.5bn. The 1,700 km pipeline is expectedto be completed by 2002.Industry sources said bids would be opened in mid-January. Thesuccessful company would be asked to start construction of the pipelineby June 1996. The firm would also be responsible for operation andmaintenance and the project would be based on a build-own-operatebasis. The agreement package would include purchase of gas from Iranand its delivery to Pakistan at an agreed point at a price consistentwith the price offered by other gas exporters such as Qatar andTurkmenistan.The Bhutto government is negotiating with Turkmenistan and Qatar forimport of a similar quantity of gas to meet growing demand in thecountry. Discussion with the Turkmenistan government is in earlystages, industry sources said. But negotiations with Qatar authoritieshave been delayed for more than a year due reportedly to a disputebetween the Qatari government and sponsor of the gas pipeline project,Crescent Petroleum Co, which would be responsible for importing gas toPakistan, over the price for gas it will pay Qatar.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996QATAR/TURKEY LNG DEAL 'CLOSE'Qatar and Turkey will shortly sign a deal for a sales and purchaseagreement (SPA) on supply of 2m tonnes (t)/yr of Qatari LNG to Ankara,according to a Qatari official. "We believe we can come to anunderstanding shortly on 2m tonnes later," Jaber Al Marri, vicechairman of state-owned Qatar General Petroleum Corp (QGPC) said. QGPCand its joint venture partner Mobil Corp signed a preliminarymemorandum of understanding with Turkish pipeline company Botas inJanuary under which Turkey would buy an initial 2mt of Qatari LNG for25 years.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996EGYPT-ISRAEL ACCORD FLAGGEDA letter of intent vis a vis planned supplies of Egyptian gas to Israelis likely to be signed this coming week, according to Israeli sources.The document will define "late 1996 or early 1997" as deadline fornegotiations but will not refer to prices or quantities. Sources alsosay Israel has virtually completed assessments of its gas needs, havingcompleted a survey of major potential consumers. Meanwhile, there hasbeen growing activity in Israel by groups interested in the project. On18 December Israel's largest private fuel company Paz, announced acooperation agreement with Amoco, one of the companies with gasfieldsin Egypt slated for the Israeli market. Paz is two-thirds owned by theLiberman-Bino group and one third by Renaissance-Claridge and others.Apart from being the largest gasoline retailer, it holds 35% of thecountry's total LPG market and 40% of the residential LPG market(600,00 households). Amoco's Cairo-based vice president (Mideastnatural gas) Tony Barrett said Paz and Amoco had "been exploringopportunities in various segments of the natural gas industry -including transmission, storage and distribution to the end markets".Energy minister Gonen Segev has ruled out the possibility of any groupcontrolling both transmission and distribution of the gas, so the newconsortium will have to choose in which area it wishes to compete.Paz board chairman Mordechai Ben Shach described Amoco's approach tothe gas project as "vertical" but added "we are waiting for a decisionby the state. Whatever tender we decide to bid for, the partnershipwill be on a basis of equality, both regarding ownership andinvestment". The Paz-Amoco deal caught most energy observers bysurprise as Amoco was expected to team up with a big company consortiumcomprising the Mashav, Delek and Dankner groups with whom it had beennegotiating for more than a year.However, leading Israeli business daily Globes reported subsequentlythat - despite the Amoco-Paz deal-the consortium was still negotiatingwith Amoco about involvement in setting up gas-fired power stations inthe region. And two days after the Paz-Amoco announcement, Enron'sexecutive in charge of negotiating an LNG deal with Israel, RebeccaMark, said the Mashav-Delek-Dankner group and Enron had a cooperationagreement regarding import of LNG from Qatar. Together with Enron, theconsortium would invest in a $300m plant in Israel to gasify LNG.Marks said that - for economic reasons-Enron would prefer the facilityto be located at Eilat or Aqaba rather than Ashkelon, the sitepreferred by Israel's energy ministry. This would enable Jordan toparticipate in the project and lower the gas price. Mark reportedlysaid that "in principle" Enron preferred Eilat to Aqaba. If Aqaba waschosen, an 8 km pipeline connection to Israel would be needed and Enronwould seek Jordanian partners for the gasification project. (Pressreports said negotiations with Enron were deadlocked because Israelconsidered the price being asked for the LNG - more than $4/MMBtu - asexcessive).Meanwhile, on 2 January Globes reported Gaz de France (GdF) was on theverge of signing an agreement with the Mashav-Delek-Dankner group forjoint activity in the tenders relating to import of Egyptian gas. Thepaper quoted unidentified energy sources as saying GdF's involvementcould be problematic because in 1994 a GdF-affiliated company,Sofregaz, had carried out the feasibility study for the Egyptian gasproject on behalf of the Israeli energy ministry. The sources said theissue would probably have to be decided by the government's legaladviser. However, energy minister Segev "does not believe GdF'sparticipation in tenders will represent a problem", according toGlobes.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996COST CUTS MAY FORCE MERGERSUncertainty over MTBE prices and the need to keep methanol productioncosts in check (IGR 270/14) is forcing Sabic to take another look atthe structure of its industry. Now, in an attempt to cut administrationcosts, the company is mulling the merger of two subsidiaries based inal-Jubayl. If the plan goes ahead, methanol producers Ar-Razi and IbnSina will merge, as will MTBE producers Ibn Zahr and Ibn Sina.Unclear is whether Sabic intends to split Ibn Sina's methanol and MTBEsides so as to form a single methanol producer and a single MTBEmanufacturer. Even larger cost savings should be possible if all threefirms come together. One problem facing Sabic, however, is theownership structure of the companies. Ar-Razi is 50% owned by aJapanese consortium led by Mitsubishi Gas Chemical. Ibn Sina is 25%owned by Hoechst Celanese with another 25% in the hands of PanhandleEastern.Ibn Zahr is 10% owned by Neste, 10% by Ecofuel and 10% by Apicorp.Sabic reckons it might be necessary to cut back on the foreignshareholdings in order to effect mergers. That assumes a willingness toco-operate on the part of the foreign partners. It also assumes Sabiccould do without the marketing expertise (and in some cases markets)provided by those partners. Unitisation might provide the answer butthe mood in Saudi Arabia at present is not in favour of foreignownership in general.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996SHIP CHARTER SLASHES COSTOman LNG has scrapped plans to build dedicated LNG tankers for itsplanned LNG-export scheme. That, says general manager Tony Hanna, willcut overall costs from $6bn to $5bn. To handle the 3m tonnes/yrintended for Korea Gas, chartered ships will be used instead. Detailedterms for the 25-year contract are currently being negotiated, saysHanna, but it is already decided that outside finance will be soughtfor 70% of the cost. Oman LNG shareholders will put up 30% - $1.5bn -in proportion to their holdings. That pans out at $765m from the Omanigovernment (51%); $510m from Shell (34%); $90m from Total (6%); $45meach from Mitsui and Mitsubishi (3% each); $30m from Partex (2%); and$15m from Itochu (1%).Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996PETRONAS DETAILS NEW LNG PLANTMalaysia's third LNG plant, for which a deal was signed last month (IGR289/33), will have two liquefaction trains of 3.4m tonnes (t)/yrcapacity each, boosting Malaysian LNG output to 22mt/yr. Mohamed HassanMarican, president and chief executive of Malaysian state oil and gasfirm Petronas, said gas from the new project was expected to be takenup by traditional buyers Japan, South Korea and Taiwan and also newmarkets like India, China and Thailand. Asia Pacific area LNG demand,currently 56mt/yr, was forecast to rise to about 80mt/yr by 2005, hesaid.The new LNG plant at Bintulu, Sarawak will be owned 60% by Petronas and10% each by US parented Occidental LNG (M), Japan's Nippon Oil Co,Shell Gas BV and Sarawak state. Hassan gave no project cost but said aguide was the 17bn ringgit ($6.7bn) investment in Malaysia's second LNGplant. An initial deal between Petronas, Nippon and Oxy was reached in1993 with Shell, already a major LNG player in Malaysia, invited inlater with Sarawak. The new plant will process gas from fields found byOxy, Petronas, Nippon and Shell offshore Sarawak.At the same time as the LNG signing, Petronas (60%) signed a deal withlocal firm Land & General Bhd and Japan's Mitsui and Co (20% each) fora $300m, 0.4mt/yr capacity vinyl chloride monomer (VCM) plant targetedat commercial production start by late 1998. Officials said Mitsui andLand & General would spend another $100m to set up a separate polyvinylchloride (PVC) plant for which VCM is a feedstock. The two plants willbe at Kertih in Trengganu state which, Hassan said, Petronas aims toturn into SE Asia's largest petrochemicals centre. He said a"worldscale" 0.6mt/yr ethylene plant would be built at Kertih, while anexisting ethylene facility in the area would be expanded from 0.32mt/yrcapacity to 0.4mt/yr.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996DUTCH FIRMS IN LPG PROJECTThe city government of Guangzhou in south China has joined with twoDutch firms, LPG company Nuon and Union Chase, for joint investment of$25m in building and managing piped LPG supply for the city, accordingto Xinhua news agency. The city also signed two memoranda ofunderstanding to set up an international consortium to build a gasfired power generation plant involving investment of some $2bn,according to Xinhua.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996TEPCO PLANS LNG CAPACITY BOOSTTokyo Electric Power Co Inc (Tepco) says it plans to build additionalpower generation facilities to boost output at its Futtsu plant inChiba prefecture east of Tokyo. Two new generators would add 3.04mkilowatts (kW) of output capacity at Futtsu, which can currentlyproduce 2m kW, it said. Tepco also plans to build four LNG tanks andone LNG berth for extra fuel supplies. Construction is due to start in1998, the company said.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996FLUOR/MITSUBISHI FORGE LNG LINKJapan's Mitsubishi Heavy Industries says it plans to pursue the marketfor LNG engineering projects via a global tie-up with major USengineering company Fluor Daniel. The two would cooperate on allactivities from business development to construction.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996UEA IN CHINA GAS VENTUREJingshan Port office of Tangshan city in north China has linked with aUnited Arab Emirates trading group to set up a petroleum gas jointventure near Tangshan, according to Xinhua news agency. TangshanInternational Petroleum Gas involves investment of $22m of which $4.4mwill be from the port office, the agency said. The joint venture wouldbuild a 10,000 tonne (t) berth for petroleum gas transportation, a20,000t gas tank and supplementary facilities including storage for520,000 cubic metres of petroleum gas.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996TENNECO WINS GASLINE LICENCEAustralia's Queensland state said it had granted a pipeline licence toTenneco Energy Australia Pty Ltd, part of US Tenneco Inc, to build a750 km, 90 petajoules/yr capacity gasline between Ballera in southwestQueensland and Wallumbilla, near Roma. Tenneco had indicatedconstruction work would start immediately targeted at operation of theline by end-September 1996, state minerals and energy minister TonyMcGrady said. Tenneco was chosen as preferred developer in late 1994.Construction of the line would mean gas markets in southeast andcentral Queensland were assured of future access to plentiful gassupplies as existing reserves around Roma were depleted, said McGrady.The line's capacity was over double current east coast market demand,he added.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996SANTOS TESTS RECORD GAS FLOWSantos Ltd said its Pennie-l well in the South Australia PatchawarraEast Block flowed 18.9 MMcfd of gas on test, the highest flow rate everrecorded from the Cooper Basin. The Pennie well, located about 12.5 kmsouth of the Cuttapiria oil and gas field and 118 km north of theMoomba gas plant, flowed gas from Permian Epsilon Formation sands at2,849-2,868 metres depth on a 3/4-inch surface choke. The well wasfirst test of a number of undrilled prospects in the area, two of whichare due to be drilled this year, said Santos.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996WOODSIDE DECAMPS TO PERTHWestern Australia's Northwest Shelf gas project operator WoodsidePetroleum says it plans to move its head office to Perth from Melbourneduring first-half 1996. It noted the company had extensive explorationand development interests in WA and offshore north Australia and thatPerth was rapidly becoming the centre for upstream hydrocarbonsindustry activity in Australasia. Chief benefit of the move would becloser links between senior corporate management and operatingsubsidiaries, enabling stronger ties between technical, commercial andfinancial activities. Woodside will keep an office and boardroom inMelbourne.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996CALTEX IN LPG STORAGE PLANCaltex Petroleum Corp and China's Shantou Ocean Enterprises (Group)Petroleum & Petrochemical Co have announced plans to invest $125m tobuild China's largest LPG storage facility. The underground storageunit in the Shantou special economic zone between Guangdong and Fujianprovinces will be first of its kind in China. Capacity will be 100,000tonnes (t) of gas, more than triple China's current 30,000t capacity,according to Caltex senior vice president Matthew Saunders.The facility will also have capacity to blend over 1mt/yr of LPG andinclude three ocean berths and eight tank truck bays for import,storage, manufacturing and distribution of high quality LPG. Projectoperations start is expected in mid-1998. Caltex, a joint venture of USfirms Texaco Inc and Chevron Corp, will meet 60% of investment costsand Shantou 40%.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996YACHENG GAS FEEDS HONG KONGChina on 1 January started piping natural gas from the South China SeaYacheng 13-1 field offshore Hainan Island to Hong Kong under a 20 yearcontract to feed power generation, according to officials of stateowned China National Offshore Oil Co (CNOOC). Owned 51% by CNOOC, 34.7%by US parented Arco China and 14.3% by Kuwait Foreign PetroleumExploration Corp (Kufpec), the $1.2bn Yacheng 13-1 development hasannual production capacity of 3.4 Bcm and total reserves of about 82Bcm, according to CNOOC.Some 2.9 Bcm/yr shipped via a 790 km gasline will feed the Hong KongBlack Point power plant of Castle Peak Power Corp, a 50/50 jointventure of Hong Kong's China Light and Power and Exxon Corp of the US.The remaining 0.5 Bcm/yr will feed power and chemicals plants on HainanIsland via another 91 km gasline. According to Xinhua news agency,Hainan plans to invest 10bn yuan ($1.2bn) to build three syntheticammonia and urea plants on the island in the next five years, fed bynatural gas.Using some 2.2 Bcm/yr these plants would, on completion produce about0.45m tonnes (t)/yr of synthetic ammonia and 0.78mt/yr of urea, saidXinhua. Hainan also planned to build a methanol plant of 1mt/yrcapacity, a chemical works and acetylene salt chemical works. Annualnatural gas output in the area round Hainan was expected to reach some10 Bcm by end-century and 21 Bcm by 2007, it said.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996CHINA 'CUTS LPG TARIFF BY 3%'China will cut LPG import tariffs from 9% to 6% starting 1 April,according to an official from state refining company Inopec as quotedby Reuters. Xinhua news agency earlier said Beijing had relaxed curbson numerous imports.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996ALLIANCE FOCUSES ON GAS MARKETConsolidated Natural Gas and Australia's biggest electricity utility,MetNorth Energy (MNE), are planning an alliance to exploit Australia'snew-look energy industry. The focus will be on boosting gas marketingopportunities and aiding MNE's industrial and commercial clients tofind apt energy sources. Opportunities in Asia will also be examined.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996SABAH GAS WORK UNDER WAYMalaysian state oil firm Petronas has begun work on extra gas transportfacilities in the state of Sabah. Work involves laying a 65 km pipelinefrom the Erb West field offshore to Kota Kinabalu (IGR 278/18),upgrading Erb West units and building an onshore terminal. The projectshould start up in about two years.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996FERTILISER FIRM UP FOR SALEPakistan's Privatisation Commission is seeking bids for NationalFertilizer Corp's Pak-Saudi Fertilizer Ltd, which it earlier said wouldbe put up for sale in first-half 1995. In 1992 the government rejectedoffers for the state entity, saying it had decided to divest thecompany through public offerings. During 1994 Pak-Saudi operated atover 100% capacity to make 617,095 tons of urea employing Snamprogettitechnology. Sales for the year rose to nearly Rs2.02bn ($59m) fromRs1.56bn in 1993. The commission says Pak-Saudi's plant is free fromany long-term financial liabilities. It is situated on almost 570 acresat Mirpur Mathelo, is near the National Highway and is fitted with goodinfrastructure and production units.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996DABHOL D-DAY LOOMS - AGAINThe fate of the Dabhol power generation project is likely to be decidedon 6 January. Maharashtra Chief Minister Manohar Joshi says a specialmeeting of the state cabinet has been called that day to consider thematter. Later, as IGR went to press, local reports quoted an unnamedstate minister as saying a revised deal had been approved by the stateand announcement was a formality. The state government has been pushedinto a decision before 15 January when arbitration proceedings at thebehest of the US project promoters Enron, Bechtel and GE are scheduledto resume in London. The promoters had earlier agreed to postponementof the proceedings until 10 December, the deadline set by Joshi fordecisive action (IGR 289/4).But the opinion of senior state government officials to seek morecapital cost and tariff cuts than agreed with an experts committeecompelled him to pursue an apparently tough negotiating line. Extramileage gained in the negotiations can also yield electoral dividendsto the ruling Shiv Sena-Bharatiya Janata Party coalition which is keento rake up the corruption issue in coming elections against the mainrival Congress party whose government approved the Dabhol deal.Sources say a compromise has been reached after Enron Development Corppresident Joseph Sutton conveyed to Joshi in late December that itwould not yield further on cost and tariff cuts. This provides for amarginal reduction of tariff from the Rs1.89 ($0.054) levelised tariffagreed earlier with the experts negotiating group. In return,Maharashtra State Electricity Board will agree to lift power at morethan the 90% Plant Load Factor mentioned in the original Power PurchaseAgreement. This arrangement will keep intact the internal rate forDabhol Power Co.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996MOBIL IN LPG JOINT VENTUREAbout 0.5m tonnes (t)/yr of LPG is to be imported to India by PeeveesPetroleum Products Ltd (PPPL), a joint venture announced between MobilAsia Pacific Pte from Singapore and a Dubai-based Indian. Mobil has a45% stake in PPPL which is to spend Rs830m ($23.71m) in the first phaseof the project to import, bottle and market 150,000t of LPG in southernIndia. Two bottling plants of 50,000t capacity each are to be built atChaliyam in Kerala and Karur in Tamil Nadu in the first phase to becompleted by December 1996 when coverage will include 700,000 domesticusers and 50,000t of bulk supply to industries. A RCC jetty with 2,800ttankage will go with it. Port dredging to 11 metres depth for 20,000ttanker parcels and a further 20,000t cryogenic tankage is to be takenup in the second phase to increase LPG volume handling capacity to500,000 t/yr.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996ESSAR/PREMIER LAND R FIELDSIndia-UK consortium Essar Oil-Premier Oil has been picked by selectionpanel authorities for development of the R-series of hydrocarbon fieldsin the Bombay offshore. It has proposed peak output of 22,865 b/d ofoil based on an estimated 87.24m bbls of oil in a 22-year productionprofile. R-series fields figure among the eight medium-sized and 33small fields offered by the government in October 1993 for productionof oil and gas in joint ventures with national oil companies Oil &Natural Gas Corp (ONGC) and Oil India Ltd.The Tenders Evaluation Committee (TEC) selected Essar-Premier inpreference to close rival Reliance Industries Ltd (RIL)-Santa Fe, anIndo-US combine. The committee noted "the scheme proposed by Essarconsortium may be more appropriate technology for production comparedto the gas lift scheme of the RIL consortium, in a scenario where thereis uncertainty about the availability of the requisite amount of gasfrom ONGC over the life of the contract". The TEC report will beconsidered by a committee of secretaries with final award of the dealto be decided by the cabinet.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996GAIL SEEKS GAS PLAN PARTNERSGas Authority of India Ltd (GAIL) is soliciting offers from privateinvestors by 15 February for a joint venture for distribution ofnatural gas in Agra and Ferozabad towns of northern state UttarPradesh. GAIL and the private sector promoters are to hold 26% stakeseach in the 2:1 debt-equity venture, estimated to cost Rs650m($18.57m), with the balance of 48% equity to be subscribed by the stategovernment, local bodies and the public. The project is part of a 10-point programme to reduce atmospheric pollution in the Taj Trapeziumarea. GAIL says it will provide pipelines to city gate stations at theoutskirts of Agra and Ferozabad and the joint venture will furtherdistribute the gas to industrial units. The government has allocated0.6 MMcmd of gas for distribution in the two towns.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996UNION TEXAS/OXY IN LPG PLANTwo US oil firms - Union Texas and Occidental Energy Venture Corp -will set up an LPG extraction plant with a production capacity of130,000 tonnes (t)/yr and a 132 MW gas-fired combined cycle power plantat Badin, Sindh province. Total estimated cost of the two projects willbe $180m. A delegation of representatives of the two companies metpetroleum and natural resources minister Anwar Saifullah Khan inIslamabad recently and said the proposed project would be based onindigenous petroleum streams from the Badin Petroleum Concession blockawarded to Union Texas recently.Saifullah said the Bhutto government would provide all possibleassistance for completion of the two projects. He asked the jointventure delegation to ensure local private sector involvement in thescheme as it would provide an opportunity to Pakistan's private sectorto learn technical know-how as well as encourage it to invest in thepetroleum sector.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996PAKISTAN SET FOR NEW ROUNDPakistan will shortly invite a second round of bidding for offshore oiland natural gas projects, a petroleum and natural resources ministryannouncement said. "We hope to attract investments worth $9bn in oiland gas exploration, $4.5bn in domestic pipelines and $6bn in refineryfacilities to cope with growing energy demand over the next 30 years,"it added. The announcement further said international companies wouldbe invited to conferences in Houston and London in April to bid foroffshore oil and gas exploration in Pakistan. Preliminary response fromfirms had been encouraging, it said.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996FIELD NARROWS FOR $700M PROJECTNineteen out of 34 international consortia vying for the $700m naturalgas utilisation scheme in Burma have made it to the shortlist of theRangoon regime. The list includes seven Japanese heavyweights likeMitsubishi, Mitsui, Sumitomo, a South Korean league of Daewoo, Hyundaiand Samsung, and groups consisting of Total and Unocal, Bechtel, NorskHydro, British Gas as well as the Petroleum Authority of Thailand (PTT)and the Thai giant conglomerate Charoen Pokphand, according to sourcesparticipating in the tender.The bid calls for the rights to engage in the so-called "three-in-one"project to utilise natural gas from Burma's known largest gasfieldYadana, some 320 km south of Rangoon in the Gulf of Matarban. Thescheme involves construction of a 200 MW gas-fired power plant, a570,000 tonnes (t)/yr urea fertiliser plant and a 250 km gasline totransport Yadana gas ashore to the project site near the Burmesecapital.Rangoon authorities have indicated to bidders they would be able toannounce a final decision on the choice of bidders in late January orearly February 1996. Due to magnitude of the scheme, the Burmesegovernment is expected to pick as many as five companies to undertakework, rather than awarding the entire contract to just one company.Industry sources clarified that Mitsui remains one of the contendersthough it may have provided some feasibility studies for the scheme toSlorc last year (IGR 282/17). The three-in-one project will be based onthe 125 MMcfd of Yadana gas supply which the field production sharingcontractors including Total, Unocal Corp and PTT Exploration &Production Plc (PTTEP) of Thailand will deliver to Rangoon under anaccord signed in February 1995 (IGR 269/21).The majority of Yadana gas supply will be piped to Thailand under a 30-year export contract concluded last February. The deal is for deliveryof 525 MMcfd of Yadana gas which will be used primarily for powergeneration in Thailand. Yadana gas production is scheduled to start inmid-1998.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996UNIQUE/MITSUI CHASE MARKETSUnique Gas and Petrochemicals Plc of Thailand and Japan's Mitsui & Cowill use their first joint venture on LPG and ammonia marketing inVietnam to spearhead into a wider range of energy-related businesses inthis socialist state. This strategic plan was outlined by seniorexecutives of the two firms specifically in a bid to capitalise onextensive market opportunities in the country of 73m people.That conforms with Unique Gas' target to expand its businesses in thisregion and diversify its business lines beyond LPG and ammonia toinclude other speciality gas, chemical and other products to become oneof Southeast Asia's leading chemical and energy concerns. Earlier lastyear, Unique Gas formed a joint venture with Malaysia's state oil firmPetronas to develop a network of service stations in Thailand offeringa full range of petroleum products under the Petronas brand name.For Mitsui, the joint venture with Unique Gas in Vietnam forms anintegral part of its expansion of its businesses there where it hasbeen active in marketing fertiliser, among other areas. Unique Gas andPetrochemicals (Vietnam) Co, equally owned by Unique Gas and Mitsuigroup, early in December opened its $5.02m LPG and anhydrous ammoniaterminal in Long Thanh district of Dong Nai province, about 70 km southof Ho Chi Minh City.The terminal serves as platform for the joint venture to launch its LPGand ammonia marketing in Vietnam where demand for those products isexpanding dramatically. Unique Gas president Phaibul Chalermsaphayakornand Mitsui & Co (Thailand)'s Hiroyuki Maruko said they were convincedabout "bright" economic growth potential.Maruko said Unique Gas and Mitsui would broaden product lines inVietnam to include products like fuel oil in the near future. However,execution of such a project was very much subject to Vietnameseauthorities' approval, a difficult and time consuming process, he said.In spite of that, Mitsui, on its own part, will start looking into theviability of setting up what would be the first LPG cylinder productionplant in Vietnam.It has also been eyeing opportunities for establishing a natural gasseparation plant in Vietnam to process indigenous natural gas producedfrom oil and gas fields off the country's southern coast, he added. ForUnique Gas, Phaibul noted the company has been assessing thepossibilities of establishing businesses including LPG distribution inneighbouring countries, particularly Burma.Established n 1982, Unique Gas has been active in distribution of LPGand ammonia in Thailand. Vietnam is the first foreign country whereUnique Gas has an investment. The Unique Gas and Mitsui alliance inVietnam has had a firm plan to enlarge its operations in the country inline with the expected dramatic jump in consumption of LPG. Phaibulannounced the joint venture plans to inject some $2m in additionalcapital to boost the LPG storage capacity of its Long Thanh terminalfrom the current level of 400 tons by 200 tons in February 1996 andanother 400 tons in 1997, so that at end-1997 combined capacity will be1,000 tons.Unique Gas Vietnam targets industrial users, especially those locatedin Go Dau industrial zone where its terminal is situated, as its mainclientele for LPG, accounting for roughly 60% of its expected salesvolume of some 6,000 tons in 1996. The remaining 40% would be sales toresidential and commercial sectors in the form of cylinders. Unique GasVietnam general director John Lu said total LPG and ammonia demand inVietnam was expected to more than double by 2000 and the company hopedto grow with the market.An industry estimate puts present LPG demand in Vietnam in the range of4,000-5,000 tons a month. The Thai-Japanese joint venture expects tocapture a 10-15% share in Vietnam's LPG market currently dominated bylocal suppliers like Saigon Petro, Elf Gas and Petrolimex - all withlocal government participation.Initial LPG supplies to Unique Gas Vietnam are from Thailand, Malaysiaand Indonesia. There is no local production of LPG in Vietnam. UniqueGas Vietnam is the first wholly-owned foreign venture in LPG andammonia business to be licensed by the Vietnamese authorities. Thecompany's terminal covers an area of 111,000 sq metres; only a fractionhas been utilised. In Thailand, Unique Gas operates two LPG/ammoniaterminals in Bang Pakong and Surat Thani, two LPG tankers, 55 LPG roadtank trucks and 63 LPG bottling plants.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996PTT MULLS HIGHER BURMA TAKEPetroleum Authority of Thailand (PTT) is considering raising itspurchase of natural gas from Burma's offshore Yadana field by 200-300MMcfd over agreed contractual levels. PTT governor Pala Sookawesh spokeof the possibility since the Yadana field developing group expectshigher gas productivity from the field and in light of additional gasdemand spurred by private power plant operators in Thailand under theindependent power producer (IPP) and small power producer (SPP)programmes. He said recent information obtained from Yadana operatorTotal indicated the field, some 320 km south of Rangoon in the Gulf ofMatarban, could prove additional gas reserves and deliverability.According to PTT, Yadana's present certified recoverable gas reservesare put at 5.7 Tcf. The 30-year contract PTT concluded with the Yadanadeveloping group in February 1995 calls for initial gas delivery of 141MMcfd in mid-1998 before building up to 525 MMcfd 14 months later (IGR268/16). Total executives have said earlier that Yadana is quiteproductive and does not require Total to drill as many wells asexpected. Only some 10-15 wells would be needed in the initial stage toachieve the contractual production level of some 500 MMcfd (IGR270/18). Meanwhile, Pala said he had received assurance from partiesconcerned that production and delivery of Yadana gas to PTT would startwithin the contractual date.Lately, Burmese ministers have also assured the PTT governor theproblem of most concern to PTT and the Yadana developing group - layingof part of the gasline over areas in southeastern Burma where ethnicKaren and Mon guerrillas have been waging war against the Rangoonforces - would no longer pose a threat. They reportedly said thesouthern part of the area holding most of the onshore section to theThai western province of Kanchanaburi was now controlled by ethnic Monsallied with the Rangoon regime. The only problem at the border was theminority Christian Karens who still dominated the area north of thegasline route, though their Bhuddist faction had defected to thegovernment's Slorc. Pala said work related to the Yadana gas project onthe Burmese side, including the $1bn field development and the 300-pluskm off/onshore gasline was well under way.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996CAMBODIA MULLS PTT MODELCambodia has started considering establishment of a state oil firm tomanage its indigenous petroleum resources, particularly offshorenatural gas, which could be discovered and developed in future. PouSotirak, Cambodian industry, mines and energy minister, said thegovernment had accepted it was the right time for the country to have a"national" oil firm, possibly similar to those created in neighbouringAsean states such as the Petroleum Authority of Thailand (PTT). Heindicated the starting point would be when the country discovered"practical" size resources, perhaps of Thailand's scale. "If we don'thave any reserves, then there is no need for a national oil company,"he added.Sotirak said he was "still thinking very hard" about the role of theproposed national oil body. But generally Cambodia wanted to optimiseits economic exploitation of natural gas and petroleum, if it had any."It must serve the benefits of the public and the government." He saidhe had asked PTT governor Pala Sookawesh if PTT could "teach a fewtricks" on establishing a national oil firm and developing personnel torun the organisation."Right now we are still searching for petroleum (offshore); if wediscovered something I have to quickly visit Mr Pala to learn toestablish a national oil firm," he added. Cambodia has high hopes offinding substantial natural gas reserves at locations near the so-called overlapping areas of Thai-Cambodian territorial claims in theGulf of Thailand, given the fact Unocal Thailand has been producing gasand condensate from the general area. Bangkok and Phnom Penh are stillunable to resolve their disputes over the offshore territorial claims,said to be highly gas prospective.Phnom Penh has mooted the idea that Thailand and Cambodia adopt a"Joint Development Area (JDA)", as Thailand Malaysia have done, inresolving the disputes in the southernmost part of the Gulf ofThailand. Thailand has not accepted this, insisting on its claims onthe overlapping tract covering tens of thousands of square kilometres(IGR 285/21).Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996HONDO WARNS GASLINE IN DOUBTHondo Oil & Gas Co this week warned completion of a Colombian naturalgas pipeline it plans with Amoco of the US is now in doubt because ofchanges in Colombian regulations on pipeline tariffs and natural gasprices. It also said the planned Opon 5 development well in the countryhad been delayed indefinitely because of right of way disputes withlandowners. Hondo cited adoption of new regulations by recently formedgovernment agency Comision de Regulacion de Energia y Gas, part of themines and energy ministry.It said the regulations set a ceiling price for natural gas and amaximum 12.5% rate of return (before Colombian taxes) for pipelinetariffs. The ceiling had been interpreted to include costs or fees fornatural gas processing, so that process costs could not be passed on tobuyers. "These new regulations will reduce the amount the companyexpects to receive for natural gas and pipeline tariffs in the future,"said a Hondo statement.Earlier, Hondo said the new regulations affected terms agreed in amemorandum of understanding announced last summer with Colombian stateoil and gas firm Ecopetrol for construction of an 88 km pipeline fromthe Opon Association Contract (OPC) area to Ecopetrol's refinery atBarancabermeja. This called for recovery of pipeline investment via atariff. Negotiations were continuing with Ecopetrol on relief from theregulations' effects and meantime pipeline work was continuing, saidHondo. Plans for 1996 OPC area exploration and development projectswould be reconsidered during the first quarter.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996NEB DETAILS EXPORTS IMPACTTotal volumes of Canadian gas to be exported under long term contractsup to 2014 represent 11% of remaining and undiscovered western Canadareserves, according to the National Energy Board (NEB). Known and yetto be found reserves totalled an estimated 164 Tcf at 1 November 1995of which 63 Tcf was remaining reserves and 101 Tcf undiscovered, saidthe board. Authorised volumes under long term contract totalled 18.2Tcf. The volume did not include licences for gas exports from theMackenzie Delta totalling 9.2 Tcf. NEB said volumes authorised for longterm export to the USA included 40% to the northeast, 32% to themidwest, 15% to California and 13% to the Pacific northwest.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996HANSON SELLS SUBURBAN PROPANEIndustrial conglomerate Hanson has announced plans to sell a majorityequity stake in Suburban Propane, third biggest retail propanedistributor in the USA, through a public offer. Hanson expects to raiseabout #500m ($776.3m) through the offer and a related debt issue. Thepublic offer will represent about 62% of equity in a new 'masterlimited partnership' dubbed Suburban Propane Partners LP. Suburban willalso issue $425m of senior debt maturing in 2002-2011. Hanson will keepan approximate 38% combined subordinated and general partnershipinterest in the new MLP, it said.The structure would enhance Suburban's ability to expand by usingpartnership units to acquire other propane distributors. Suburban isthird largest retail and wholesale distributor of propane gas in the USfor residential, commercial, industrial and agricultural uses. Itsretail operations are run through 353 sales and service centres servingnearly 0.8m customers in 39 states. Suburban has about 6% of the USretail propane market, said Hanson. A substantial slice of net proceedsfrom the unit offering and debt issue would be used to make payments toHanson subsidiaries.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996FLYING START FOR MARITIMES LINEA recent open season for Phase I of the planned Maritimes & NortheastPipeline project resulted in nominations for over 410 MMcfd of naturalgas transportation services, according to lSource Development Co, aunit of Panhandle Eastern Corp, one of the line sponsors, early lastmonth. With announced initial capacity on Phase I just 60 MMcfd,nominations far exceeded expectations, said 1Source. Phase 1, due tostart transportation services in 1997, comprises 63 miles of 24-inchgasline linking Dracut, Massachusetts with Wells, Maine. Other sponsorsof the project to market natural gas from the Sable Island areaoffshore Nova Scotia are Westcoast Energy Inc, Mobil Corp, Shell Canadaand Eastern Enterprises.1Source said the open season response demonstrated the strong demandfor natural gas service in Maine and New Hampshire and the variety ofshippers nominating was evidence of a rapidly emerging, competitivenatgas marketplace there. "This is good news for the Maritimes &Northeast project as a whole since Phase I is the project's gateway tomajor markets in the eastern United States," said lSource. For Phase Isponsors will now look to seal binding precedent agreements with futureMaritimes & Northeast customers, with federal approval to proceedexpected to be sought this month.1Source said sponsors were keen to move ahead on Phase II for which itexpected the response in Maine and the Maritimes to be as encouraging.The overall project will eventually involve construction of a 630 mileunderground pipeline crossing areas in Nova Scotia, New Brunswick inCanada, Maine and New Hampshire before interconnecting with the NorthAmerican pipe grid in Massachusetts. Scheduled pipeline capacity is 400MMcfd with service due to start in November 1999. Sable Offshore EnergyProject companies are Mobil, Shell Canada, Petro-Canada Inc, ImperialOil and Nova Scotia Resources Inc. They aim to tap about 3 Tcf ofrecoverable natural gas from six fields in the Sable Island area.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996CORPOVEN PLANS NGLS LEAPState owned PDVSA unit Corpoven says it plans to boost natural gasliquids (NGLs) output by some 160% over the next 10 years with outputexpected to reach 6.22 Bcf in 2005 from 2.36 Bcf currently. It said theforecast was based on "large proven reserves of natural gas" inVenezuela totalling 138 Tcf of which Corpoven held 62%. The companyplanned to invest 262bn bolivars ($771.6m) in various projects to boostNGLs output. Main project was the Eastern Cryogenic Complex, or Accro,in eastern Monagas state.Its latest component, a $300m cryogenic plant, was inaugurated at SantaBarbara last November. Third and final phase is due complete in 2004.Accro output was expected to reach 290,000 b/d of NGLs by 2005 against82,000 b/d now. Up to 30% of Venezuelan gas liquids are exported,mainly to the USA. Corpoven estimates market capacity in the Americasat about 150,000 b/d.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996SHV CALOR EXPANDS IN BRAZILThe international LPG joint venture of Calor Group of the UK and DutchSHV Energy is spending $62m for a 49% stake (with 50% voting rights) inSupergasbras Distribuidora de Gas, Brazil's fourth largest LPGdistributor. The two partners in SHV Calor Brasil are investing $31meach. The deal follows acquisition last August of a majority stake inMinasgas, Brazil's fifth largest bottled gas supplier. Calor said thetwo firms would be operated as separate companies but it wouldencourage the rival suppliers to make cooperation arrangements for thefuture. The two supply a combined total of 1.35m tonnes/yr of LPG toover 40m people.Last summer Calor unveiled plans to spend about #70m ($108.7m) onprojects in Asia and Latin America, in conjunction with SHV which has acontrolling stake in Calor, seeking to reduce its dependence on the UKLPG market. Calor financial controller John Taylor this week said thegroup had about #40m to spend on other projects, mostly in Asia.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996CPUC SEEKS POWER COMPETITIONThe California Public Utilities Commission (CPUC) is back in theprecedent-setting business with a late December move to bringcompetition to all electric power sales in the Golden State. The broadderegulation plan, a refinement and stretch-out of the pioneering free-market initiative launched by the commission last April, will affectvirtually every aspect of the $20bn California electricity market. Inthe process, it may be the beginning of the end for CPUC itself, atleast as presently constituted. And, like so many other thingsCalifornian, it is likely to serve as a bellwether for other statecommissions seeking a roadmap to successful deregulation of their ownelectric utilities.For gas interests, the CPUC move is expected to result, at leasteventually, in a further proliferation of small-scale, independentpower production facilities, most of which are likely to be fired bynatural gas. "Market mechanisms", said CPUC, will be used "to minimisetransition costs [and] utilities will be allowed the opportunity forfull recovery of the transition costs associated with existing powercontracts and prior regulatory commitments".The commission added it would also permit "accelerated recovery of netbook value of undepreciated assets combined with a reduced cost ofcapital". However, the new plan was approved on a sharply divided 3-2vote of the commissioners, signalling lengthy fights beforederegulation in California becomes a fait accompli. And the plan mustreceive concurrence from California Governor Pete Wilson and from theFederal Energy Regulatory Commission (Ferc).Timing of the transition to open markets remains ambitious:deregulation would begin in less than two years, on 1 January 1998,continuing through the first day of 2003 when power markets wouldbecome completely open. In a repeat of part of its original proposalthat resulted in extensive criticism from various energy industrysectors, the new CPUC plan includes preferences for "renewable" fuelsand penalties for failure to achieve minimum purchase requirements forpower generated using environmentally benign technologies.The new regulatory regime would also use "performance-based" criteriato spur operational efficiency at the state's utilities. CPUC said itwould strive during first-quarter 1996 to achieve a "CaliforniaConsensus" among state and local officials and electricity customers.The commission pledged to submit the envisaged consensus to Ferc inwhat it termed "a spirit of cooperative federalism", and what cynicssuggested was an end run to co-opt the Washington regulators.Rather than phasing the deregulation plan in by customer classes, thenew CPUC plan would select a "representative" group from all customersfor participation in the first phase two years hence. That initial moveinto uncharted waters would last just one year, during which selectedcustomers could shop around among electricity providers for the bestdeals. After that, full open market conditions would be implemented.State regulation of rates and services would continue in instanceswhere true competition did not occur, said CPUC, although traditionalcost-of-service standards would be supplanted by overall performancecriteria. In the CPUC view, that would lead to increased profitpotential for the most efficient producers and investor penalties forthose who failed to cut costs sufficiently.To assure open transmission access for all power producers, the CPUCsystem would establish an "independent system operator" (ISO) to assumecontrol of utility-owned transmission assets and manage the use ofthose resources. The ISO would also be responsible for assuringadequate power supplies and reliability of transmission facilities, aswell as fixing any problems that develop. In short, major utilitiescould continue to own transmission properties but could not operatethem independently of the ISO.In an element likely to be among its most controversial, the CPUC planwould require California's Big Three electric utilities - Pacific Gasand Electric, Southern California Edison, and San Diego Gas andElectric - to divest half their fossil-fired generation facilities ifthey wish to avoid "market power" accusations. Another "politicallycorrect" aspect of the CPUC decision would require a "public goodscharge" on retail electricity sales, with proceeds to be used to fundenergy conservation and efficiency initiatives "not provided by thecompetitive market that are in the broader public interest".CPUC also mandated that electric rates include a "competitiontransition charge" that could not be bypassed in sales transactions.That charge would be collected from all power consumers, whether theyreceive conventional bundled service from utilities or buy powerdirectly from independent producers. As the dust began to settle on theCPUC announcement, gas industry analysts were hedging their bets onexactly what the impact might be on gas use.However, most observers concurred that if the plan is endorsed by thegovernor and by Ferc, the increased access of independent generatorswould inevitably favour greater gas use in California. If other stateschoose to copy California once more, the consensus is that gas use forpower generation could increase substantially, with few observerswilling to speculate on precise growth figures.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996COLD SPARKS PRICE SPIKEAbnormally cold weather in the eastern half of the US, combined with aperception among traders that gas storage inventories are decliningrapidly enough to raise questions about sufficiency of gas suppliesthrough the 31 March end of the winter heating season, produced anunprecedented upward spike in gas futures prices on the New YorkMercantile Exchange during the week before Christmas, with high pricesfor the January futures contract climbing close to $4/MMBtu in dailytrading before settling back into the $3.00 range for the week.The abrupt jump also marked the highest gas futures prices on the Nymexsince trading in those instruments began. As the New Year's holidayweekend began, gas futures contracts were trading back in the $2.50range. Traders appeared more worried this season about the "early" coldsnaps that have occurred in the eastern US. While periods ofexceptionally cold weather in the last several years have often beencolder and more prolonged than those in recent days, they occurredcloser to the end of the winter season, when concerns about the season-long adequacy of gas supplies were less severe.Questions along the lines of "can we make it until April?" haveoccurred with increasing frequency. For the week ending 22 December,the American Gas Association reported gas in storage totalled 2,257Bcf, or 70% "full". For the same reporting period last year, storagevolumes were nearly 400 Bcf higher, and inventories stood at 83% full.Spot wellhead gas prices rose by 25 cents/MMBtu to $2.30 during theweek before Christmas, closing at 83 cents more than the year-earlierweek. For the week between Christmas and New Year, prices rose another29 cents to $2.59, closing at $1.15/MMBtu above the year-end week of1994. Meanwhile, figures for average spot wellhead prices for full year1995 came out at $1.45/MMBtu.The dramatic increases in gas futures prices during the year's lastfortnight gave rise to a formal complaint filed by an ad-hoc groupcalling itself "the Nymex floor members", seeking an investigation bythe Commodity Futures Trading Commission into the volatile fluctuationsin gas futures contract prices just before the end of the year. Theleap of 94.4 cents/MMBtu registered by the January gas futures contractbetween 18 December and the closing of the January contract on 21December brought the contract price to $3.448/MMBtu, a record for thecontract. Representatives of Nymex insisted the price volatility was anatural result of exceptionally strong gas demand, rather than anymismanagement or wrongdoing on the part of the exchange or individualtraders.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996NEW PIPE TALLY 8,000 MILESMore than 8,000 miles of new US natural gas transmission line orpipeline looping have been built, are under construction or areproposed, according to the American Gas Association (AGA) in its latestannual report on new construction. Additionally, AGA lists 47 proposednatural gas storage projects in various stages of development to addmore than 500 Bcf of working gas storage capacity and, if built,increase total US working gas storage capacity by nearly 20%.Through 1993 and 1994, more than $9bn of new gas pipeline constructionprojects were in various stages of development. AGA classifies theseprojects as either built in 1993 or 1994 and operational, or currentlyunder construction, proposed and pending. In aggregate, the projectstotal 8,087 miles of new line and looping, 1,098,940 hp of additionalcompression, and 15.3 Bcfd of additional capacity. The existing US gastransmission network consists of more than 2,984,500 miles of line andmore than 14m hp of compression with a total book value of nearly$54bn.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996ENGINE IN SCHOOL BUS EXAMEngineers at South-western Research Institute, San Antonio aredeveloping an electronically controlled natural gas engine for schooland commercial buses. Based on an existing PowerTech Deere natural gasengine, it is part of an Energy Department-funded project to build safeschool buses powered by natural gas. The modified 8.1 litre engine haselectronic fuel injection, an electronic drive-by-wire throttleactuator, an electronically controlled wastegate and a direct-fire,coil-on-plug ignition system.So far, it is said to have demonstrated low emission levels with betterperformance and fuel efficiency than any heavy-duty, natural gas enginecommercially available. Deere plans to produce a commercial version ofthis engine this year. The engine is currently undergoing lean-misfireand knock-limit tests to determine operating limits. Researchers arealso identifying the influence of various engine components onperformance and emissions with the goal of lowering nitrogen oxideoutput while maintaining engine efficiency.During the next several months, they will evaluate different controlstrategies for keeping the desired air-fuel ratio, spark timing, boostpressure and other parameters during steady-state and transientoperation. They are also developing systems for knock and misfiredetection and catalyst efficiency monitoring. Once proven, the enginewill go into a prototype, ultrasafe bus being designed by Blue BirdCorp. Natural gas will be stored in four composite-wrapped aluminiumcylinders located within the frame rails underneath the bus which isexpected to have a range of more than 300 miles. Besides sporting a newengine, the ultrasafe bus will be lighter weight for optimum fuelefficiency.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996ELTRON IN NEW SYNGAS R&DEltron Research Inc is developing a 'ceramic membrane reactor' (CMR)technology for electrochemical conversion of humidified natural gas tosynthesis gas. In addition to the yield being up to 90% in a singlepass, the reaction is thermodynamically spontaneous and thereforerequires no externally imposed voltage. Further, it needs no externalsource of pure oxygen, cutting production costs by 30-50%, says projectmanager Michael Schwartz. Maintained at some 900oC, the CMR is equippedwith a tubular mixed-conducting membrane with methane held inside andthe air (for O2) outside.The methane side of the membrane is coated with a partial-oxidationcatalyst, while the outer side contains a reduction catalyst. The highconductivity of the membrane materials for electrons and oxygen ionspermits the reaction of oxygen with methane while preventing directcontact between methane and oxygen. In addition, oxygen becomesseparated from atmospheric nitrogen via the membrane. Eltron is seekingpartners to build a largescale CMR prototype.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996BUYERS TO HOOK INTO US SYSTEMLate this year, Mexico's PMI Trading Co hopes to take delivery of thefirst NGLs shipped through newly-formed Rio Grande Pipeline Co. Thelatter is a new joint venture formed by Mid-America Pipeline, AmocoPipelines and Navajo Pipeline companies to link the US NGL grid to itssouthern neighbour. Liquids will originate at Hobbs Station, Texas andother points on Mid-America Pipeline's 16,000 km system to the PemexGas y Petroquimica Basica Mendez terminal in Ciudad Juarez.To achieve this, Rio Grande is buying Navajo's existing 8-inch pipelinefrom Odessa, Texas to a point near El Paso. A new 8-inch line will linkthis point to the Mendez terminal in Mexico. Mid-America will beoperator of the system. Volume to be moved has yet to be announced.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996NEW INDIANA PLANT ON STREAMPSI Energy and Destec Energy have begun commercial operations at theirjoint venture coal gasification plant at West Terre Haute in Indiana.The Wabash River plant has taken two years to build and will convert2,7000 tonnes/day of high-sulphur coal - supplied from Peabody Coal'sHawthorn mine in the state - to an ultimate 262,000 kW of electricity.The latter will stem from PSI's existing Wabash River coal-fired plant,being converted to a syngas-fired combined-cycle unit. Destectechnology is being used throughout. In the gasification plant, thecompany claims to remove 98% of the coal's sulphur content prior togasification.That seems set to be sold for use in fertiliser production. Airpollution is said to be just a fraction of the limit set for 2000 bythe Clean Air Act. Acid rain pollutants are also said to be reducedsignificantly. A further by-product is ash derived from thegasification plant. This is converted to an inert vitrous aggregatesaid to be ideal for road building. Now Destec aims to use the sametechnology to use unsaleable residues from refineries as basic fuel forgasification.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996CMS BUYS PETAL STORAGECMS Gas Transmission and Storage Co has bought Chevron's Petal GasStorage Co for an undisclosed sum. As part of the sale agreement,Chevron will continue to receive long-term storage service from Petal,which owns a high-deliverability peak-shaving storage unit in ForrestCounty, Mississippi. With a capacity of 3.2 Bcf, the salt-dome cavernprovides up to 320 MMcfd delivery for up to 10 days and can be refilledin 20 days. At present it is connected to two interstate pipelines -Tennessee Gas and Koch Gateway.Access to other pipelines is being mulled by CMS, along with thepossibility of expansion. "We believe Petal's high-flexible peakingtype of service is what the market wants," says William Haener,president at CMS Gas Transmission & Storage. The company complementsCMS' existing storage business and will allow the latter to tailorspecific services to satisfy a wide variety of customer needs, he adds.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996BECHTEL LANDS LNG EPC CONTRACTAtlantic LNG Co of Trinidad and Tobago has taken two major decisionswhich will ensure it maintains its deadline for delivering LNG to itstwo customers, Cabot and Enagas, by first-quarter 1999. One is choiceof the Phillips optimised cascade system, developed by PhillipsPetroleum Co, as the preferred liquefaction process for the 425 MMcfdplant. Overseas Bechtel, one of three companies asked to submit frontend engineering design for the plant, based its proposals on thePhillips process and has been awarded the engineering, procurement andconstruction (EPC) contract.Negotiations on an overall contract price will begin with Bechtel inJanuary, led by Atlantic's recently-appointed vice president forengineering and construction, David Jamieson. Ground should be brokenfor construction early in the second quarter. The other major decisionis to break that ground elsewhere than at La Brea, the site insouthwest Trinidad originally chosen for LNG, mainly on the insistenceof the last government, which wanted to develop the area.But the abandoned wells left behind from discontinued oil and gasoperations could not be cleaned up in time and the existence of thenearby Pitch Lake meant the area would remain inherently unstablegeologically. The LNG site has been shifted five miles further down thesouthwest coast to Point Fortin, where ample reclaimed land and goodharbour facilities, which have accommodated oil tankers for decades,are available.The move will also help provide alternative jobs for workers maderedundant by closure of Petrotrin's Point Fortin refinery, which isimminent because no one seems interested in buying it. Bechtel beat twoother contenders to the prize contract, likely to be worth close to$1bn. Chiyoda Corp/Hudson Engineering had offered an LNG design basedon the Air Products and Chemicals liquefaction process and a jointventure of MW Kellogg and JGC Corp also submitted a bid.Atlantic believes its strategy of inviting engineering designs firstand then awarding an EPC contract was the best way to control projectcosts. As David Wight, president of Amoco Trinidad, whose associatecompany, Amoco Trinidad LNG, owns 34% of Atlantic, says: "We now have agood idea of what our costs are going to be and can control them."Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996GASLINE PLANS 'MAKE PROGRESS'Negotiations on the Bolivia-Brazil gas pipeline continue apace andaccording to a consultant close to the action there has been concreteprogress "with all technical and planning aspects in place". He wasreferring to the pipeline being built in two Brazilian sections, withcompletion of the Corumba-Sao Paulo section before that from Sao Pauloto Port Alegre instead of simultaneously. The pipeline diameter hasbeen fixed at 32 inches (instead of 28 inches) permitting a maximumvolume of 30 MMcmd rather than 16 MMcmd.The source said: "There are no problems with existing legislation forthe pipeline to go ahead; all that is really needed is long termdistribution contracts with utilities. All the partners (Enron, YPFB,Petrobras, British Gas, Tenneco and BHP) are basically in agreement."Asked about the pipeline's timetable, the consultant put a dateline ofmid-1996 for all existing problems to be overcome and a "veryconservative and cautious maximum timescale for contracts for gas powerprojects to be signed and capable of seeking finance by April 1997".One major reason for cheerfulness for the companies involved in thegasline project was a decision by Brazil's federal electricity holdingEletrobras to include gas-fired power for the very first time in itsrevised long-term plan (1996-2004) to be published this January. Enronhas always argued the Bolivian pipeline must be primed by electricitygenerating projects from day one of operation so that it is producingmoney from the start while industrial and residential markets aredeveloped.The Eletrobras plan for gas-fuelled generation consists of 1,800 MW inthe states of Sao Paulo and Rio de Janeiro, 450 MW in Mato Grosso and390 MW in Mato Grosso do Sul. The Bolivia pipeline will enter Brazil atMato Grosso do Sul (Corumba) and go straight to the contiguous state ofSao Paulo where the main market is. Sao Paulo currently takes gas fromRio de Janeiro state but when Bolivian gas arrives this flow is plannedto be reversed.A branch pipeline will probably leave the Bolivia-Brazil main pipelinewithin Bolivia (between Santa Cruz de la Serra and Puerto Suarez) inorder to serve Mato Grosso state, probably entering Brazilian territoryat the river port of Caceres. Enron is understood to have signedprotocols of understanding for establishing gas-fired power stationswith the state electricity companies of Mato Grosso and Mato Grosso doSul.There are apparently two issues still to be resolved. One is thequestion of the gas price to distribution companies. Negotiations arecentred on the equation of volume and prices. The pipeline projectcompanies have been arguing for high volumes and lower prices whiledistribution company estimates of demand have tended to be conservativeand consequently the price offered has tended to rise. The use of gasin power stations will go some way to breaking this particular log-jamby raising initial throughput and lowering the price.Another problem, aired for some time, has been the allegation thatBolivian reserves will be insufficient for the projected gasline flows.Opponents of the gas pipeline say the certified reserves (byNetherlands, Sweel and Associates of Dallas) do not cover the estimated100 Bcm Brazil would consume over the 20 year contract period. Therespected Dallas company put Bolivian reserves at 80.8 Bcm proven; 30Bcm probable and 25.9 Bcm possible. The consultant was confident thisproblem "could be settled fairly quickly", without specifying how.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996GAS VEHICLE PRODUCTION OK'DBrazil's mines and energy minister Raimundo Brito has authorised themotor industry to start production of natural gas fuelled cars andtrucks. Until now only buses have been purpose-built to use gas whiletaxis could be converted to the fuel. Ministry officials expect thecars will be produced with the option of alcohol use in order toincrease their range outside major cities. One of the reasons given forallowing gas-fuelled car production is the increasing levels ofpollution in the two Brazilian cities with developed natural gas roadvehicle infrastructure: Sao Paulo and Rio de Janeiro.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996US INVOLVEMENT NOW LIKELYOne at least of the new ammonia/urea complexes planned for location atJose in Antzotegui state Venezuela is set for US participation (IGR287/25). Pequiven has signed a letter of intent with Arcadian tojointly study feasibility of a $700m project involving a 700,000tonnes/yr (t/yr) urea plant, fed by twin 600,000 t/yr ammonia units.Assuming the study is positive and finance can be secured, Arcadiansees a construction period running to three years. The move, saysArcadian president Doug Campbell, would allow the company to move intothe fast-growing Latin American market for agriculture fertilisers,with Venezuela's hefty gas reserves making that country a natural placefrom which to operate.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996CRISTOBAL NEEDS HIGHER PRICEPartners in Sucre Gas SA, the joint venture backing the plannedCristobal-Colon LNG export project, will wait until late 1996 beforecommitting themselves to a go-ahead. So says Ronald Pantin, planningchief at Petroven, whose Lagoven subsidiary holds 33% of Sucre. For theproject to be economically viable, says Pantin, prices in the US willhave to be $2.50/MMBtu, while those in Europe will have to hit$3.50/MMBtu. On recent forecasts (IGR 288/18), pipeline gas from almostany source will undercut the European price suggested, US prices maywell top the $2.50/MMBtu level by end-century (IGR 285/30) but thespate of new gas being released by the price-rise-inspired explorationhike puts some doubt on higher prices lasting for long.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996ATCO NEGOTIATING SALE OF ATCOR RESOURCESCanada - Atco Ltd is negotiating sale of subsidiary Atcor Resources toan unnamed buyer. Expected to fetch up to C$150m ($110m), Atcor hasreserves of 132 Bcf of gas and 13m bbls of oil, producing 46 MMcfd and4,100 b/d respectively.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996AGAC BUYS ACIA, THE LOCAL REFUSE COLLECTION COMPANYItaly - Agac, the gas and water utility of Reggio Emilia in the PoValley, has bought for L32.1bn ($20.2m) Acia, the local refusecollection company. Both companies are consortia of the municipalityand of various - though different - local authorities nearby.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996EL PASO BUYS PREMIER GASUSA - El Paso Natural Gas has bought Premier Gas, which markets tocommercial and industrial gas users in the Mid-continent, as well asutilities in the Great Lakes.Last year's sales were 150 Bcf. Premier now becomes a unit of Eastexenergy, which has sales around 2 Bcfd.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996MCN BUYING CONSOL COAL'S COALBED-METHANE BUSINESSUSA - MCN Corp is buying the Virginia assets of Consol Coal's coalbed-methane business, including 130 wells, 80 miles of gathering line, a50% stake in a 40 mile export line and 100,000 acres of methanedevelopment land.Cost of $120m covers reserves put at 250 Bcf proved, 250 Bcf probableand potential, and 1.9m bbls of oil.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996NGC BUYS OKEENE GAS-GATHERING SYSTEMUSA - NGC has bought Oneok's OKeene gas-gathering system in Oklahoma.NGC plans to install central compression on the 180 mile system,enabling field-gathering pressures to be reduced.It can then be consolidated into the low-pressure Ringwood and Rodmansystems already owned by NGC. Costs will thus be reduced, while wellproductivity could be boosted.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996BULGARIAN GAS FINDBulgaria - State firm Commgeo says gas has been founded at Bazovets,150 km north of Sofia. Geologist Margarita Nikolova says the find wasmade at a depth of 3,857 metres, while flow is put at 200,000 cmd ofgas and 40,000 cmd of condensate.Local head of the firm, Hristo Gamzakov reckons 1-2 years' furtherdrilling will be needed before a proper reserve estimate can be made.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996DEMAND FOR CANADIAN NATURAL GASCanada -  Demand for Canadian natural gas, including exports, willrequire aggressive drilling programmes for the next 15 years, Canada'sNational Energy Board (NEB) predicts.In a supply/demand study covering 1993-2010 it says operators havefound about 3.5 Tcf/yr since 1987. But that is 1 Tcf less than thevolume needed to keep reserves from declining.It forecasts Canadian gas production will increase from a current 4.5Tcf/yr to more than 6 Tcf/yr by 2005. On the price side, it projectedprices rising to about $4/Mcf by 2010, or $2.50/Mcf after adjustmentfor inflation.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996COPHILL PLUGGING WELL IN PHILIPPINESPhilippines - Cophill Exploration Corp was plugging its Dalingding-lwell in northern central Cebu Island having found only salt water andsmall gas traces, the Philippines energy department said this week.Total well depth was 1,508 ft.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996AMMONIA PLANT AT CABO NEGROChile - A first ever ammonia plant is to be built at Cabo Negro, on theMagellan Strait, by local firm Enaex as a joint venture with state oilfirm Enap, using local gas as feed for the 400,000 tonnes/yr unit.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996FINANCING FOR SUI NORTHERN GAS PIPELINEPakistan - The Bahrain-based Faysal Islamic Bank Ltd (FIBL) is toprovide a lease financing of Rs100m ($2.9m) to Sui Northern GasPipeline Co Ltd (SNGPL). The agreement is in addition to Rs125mprovided by FIBL to SNGPL in 1994. The new loan would extend for a fouryear period.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996INDONESIAN LNG SHIPMENT TO SOUTH KOREAIndonesia/South Korea - Indonesian LNG is now moving to South Korea inthat country's first 130,000 cubic metre membrane-type vessel. HanjinPyeong Taek, built in Pusan by Hanjin Heavy Industries, looks likebeing the forerunner of a new wave of LNG carrier orders from Korea GasCorp due soon (IGR 284/21).Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996THAI LPG PROJECTThailand - Petroleum Authority of Thailand (PTT) recently awarded a$2.02m contract to Foster Wheeler International Corp of the UK toprovide engineering consultancy services for LPG and oil depotprojects.The LPG project involves a $22m investment to expand storage capacityat PTT's Khao Bor Ya terminal in Chon Buri, about 100 km east ofBangkok, by 5,000 tons.Installation of three additional LPG spheres and related loading andunloading facilities as part of the expansion of Khao Bor Ya terminalis expected complete by 1997.The expansion facilitates a significant increase of LPG throughputvolume at the terminal, resulting from a substantial rise in locally-produced LPG and the need to export surplus LPG which is expected to be453,000 tons.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996START-UP OF NORSK HYDRO'S PORSGRUNN COMPLEXNorway - Following start-up of a 0.5 tonnes/day demonstration unit lastJune at Norsk Hydro's Porsgrunn complex, UOP and Hydro are offeringlicences for their new natural gas to olefins process.The MTO process uses methanol produced from natural gas to extend thereaction to produce ethylene and propylene. In effect it is an add-onto the usual natural gas to methanol route, allowing petrochemicalfirms to vary end product according to state of the markets.Using a fluidised-bed reactor and a highly-selective molecular-sievecatalyst, the process is now reckoned to be commercially proven.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996NEW YORK TO CONVERT SOME TAXIS TO COMPRESSED NATURAL GASUSA - New York State's Energy Research and Development Authority EDCOCorp of College Point, Queens and New York City Department ofEnvironmental Protection are funding a demonstration programme toconvert about two dozen medallion taxis (yellow cabs) to use compressednatural gas (CNG).EDCO Corp manufactures the carbon-fibre CNG fuel tanks that will beinstalled in the taxis which will initially be dual-fuelled with smallreserve petrol tanks. New York City has about 12,000 medallion taxis inservice.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996INDIAN PETROCHEMICALS TO RAISE POLYETHYLENE CAPACITYIndia/UK - State firm Indian Petrochemicals Corp late last year said itsigned a technology deal with BP Chemicals of the UK to raisepolyethylene capacity at its Maharashtra Gas Cracker Complex, Nagothanefrom 160,000 tonnes (t)/yr to 220,000t/yr. The enhanced capacity wasexpected on stream by mid-1997.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996TAIWAN FACES A NEW WORRY:  SUBSIDENCETaiwan - Taiwan, already bothered by a shortage of land to develop itspetrochemical and gas industries, now faces a new worry: subsidence.National Taiwan University reckons land at the site of Formosa PlasticsGroup's projected naphtha cracker complex (IGR 282/20) is beingundermined by over-pumping of an aquifer by nearby fish farmers.A university team says land has sunk by over 30 centimetres in the lastfour years and thinks it is likely to get worse. Much of the pumping isillegal.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL GAS REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996SIAM CEMENT AND DOW CHEMICAL JOINT VENTURE TO PRODUCE LLDPEThailand - Siam Cement, one of Thailand's largest conglomerates, and US-based Dow Chemical announced a 4.75bn baht ($190m) joint venture to setup a linear low density polyethylene (LLDPE) production facility inThailand.The new plant, designed to produce 30,000 tonnes/yr (t/yr) of LLDPE,will strengthen SCC's production capacity of polyethylene and propyleneand its derivatives to 1mt/yr in 1999, said to be the largest scale inAsia.According to SCC petrochemicals vice president Apiporn Pasawat, SCC andDow have incorporated Siam Polyethylene Co with a registered capital of1.5bn baht to carry out the venture.The two parties have an equal share in the scheme, to be located in MabTa Phud Industrial Estate, Rayong. The plant, to be built ontechnologies supplied by Dow, is scheduled on stream in 1999. Dow hasalready been a partner with SCC in four other petrochemical projects.Thai Polyethylene Co, part of Siam Cement, is currently the country'ssole producer of LLDPE with an annual production of 80,000 t/yr.Back to Headline List WT02-B35-31IA086-000616-B012-286http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/ey58.html 205.156.212.5 19970122000622 text/html 19551HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 00:04:29 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:40:52 GMTContent-length: 19364Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ey58.html Sample Issue Copyright JAPAN ENERGY SCAN via NewsNet January 1, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES OIL & GAS MITI to strengthen supervision of power plants+ (168 words) Crude Oil imports fall 8.8% in Nov.++ (285 words) TEPCO to pay more than 2 bil. yen over labor dispute+ (206 words) MITI to rectify notorious LPG trading practices+ (213 words) Oil industry makes political donations to ruling parties+ (139 words) NUCLEAR POWER Miyagi Pref. takes dim view of leak at reactor+ (237 words) Antinuclear group calls for Monju reactor closure+ (189 words) Donen rapped for improper system to handle Monju leak+ (499 words) Agency publishes revised report on Monju sodium leak+ (332 words) 2nd high-level nuclear waste shipment to Japan postponed+ (229 words) CopyrightJAPAN ENERGY SCAN via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996MITI to strengthen supervision of power plants+TOKYO, Dec. 25 Kyodo     The Ministry of International Trade and Industry (MITI) willinstruct operators of electric power facilities under itsjurisdiction to establish a safety system for their operation, asenior MITI official said Monday.     MITI will urge power plant operators to step up training andinspection to prevent accidents, and ensure a system for an immediatereporting to the ministry in the case of emergency, said TomioTsutsumi, vice MITI minister, during a news conference.     Tsutsumi was apparently referring to the recent attempt by theoperator of the Monju prototype fast-breeder reactor to cover up theextent of an accident.     Monju and other atomic power plants are under the jurisdictionof the Science and Technology Agency while ordinary power reactorsare supervised by MITI.     A large amount of sodium leaked at Monju on Dec. 8, forcing theplant's shutdown.     A government organ in charge of running Monju has been underfire for deliberately editing or withholding videotape taken insidethe plant shortly after the accident.Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN ENERGY SCAN via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996Crude Oil imports fall 8.8% in Nov.++TOKYO, Dec. 25 Kyodo     Japan's imports of crude oil in November decreased 8.8% from ayear before, posting the fourth consecutive month of year-to-yeardeclines, the Ministry of International Trade and Industry (MITI)said Monday.     The decline was in reaction to a sizable year-to-year gain of14.6% registered in November last year when domestic fuel oil demandsurged due to a drought in the nation earlier in the year, MITIofficials said.     The United Arab Emirates was the biggest supplier of crude oilin November with 37.61 million barrels, down 9.5% from a year before.     The UAE was followed by Saudi Arabia with 24.34 millionbarrels, down 19.4%, Iran with 13.96 million barrels, up 5.2%, andIndonesia with 11.28 million barrels, down 23.3%, MITI said.     Of the total imports, those from the Organization of PetroleumExporting Countries accounted for 82.3%, up from 80.6% in October,while imports via the Strait of Hormuz represented 72.1%, down from72.7%.     Imports from the Middle East reached 78.9%, unchanged.     The amount of crude oil processed during the reporting monthcame to 128.32 million barrels, down 3.3%, MITI said.     Production of fuel oil in November sank 3.0% to 119.57 millionbarrels, the first decline in three months, MITI said.     Output of naphtha, jet fuel oil and heavy oil decreased but thatof gas oil and gasoline hit record highs.     Domestic sales of fuel oil came to 130.89 million barrels, up3.6%.     Sales of fuel oil B and fuel oil C slid but others increased,with gasoline, naphtha, gas oil and jet fuel oil reaching recordhighs for any November.     Imports of fuel oil surged 39.2% to 19.00 million barrels butexports sank 10.8% to 9.62 million barrels, MITI said.Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN ENERGY SCAN via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996TEPCO to pay more than 2 bil. yen over labor dispute+TOKYO, Dec. 25 Kyodo     Tokyo Electric Power Co. (TEPCO) signed an agreement Monday topay more than 2 billion yen in compensation to 165 employees fordiscriminating against them on grounds that they are communists.     The agreement, reached out of court under a proposal by theTokyo High Court after a 19-year legal battle, also calls forpromotion and fair treatment for those still on the payroll.     ''This has been a very long legal battle that lasted 19 yearsand two months and we all are happy now.  I'm confident that thiswill help promote liberty and democracy for the basic rights ofworkers,'' said Hideo Nihei, who led the plaintiffs.     ''We decided to reach an out-of-court settlement in view of thecircumstances surrounding the case such as the court proposal and thelong duration of the trial,'' a TEPCO spokesman said.     The plaintiffs first took their case to court in 1976, demandingthe company pay a total of some 3.7 billion yen in damages fordiscriminating against them in wages and promotion due their beliefsas members of the Japanese Communist Party.     TEPCO had justified the wage differentials, saying theyreflected the employees' job performances.     The high court recommended an out-of-court settlement lastDecember.Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN ENERGY SCAN via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996MITI to rectify notorious LPG trading practices+TOKYO, Dec. 25 Kyodo     The Ministry of International Trade and Industry will try torectify practices related to the trading of liquefied petroleum gas(LPG), ministry officials said Monday.     To answer consumer criticism that the LPG price system isunclear, the ministry is considering revising the Law Concerning theSecuring of Safety and the Optimization of Transactions of LiquefiedPetroleum Gas.     When the ministry reviews the law, it plans to include penaltiesto prevent inappropriate trading practices from having adverseeffects on consumers.     The move will be made because a subcommittee of the PetroleumCouncil, an advisory body to the international trade and industryminister, called for rectification of LPG transactions in its interimreport issued Monday.     The report proposed that how LPG prices are calculated should bewritten on paper, which traders will issue when they sign contracts.The ownership of pipes and equipment in houses will also be madeclear, the report also said.     The ministry will issue a ministerial ordinance to force tradersto make clear on paper such things as prices and ownership of pipesand equipment.     To punish traders who do not issue such papers, the ministrywill revise the law.  A bill designed to revise the law will bepresented before the next ordinary Diet session.Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN ENERGY SCAN via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996Oil industry makes political donations to ruling parties+TOKYO, Dec. 29 Kyodo     The Petroleum Association of Japan disclosed Friday it has madepolitical donations to two conservative parties in the rulingcoalition in response to their requests.     The association of oil producers and distributors said 60million yen went to the Liberal Democratic Party, the main force inthe tripartite ruling coalition, and 3.5 million yen to New PartySakigake, the coalition's smallest party.     Last year, the association donated 50 million yen to the LDP.It increased its donation in order to strengthen its ties with theparty in response to a request by the powerful Federation of EconomicOrganizations (Keidanren), association officials said.     Keidanren asked member organizations and corporations tocontribute funds to help the LDP repay 10 billion yen borrowed fromcommercial banks to finance its campaign for the general election inJuly 1993.Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN ENERGY SCAN via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996Miyagi Pref. takes dim view of leak at reactor+SENDAI, Japan, Dec. 25 Kyodo     Miyagi prefectural authorities said Monday they take a''serious view'' of a leak of water at a reactor operated by TohokuElectric Power Co. in the prefecture in northern Japan despite thecompany's assurance that it involved only a minute release ofradioactivity.     The leak occurred near a hygroscopic moisture heat separator onthe plant's No. 2 reactor at Onagawa, a light-water, boiling watertype with an 825,000-kilowatt power output.     Operators began shutting down the reactor manually on Sundaynight after the leak was discovered and completed the process bymidday Monday, after which they began investigating the cause of theleak.     Yutaka Suto, head of the company's nuclear power division, tolda press conference that radioactivity in the coolant water amountedto ''a mere trace.''     Prefectural officials counter by saying they view the case as''an extremely serious mishap'' since the reactor had only recentlybegun operations in July.     An investigation by prefectural and company officials indicatesthat the site of the problem was a device that adjusts the high watermark on a drain tank on a second stage heater forming part of ahygroscopic moisture heat separator installed to more effectivelyremove steam generated in the reactor.     At 6:15 p.m. Sunday, operators found water leaked from theheater between the high- and low-pressure turbines.     When the most recent inspection was carried out Dec. 10, noabnormality was found.Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN ENERGY SCAN via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996Antinuclear group calls for Monju reactor closure+TOKYO, Dec. 25 Kyodo     A citizens' group opposed to the development of nuclear powerplants petitioned the head of the Science and Technology Agency onMonday, demanding the fast-breeder nuclear reactor Monju be closedimmediately.     The Citizens' Nuclear Information Center, in a letter to agencychief Yasuoki Urano, also demanded that the agency reconsider itsplans to use plutonium in nuclear reactors in Japan's energydevelopment plans.     Jinzaburo Takagi, executive director of the center, said theagency should have known that the government-funded Power Reactor andNuclear Fuel Development Corp. (Donen), which operates the prototypereactor, was concealing the accident.     ''If (the agency) did not know, it has lost its power as amanager,'' said Takagi.     On Dec. 8, liquid sodium from the reactor's secondary coolingsystem leaked and forced a shutdown of the reactor in Tsuruga, FukuiPrefecture along the Sea of Japan coast.     The group is also demanding that information concerninginvestigations into the accident be made available to the public.     ''The agency has not answered criticism from the outside, andhas given birth to a situation in which it is essentially protectingDonen,'' said Takagi.Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN ENERGY SCAN via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996Donen rapped for improper system to handle Monju leak+FUKUI, Japan, Dec. 25 Kyodo     The Fukui prefectural government, host to the prototypefast-breeder reactor Monju that was shut down after a huge sodiumleak, criticized the reactor's operator Monday for lacking thenecessary system to deal with such accidents.     The prefectural government made the criticism against thegovernment-funded Power Reactor and Nuclear Fuel Development Corp.(Donen) in a report on the Dec. 8 accident at the plant located inTsuruga, Fukui Prefecture, on the Sea of Japan coast.     In the report, the local government said that the management ofsodium coolant is basic to operating a fast-breeder reactor, but withthe present system and equipment at the Monju reactor, Donen isunable to act promptly after a sodium leak.     The prefectural government also rapped Donen for its delay ininforming the public of the accident.     Donen reshuffled three senior officials who withheld videotapestaken at the site of the accident.  The three officials withheld thevideotapes in an attempt to cover up the extent of the leak.     A panel of the three-party ruling coalition discussing the Monjuaccident agreed Monday to send a fact-finding mission to the reactorsite in Tsuruga early next year, coalition officials said.     The coalition panel also agreed to reconsider, if necessary,government policy promoting nuclear fuel recycling, in whichplutonium is removed from spent nuclear fuel to be reprocessed foruse as nuclear fuel again, they said.     It is one of Japan's major energy policies, and the governmentaims to put the system into practical use in the first half of the21st century.     Meanwhile, Donen officials said the corporation is consideringdiverting more than half the plutonium shipped from France threeyears ago for use at the Monju reactor to other reactors.     The officials said Donen is considering the move due to theindefinite delay of operations at Monju following the sodium leak.     Donen decided to shift the plutonium because Monju requireshigh-grade plutonium and current stocks could degrade if stored foran long period, the officials said.     Japan shipped 1 ton of plutonium from a reprocessing plant inFrance amid protests from countries along the shipping route.     At the time, Donen and the Science and Technology Agency saidthe shipment was a vital replacement fuel for Monju.     But because of delays at a factory in Japan making plutonium forMonju, the processing of the imported plutonium did not begin untilDecember 1994.     Some 600 kilograms, or more than half the transported amount, isstill unprocessed and in storage at the village of Tokai in IbarakiPrefecture, northeast of Tokyo.     A Donen official said the fuel could be used at an experimentalfast reactor known as Joyo at Oarai in Ibaraki Prefecture and at aprototype heavy-water reactor known as Fugen in Tsuruga.     The diversion of the fuel would not involve major problems inregard to nuclear fuel treaties with France and the United States,but Japan would have to explain its actions to gain internationalunderstanding, the Donen officials said.Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN ENERGY SCAN via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996Agency publishes revised report on Monju sodium leak+TSURUGA, Japan, Dec. 26 Kyodo     The Science and Technology Agency on Tuesday published arevised report on a coolant leak at the prototype fast-breedernuclear reactor Monju after the first report submitted by itsoperator turned out to have been falsified.     The revised report was submitted to the agency Monday by theoperator, the governmental Power Reactor and Nuclear Fuel DevelopmentCorp. (Donen).  It contains corrections on the first report submittedlast week.     The revised report says the time at which the first inspectionat the accident site was made was 2 a.m. Dec. 9, instead of 10 a.m.on the day as reported previously.     The new report also includes detailed chronological records oncontacts between Donen and the local and central governments sinceimmediately after the accident in Tsuruga, Fukui Prefecture, on theSea of Japan coast.     Meanwhile, Donen on Tuesday dismissed another senior official incharge of the controversial nuclear plant over the cover-up attemptto conceal the extent of the sodium leak that forced the shutdown ofthe plant Dec. 8.     Donen, which has been accused of editing and withholding videostaken inside the plant shortly after the accident, said TadaoTakahashi, a director in charge of Monju operations, will be replacedby Atsuhiko Kishida.     The corporation dismissed three officials last weekend over theissue -- Yasuhito Omori, who headed construction works at the Monjuplant, his deputy Isao Sato and Futoshi Maeda, a section chief.     At the Monju plant, a specially established working group of thegovernment's Nuclear Safety Commission launched a probe into theaccident Tuesday.     The group has been set up to clarify the causes of the accidentand recommend steps for the prevention of a recurrence.     The group will conduct a separate investigation, independent ofthe Science and Technology Agency's inspection team.     Meanwhile, the Tsuruga municipal assembly handed agency chiefYasuoki Urano a statement saying that the city will not allow thereactor to be restarted until after it is convinced of its safety.Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN ENERGY SCAN via NewsNetJanuary 1, 19962nd high-level nuclear waste shipment to Japan postponed+AOMORI, Japan, Dec. 26 Kyodo     The planned second shipment of high-level nuclear waste fromFrance to Japan's nuclear recycling plant in the village of Rokkashoin northern Japan has been delayed, electric companies and JapanNuclear Fuel Ltd. said Tuesday.     France's state-owned nuclear fuel company COGEMA, whichreprocesses Japan's spent nuclear fuel, has not yet drawn up a planfor the transportation, Japan Nuclear Fuel officials said.     In April, the British ship Pacific Pintail, owned by BritishNuclear Fuels Ltd., carried the first shipment of high-levelradioactive waste in 28 vitrified blocks from France, where it wascreated as a byproduct of reprocessing spent nuclear fuel on behalfof Japanese electric power companies.     The shipment of the waste is the first of several that Japan hasplanned over the next decade, in which over 3,000 vitrified blocks ofwaste will be shipped to Japan after spent nuclear fuel isreprocessed by COGEMA and British Nuclear Fuels.     Another 96 vitrified blocks were to be brought to the Rokkashoplant in Aomori Prefecture in the second half of fiscal 1995, throughthe end of March 1996.     The waste would then be buried deep underground, but a finalstorage site has not yet been decided.     The April shipment drew strong protests from the countriesalong the shipment route as well as from environment protectionorganizations and local residents in Aomori Prefecture.Back to Headline List WT02-B35-32IA086-000616-B012-356http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/ey10.html 205.156.212.5 19970122000703 text/html 121492HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 00:04:44 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:41:00 GMTContent-length: 121304Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ey10.html Sample Issue Copyright MINE REGULATION REPORTER via NewsNet JUNE 18, 1993 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES IN FACE OF MSHA CIVIL PENALTIES, FINES J&T COAL CO. FILES FOR CHAPTER 7 (241 words) PAYMENTS REQUIRED UNDER NEW FUNDS LAW ARE 'TAXES,' HAVE BANKRUPTCY PRIORITY (469 words) PARTNERSHIP MAY STILL BE LIABLE FOR INCOAL'S WITHDRAWAL LIABILITY (493 words) FOURTH CIRCUIT DENIES BENEFITS TO WIDOWS IN TWO SEPARATE CASES (607 words) PYRO FOREMEN HIT WITH $2,000 FINES; MUST PAY FOR PROBATION SUPERVISION (457 words) SCHOOLS IN W.VA. BENEFIT FROM SENTENCE (159 words) JUDGE THROWS CONTRACTOR INTO JAIL (119 words) COAL VENDOR PLEADS TO RACKETEERING (213 words) ALJ IMPROPERLY AWARDED BACKPAY TO MINER ON REMAND, FMSHRC RULES (306 words) SIXTH CIRCUIT UPHOLDS ALJ DECISION (172 words) MAY ACCIDENTS CLAIM SEVEN LIVES; 36 HAVE DIED SINCE JANUARY (558 words) BLAST DEBRIS KILLS CAR PASSENGER (140 words) MSHA EXTENDS FINAL RULE STAYS (267 words) MSHA DIST. 6 INSPECTORS ACCUSED OF HARASSING COAL MINE OPERATORS (379 words) EASTERN FILES NLRB CHARGES AGAINST UMW; COURT GRANTS PEABODY RESTRAINING ORDER (420 words) PEABODY, CONSOL HIT IN LATEST ROUND OF UMW SELECTIVE STRIKES (237 words) PEABODY BACKS OFF FIRING 163 UMW MINERS, INSTEAD ISSUES FOUR DAY SUSPENSION (298 words) DECERTIFICATION ELECTION UP IN AIR FOR BUCK CREEK COAL CO. MINERS (236 words) VOTE SCHEDULED AT ZEIGLER SUBSIDIARY ON HEELS OF SUCCESSFUL MARROWBONE VOTE (327 words) BCOA FILES SUIT TO STOP AMAX WITHDRAWAL; AMAX SAYS IT WILL BARGAIN WITH CYPRUS (371 words) Variances (2167 words) IRREBUTABLE PRESUMPTION PROVISION OF KY. LAW CONSTRUED BY STATE COURT (293 words) ALABAMA COURT UPHOLDS BENEFITS AWARD TO MINER WHO EARNED MORE AFTER INJURY (178 words) Review Commission Decisions (31 words) Judges' Decisions (1178 words) Judges' Decisions Ordered Reviewed (238 words) BONDS FROM TENNESSEE INTERIM PROGRAM MUST BE FORFEITED TO OSM (364 words) ANDALEX TRUCK ROUTE TOO DANGEROUS BECAUSE OF SCHOOL, RESIDENTS SAY (275 words) CALIFORNIA DESERT MUST BE PROTECTED FROM MINING, EXPLOITATION, SAYS BABBITT (512 words) STATEMENTS AVAILABLE ON TWO PROJECTS (184 words) COURT CONSIDERS AMAX PERMIT (152 words) OSM, MONTANA HOLD ENFORCEMENT MEETING; MERIDIAN SUSPENDS WORK UNTIL SEPTEMBER (239 words) EPA PROPOSES OFF-ROAD EQUIPMENT RULE FOR ENGINES BIGGER THAN 50 HORSEPOWER (599 words) ASARCO NAMED PRP AT TRIUMPH (149 words) GOVERNMENT CLOSES 13,886 ACRES OPENS ONLY 130 ACRES (502 words) Discovery (516 words) Jurisdication (220 words) Placer Mining (260 words) Reclamation (259 words) UNUSED FORFEITED BOND COULD BE RETURNED IF SITE IS MINED BY ANOTHER OPERATOR (203 words) CIVIL PENALTY MODIFICATION APPROVED (189 words) AMENDMENTS FACE COURT CHALLENGE (135 words) BONDING LANGUAGE PROPOSED (135 words) MSHA HEALTH AND SAFETY COURSES AVAILABLE UPON REQUEST (874 words) Meetings (634 words) CopyrightMINE REGULATION REPORTER via NewsNetJUNE 18, 1993IN FACE OF MSHA CIVIL PENALTIES, FINESJ&T COAL CO. FILES FOR CHAPTER 7     A Lee County, Va. coal company faced with morethan $320,000 in civil penalties, and even more inpotential criminal fines from a fatal roof fall, hasfiled a Chapter 7 bankruptcy petition in federal court.     J&T Coal cited a lack of assets for its filing.J&T's deep mine in St. Charles, Va. was the site of amassive roof fall that left four workers dead (MRR3/1/91, p. 85).     Earlier this spring J&T was convicted in U.S.District Court on six criminal counts in connectionwith the fatal accident (MRR 3/26). That rulingcould increase the cost to the company anywherefrom $600,000 to $3 million in additional fines.     The bankruptcy filing could complicategovernment efforts to collect the fines.     Also U.S. District Judge Samuel Wilson hasrefused to back off an 18-month prison sentence formine superintendent Garry Williams. Williams'lawyers had asked to delay formal entry of judgmentfor 30 days, so they could file a motion forreconsideration of the sentence.     Defense lawyers had earlier agreed to a lightersentence endorsed by federal prosecutors, but thefederal judge is not bound to adhere by such pleaagreements.     Wilson had issued the tougher sentence afterreading an MSHA letter regarding unpaid safetyfines from operations Williams had run in the past.Williams' lawyers still have until June 19 to appealthe sentence, officials said.     Wilson stood by his sentence during courtproceedings June 9.Back to Headline List CopyrightMINE REGULATION REPORTER via NewsNetJUNE 18, 1993PAYMENTS REQUIRED UNDER NEW FUNDS LAW ARE 'TAXES,'HAVE BANKRUPTCY PRIORITY     The recently enacted Coal Industry Retiree HealthBenefit Act, which imposes costs on coal miningcompanies in order to stabilize the UMW retireehealth funds, applies to a company in Chapter 11reorganization proceedings.     The U.S District Court for the Southern Districtof New York rejected LTV Steel Co.'s argument thatthe new funds law does not apply to it. The courtalso held that required contributions are "taxes"entitled to first priority under the Bankruptcy Code,and the obligations imposed by the new law shouldbe given first priority in LTV's bankruptcyproceeding (MRR Document No. 0529).     LTV Steel was a signatory to several industry-wide wage agreements, which were the product ofmulti-employer bargaining by the Bituminous CoalOperators Assn. with the UMW. LTV filed forChapter 11 bankruptcy protection in 1986 and soughtto terminate health benefits to retirees.     In 1991, LTV won a court battle when a federalappeals court held it was not required to provideretiree benefits after January 1988 when the 1984wage agreement expired. However, the new fundslaw enacted in late 1992 makes all companies thatonce signed any wage agreement with the UMWliable for perpetually funding the retiree health caresystem on a per-head basis. Under the new law,contributions are paid to the UMW Combined Fundwhich in turn provides benefits to retirees.     LTV is now preparing to emerge from Chapter 11and has scheduled a confirmation hearing on a planthat does not provide for payments under the newfunds law, which LTV claims will be at least $12million annually.     LTV argued that any claim the Combined Fundhas against it is a "pre-petition claim" and barredbecause it was not filed on time. However, the courtruled the Combined Fund did not have a "claim"before LTV's bankruptcy petition was filed becauseany claim "simply did not exist" until the funds lawwas enacted in 1992.     The court also agreed with the Combined Fundthat contributions required by the new law are"taxes" imposed by the federal government and,therefore, are administrative expenses entitled to firstpriority under the Bankruptcy Code. "Coal Actobligations are appropriately described as 'taxes' dueto their overwhelmingly involuntary nature, theirexplicitly stated public purpose and their obviouspotential to be imposed pursuant to the taxingpower," the court said.     The court added that LTV's charges under thenew law are a "direct consequence of its continuedcorporate existence," noting the law only imposesobligations on signatories which are still "inbusiness," and are therefore best classified as"administrative expenses."     LTV and other companies have also attacked thenew funds law on constitutional grounds (MRR 2/12,p. 56; 4/9, p. 167).     LTV Steel Co. v. Shalala, DC SDNY, No. 93 Civ.0554, 5/7/93.Back to Headline List CopyrightMINE REGULATION REPORTER via NewsNetJUNE 18, 1993PARTNERSHIP MAY STILL BE LIABLE FORINCOAL'S WITHDRAWAL LIABILITY     A partnership under "common control" withIncoal Inc. may still be liable for Incoal's $810,610withdrawal liability to UMW pension plans after arecent federal appeals court decision.     The U.S. Court of Appeals for the District ofColumbia Circuit ruled the lower court erred inletting Double A Farms off the hook based on itsfinding that there was no economic connectionbetween the two entities.     The D.C. Circuit stressed it is not necessary tofind an economic connection in order to establishthat an enterprise is a "trade or business" undercommon control with an employer and liable for itsunpaid withdrawal liability (MRR Document No. 0525).     The court refused to decide the merits of the issueand sent the case back to the U.S. District Court forthe District of Columbia to rethink its finding thatDouble A Farms was not a "trade or business."     However, the D.C. Circuit said it was inclined toside with the trustees of the UMW pension planswho sued Double A Farms to collect Incoal's unpaidwithdrawal liability.Incoal conceded liability     Incoal, owned by the Adkins family, went out ofbusiness in 1985 and conceded withdrawal liabilityto the pension plans under the EmploymentRetirement Income Security Act. The Adkins familyestablished Double A Farms in 1979 after acquiringseveral hundred acres of land in Kentucky, and thefamily claimed it bought the land for recreational andinvestment purposes.     Under ERISA, when an employer incurswithdrawal liability, a "trade or business" under"common control" is also responsible for paying thewithdrawal liability to the pension plans. The districtcourt ruled that Double A Farms was not a "trade orbusiness" under ERISA because there was noeconomic connection with Incoal (MRR 2/14/92, p.62).     Reversing the lower court on this issue, the D.C.Circuit said any inquiry into an economic connectionbetween the two enterprises is "irrelevant" indetermining whether Double A Farms is a "trade orbusiness" under ERISA.     The appeals court sent the case back to the districtcourt to "find the facts" on this issue. However, theappeals court set forth several guidelines and pointedto a 1987 U.S. Supreme Court decision interpreting asimilar "trade or business" provision of the InternalRevenue Code.     The Supreme Court said the "primary purpose forengaging in the activity must be for income or profit"and that there must be "continuity and regularity" ofinvolvement.     The D.C. Circuit said these factors appear to befulfilled in this case, noting Double A Farmsreported tobacco and cattle sales for at least sevenconsecutive years.     The court added it is not dispositive that the landis used partly for recreational purposes and warnedthe lower court not to base its findings on thefamily's "self-serving" statement that they did notintend to start a trade or business.     Connors v. Incoal Inc., CA DC, No. 92-7023,6/4/93.Back to Headline List CopyrightMINE REGULATION REPORTER via NewsNetJUNE 18, 1993FOURTH CIRCUIT DENIES BENEFITS TOWIDOWS IN TWO SEPARATE CASES     In two separate cases, the 4th U.S. Court ofAppeals denied benefits to widows seekingsurvivors' benefits under the Black Lung BenefitsAct.     In a decision issued June 2, the court found thatsubstantial evidence supported an ALJ's decision thatBramble Grizzle died from lung cancer and thatpneumoconiosis was not a substantially contributingcause or factor leading to his death.     Grizzle worked in coal mines for 35 years beforehis retirement and subsequent death in 1983. TheALJ found that Grizzle had pneumoconiosis to somedegree at the time of his death, that he also sufferedfrom severe emphysema and heart disease, and thatthe direct cause of his death was a pulmonaryhemorrhage caused by lung cancer.     Grizzle's widow presented the testimony of theminer's personal physician that black lung diseaseweakened his heart and lowered his resistance so thathe could not withstand bleeding caused by hiscancer. Grizzle's physician added thatpneumoconiosis caused the miner's emphysema andheart problems and may also have caused his lungcancer.     However, the ALJ relied on the reports of twoother physicians who stated that the miner wastotally disabled by emphysema caused by cigarettesmoking; that his lung cancer was also caused bysmoking, not by his black lung disease, and that hehad only a mild case of pneumoconiosis.     The ALJ found that Grizzle's pneumoconiosiswas not a substantially contributing or acomplicating factor in his death under 20 CFR718.205(c)(2) and he denied his widow's claim.Widow urged use of 'true doubt rule'     Appealing to the 4th Circuit, Grizzle's widowargued that her physician's diagnoses raised at leastsome doubt that black lung disease substantiallycontributed to her husband's death and that she wasentitled to the benefit of the "true doubt rule."     However, the court, while affirming the use of the"true doubt rule" in limited situations, refused toapply it to the widow's claim, noting the ALJ clearlyfound the opinions of the employer's doctors farmore persuasive than the contrary view of Grizzle'sphysician.     The court also rejected her argument that atreating physician's opinion is entitled to greaterweight than the reports of non-treating doctors.     One judge dissented, stating the case should beremanded in light of the recent 4th Circuit decisionin Shuff v. Cedar Coal Co., in which the court heldthat pneumoconiosis is a "substantially contributingcause" of death if it hastened the miner's death in anyway (MRR 7/17/92, p. 337).     In an unrelated decision issued May 26, the 4thCircuit ruled that Eula B. Lester failed to show herhusband had suffered from complicatedpneumoconiosis. Under Sect. 921(c)(3) such ashowing entitles a claimant to an irrebuttablepresumption that pneumoconiosis caused death ordisability (MRR Document No. 0521).     The widow relied on a conforming chest X-rayreading, but the court noted that all the other medicalevidence, including biopsy and autopsy results,showed that, at most, her husband suffered fromsimple pneumoconiosis.     Grizzle v. Pickands Mather & Co., CA 4, No. 91-1078, 6/2/93.     Lester v. Director, OWCP, CA 4, No. 92-1329,5/26/93.     Attorneys for Grizzle: Vernon Mandel Williamsand Bobby Belcher, Wolfe & Farmer, Norton Va.     Attorneys for Pickands Mather: Mark ElliottSolomons and Laura Metcoff Klaus, Arter &Hadden, Washington, D.C.     Attorneys for Labor Dept. in Grizzle case:Christian Barber and Jeffrey Goldberg, U.S. LaborDept., Washington, D.C.     Attorney for Lester: Thomas Johnson, Johnson,Schaaf, Jones & Snelling, Chicago, Ill.     Attorneys for Labor Dept. in Lester case: MartaKusic and C. William Mangum, U.S. Labor Dept.,Washington, D.C.Back to Headline List CopyrightMINE REGULATION REPORTER via NewsNetJUNE 18, 1993PYRO FOREMEN HIT WITH $2,000 FINES;MUST PAY FOR PROBATION SUPERVISION     Four Pyro foremen received $2,000 fines andthree must pay for their supervision costs for theirrole in conditions leading to the methane explosionthat killed 10 miners in September 1989.     Despite the differing number of counts againsteach man, they each paid the same $2,000 fine, andthree paid supervision costs of $1,383. All four alsopaid a special assessment.     An information filed March 10 against three ofthe foremen charged them with violating 30 CFR75.324 and 75.1802 for knowingly and willfullystating in the preshift, onshift and daily report bookthat no hazardous conditions had been observed byor reported to them, when in fact methane was inexcess of 2% and had caused equipment todeenergize.     Chris Johnson, 33, of Nebo, Ky., was sentencedon June 1 to one year of probation and a specialassessment of $125.     The information on Johnson said that on fiveoccasions, March 31, 1989, April 1, 1989, May 11,1989, June 22, 1989 and Sept. 11, 1989, methanewas reported to and observed by Johnson, inconcentrations at or above 2% in the workingsection, and that mining equipment had been de-energized from the methane.     Perry Ray, 36, from Clay, Ky., was alsosentenced June 1 and must pay the fine, supervisioncosts and a $25 special assessment for not reportingmethane problems. He was a foreman on acontinuous mining unit when methane had beenabove 2% and equipment had de-energized on May12, 1989.     Eddie Frank Barber, 36, of Earlington, Ky., wasfined and put on probation for one year for notreporting methane conditions on July 14 and July 22,1989. Barber had to pay a special assessment of $50.     These three foremen had to pay $1,383.60 for thecosts of their supervision.     The fourth foreman, Gary Johnson, 39, ofMortons Gap, Ky., was sentenced to four months ofhome confinement as part of a one-year probationterm. He had to pay a special assessment of $150.     Gary Johnson was charged in a six-countinformation with violating:     -- 30 CFR 75.324, for failing to report high        concentrations of methane.     -- 75.1315(a), for firing shots outside the confines        of a borehole.     -- 75.1313(b), for ordering the improper storage        of explosives.     -- 75.1310(c), for firing explosives with an        impermissible blasting unit.     -- 75.316, for ordering the operation of two        longwall shearers at the same time in violation of the        methane and dust control plan.     -- 75.1101-23(c), for failing to conduct mandatory        fire drills and reporting in the "Fire Drill Record        Book" that fire drills had been conducted.     Johnson was sentenced in accordance with a pleaagreement, in which he agreed to cooperate in thecontinuing investigation and related prosecutionsstemming from the explosion.Back to Headline List CopyrightMINE REGULATION REPORTER via NewsNetJUNE 18, 1993SCHOOLS IN W.VA. BENEFIT FROM SENTENCE     A mine operator will pay a $50,000 criminal fineand provide computers to Mingo County, W.Va.,schools as part of the sentence stemming from ablasting accident that injured one miner in 1989.     The company, Meador Energy, pleaded guilty tofour counts of violating the Mine Act at its No. 1mine near Newton, W.Va. The company had beencharged with five counts in a criminal informationfiled Feb. 3 (MRR 2/12, p. 59).     The Sept. 8, 1989, blasting accident injured oneminer whose arm was broken in four places. Thecompany pleaded guilty to using faulty pillarrecovery methods; firing unconfined explosives;placing primed explosives without deenergizingnearby electrical equipment; and allowing anunqualified miner to fire shots.     The company also gets four years' probation. Aspart of the probation, the company volunteered toprovide 25 personal computers to five Mingo Countyschools, along with installation and training.     The company had faced a $1 million fine.Back to Headline List CopyrightMINE REGULATION REPORTER via NewsNetJUNE 18, 1993JUDGE THROWS CONTRACTOR INTO JAIL     Saying coal dust sampling fraud must stop, afederal judge in Beckley, W.Va., sentenced acontractor to one year in jail and three years'probation.     West Virginia contractor Glen Morgan, whooperated under the name Kanawha ValleyEnterprises and later General Safety Services hadpleaded guilty in March to submitting false dustsamples to MSHA on behalf of operators as recentlyas June 1991 (MRR 4/9, p. 168). Morgan alsoadmitted to providing false certification for requiredminer training.     U.S. District Judge Elizabeth Hallanan also finedMorgan $5,000. Following his prison term, he cannotengage in training miners or coal mine dust samplingfor three years.     Morgan had faced a $250,000 fine and five yearsin prison.Back to Headline List CopyrightMINE REGULATION REPORTER via NewsNetJUNE 18, 1993COAL VENDOR PLEADS TO RACKETEERING     Sentencing is scheduled Aug. 31 for abusinessman who has pleaded guilty in connectionwith a racketeering scheme which bilked coalcompanies of more than $900,000.     Robert S. Painter, owner/operator of Bluefield,W.Va.-based Abbs Valley Electric, entered the plearecently before U.S. District Judge Samuel Wilson inAbingdon, Va.     Painter, along with other defendants, are said tohave defrauded several companies of more than$900,000 over a five year period. Companies burnedin the scheme included Peabody Coal, EasternAssociated Coal, Island Creek, CONSOL, CanadaCoal and Pittston subsidiary Sea B Mining.     "The investigation revealed that Painter providedcash kickbacks, prostitutes, and other items to coalcompany employees to induce them to direct theiremployers' business to Abbs Valley Electric,"according to a government statement.     False billings generated proceeds which were thenused by Painter to pay cash to the coal companyemployees. Painter also pleaded guilty to conspiracyto defraud the government of income taxes, andillegal dumping of hazardous wastes.     Also pleading guilty on conspiracy or income taxcharges were Painters' daughter and son-in-law,Sherri and David Bailey; Abbs Valley salesmanGerald Tabor; ex-Island Creek purchasing agentHoward Cook; and Painter's brothers-in-law RichardWeiner and Albert Harless. Nine defendants wereoriginally indicted.Back to Headline List CopyrightMINE REGULATION REPORTER via NewsNetJUNE 18, 1993ALJ IMPROPERLY AWARDED BACKPAY TOMINER ON REMAND, FMSHRC RULES     An ALJ erred in awarding backpay to a minerwhen he reconsidered his decision on remand fromthe commission, FMSHRC ruled.     The miner, Ronny Boswell, won hisdiscrimination complaint filed against NationalCement Co., but ALJ Roy Maurer, in his initialdecision in February 1991, found the miner was notentitled to backpay. Maurer found that the operatorhad illegally disqualified Boswell from his job as autility laborer and reassigned him to a position as apayloader operator based on a series of protectedwork refusals.     The operator appealed the case to the commissionand the panel sent it back to Maurer, asking him toreconsider whether a particular incident involvedprotected activity (MRR 3/13/92, p. 110).     On remand, Maurer again sustained Boswell'scomplaint, but this time he decided the miner wasentitled to a $6,094 award of backpay and interest, inaddition to his prior award of reinstatement (MRR4/24/92, p. 188).     The commission agreed with National Cementthat Maurer lacked jurisdiction to reexamine theissue of Boswell's damages. The miner neverappealed the ALJ's initial ruling that he was notentitled to backpay and that ruling became a finalcommission decision, FMSHRC said.     The panel also noted that it directed Maurer toanswer two questions on remand relating to themerits of Boswell's discrimination complaint andnever ordered him to reopen the issue of damages.FMSHRC vacated his supplemental damages awardand refused to review his other rulings in favor of theminer.     Boswell v. National Cement Co., FMSHRCDocket No. SE 90-112-DM, 6/7/93.     Representative for Boswell: Larry Myers, UnitedPaperworkers International Union, Dist. Council No.5, 229 Roebuck Plaza Dr., Suite 203, Birmingham,Ala.     Attorney for National Cement: Thomas Campbell,Lange, Simpson, Robinson & Somerville, 1700 FirstAlabama Bank Bldg., 417 20th St., N., Birmingham,Ala 35203.Back to Headline List CopyrightMINE REGULATION REPORTER via NewsNetJUNE 18, 1993SIXTH CIRCUIT UPHOLDS ALJ DECISION     A federal appeals court affirmed an ALJ decisionthat a miner was illegally discharged for makingsafety complaints.     In a brief, unpublished decision, the 6th U.S.Circuit Court of Appeals rejected Kem Coal Co.'sclaim that it discharged Charles T. Smith forswearing at his supervisor (MRR Document No. 0528).     The court said that ALJ William Fauver"correctly pointed out that [the supervisor] provokedSmith's outburst by flatly denying that he had everordered Smith to work under falling coal."     The court also found that "Smith's complaintabout the hazards of the falling coal, [hissupervisor's] denial of his order to work under it andSmith's reaction" by swearing "are inseparable."     The 6th Circuit added that the company'saffirmative defense fails because the miner'sswearing "cannot reasonably be isolated as anindependent motive for the discharge."     The commission had denied Kem Coal's petitionfor review of Fauver's decision and the companyappealed the decision to the 6th Circuit.     Kem Coal Co. v. FMSHRC, CA 6, No. 92-3734,5/24/93.Back to Headline List CopyrightMINE REGULATION REPORTER via NewsNetJUNE 18, 1993MAY ACCIDENTS CLAIM SEVEN LIVES;36 HAVE DIED SINCE JANUARY     Seven miners lost their lives in May miningaccidents, with two deaths in underground mines andfive deaths at surface operations.     Year-to-date reports show 36 fatalities sinceJanuary, with 15 miners dying in metal/nonmetalaccidents and 21 dying in coal accidents. Twenty-one of the YTD deaths occurred at surface operationsand 15 at underground operations.     Two miners were killed in machinery accidents inMay.     David Workman was killed May 10 at theMurphy No. 1 Preparation Plant of Min, Inc. inWharncliffe, W.Va. He had only one month ofexperience.     Workman, who was a general laborer for FieldingHydroseeding, was washing a Bowie hydroseederwhen he fell into the augers through an opening ontop of the tank. An access cover on top of the tankhad been removed.     Roger D. Smith, Jr., a repairman for LimousineCoal, Inc., was killed May 13 at the No. 3underground mine in Dayhoit, Ky. He had threeyears' experience and had been with the company forone year.     Smith was performing maintenance work with abolting machine and was positioned across a drillboom. When his filter SCSR and lamp belt becameentangled in the controls, the boom raised and pinnedhim to the roof, crushing him in the chest area. Hedied less than two hours later.     Three miners died in power haulage accidents inMay.     Bruce E. Schoolcraft was killed May 12. He had14 years' mining experience.     Schoolcraft was an underground mine foremanfor Cross Mountain Coal, Inc.'s No. 6 mine in LakeCity, Tenn. He was operating a six-ton batterylocomotive when he became caught between themine roof and the frame of the locomotive. He diedinstantly from head injuries.     Bret Hatfield was killed May 3. He was anapprentice mechanic/welder for Stewart-Nuss, Inc.'sBlackstone Pit and Mill in Fresno, Ca.     Hatfield was driving a welding truck when hecollided with a haul truck traveling in the oppositedirection on a pit haul road. Hatfield's truck burstinto flames on impact, and he died instantly. He hadover three years' mining experience.     Glen Baese died on May 10 when he was crushedby a screw conveyor. He was a plant foreman forCarl Schlegel, Inc.'s Clinton County Pit mine in St.Johns, Mich. He had three years' mining experience.     Baese and two other employees wereinvestigating why a sand stacking conveyor hadstopped. While a dewatering screw was still running,the buildup of sand at the top end of the screw tankscaused the support structure of the unit to collapse.The two employees assisting Baese jumped to safetyand escaped uninjured.     Bill Anderson, a superintendent working atHardin County Materials Co.'s Plant No. 2, died onMay 17. Anderson got up on a conveyor belt toexamine spillage from a primary crusher and fell 14feet to the ground. He had 30 years' of miningexperience.     Thomas Reaska was killed May 27 at MidwestMaterial Co.'s Lacon Plant in Lacon, Ill. He had 13years' mining experience.     Reaska, a mechanic at the mine, was dismantlinga crane boom to extend its length for other work.When he drove an assembly pin out of the boom, theboom fell on him.     Reaska's accident was the third fatality involvinga boom this year.Back to Headline List CopyrightMINE REGULATION REPORTER via NewsNetJUNE 18, 1993BLAST DEBRIS KILLS CAR PASSENGER     MSHA and OSM investigators are looking into ablast at the Sugar Ridge Coal Co. surface mine inTennessee that caused small boulders and mud to fallonto Interstate 75, killing a car passenger.     The mine had been closed for more than a weekwhile MSHA tried to interview all the miners. Theaccident occurred June 4, a Friday, and MSHA wasat the site that weekend.     Investigators were supposed to conductinterviews June 8. But as of June 14, one miner didnot want to be interviewed until his attorney got backfrom vacation.     Killed was Brian Agujar, 16, of Louisiana. Hewas travelling with his family on vacation.     MSHA said the company was blasting 240 feetfrom the road, which is the legal distance. However,blasting must be strictly controlled so debris does notleave a blast site.Back to Headline List CopyrightMINE REGULATION REPORTER via NewsNetJUNE 18, 1993MSHA EXTENDS FINAL RULE STAYS     Industry has been given a temporary reprieve onprovisions in the controversial explosives andventilation final rules.     MSHA has stayed nine explosives provisions formetal/nonmetal mines until Dec. 31 and stayed twoventilation provisions for underground coal minesuntil July 1, 1994.     On the explosives rule, stayed are:     > 30 CFR 56./57.6000, the definition of a "blastsite," which industry asked MSHA to clarify.Industry asked MSHA to add language that unloadedholes are not part of a blast site unless they arewithin 30 feet of a loaded hole.     > 56./57.6130(b) and 56.57.6131(a)(1) forexplosive storage facility provisions which may be inconflict with other federal regulations.     >  56./57.6202(a)(1), which would require thatvehicles containing explosives be structurally soundand well maintained.     > 56./57.6304(b) on primer protection. Industryhas asked for additional language that rigidcartridges or bags could be slit and the contentspoured to cover the primer. There was also concernover how much water should be in a hole whencartridges are dropped.     >  56./57.6306 on loading and blasting and whatactivities are permitted in the blast site.     > 56.57./6501(a) on nonelectric initiationsystems.     > 56./57.6902(b) on the special precautions thatmust be taken when blasting sulfide ores.     > 56./57.6903 on burning explosive material.Industry worries the current language would bemisconstrued by some who would stay to fight firesinvolving explosives.     On the ventilation regulation, stayed are:     > 75.313, covering main mine fan stoppages withpersons underground.     > 75.344(a)(1), which would require electriccompressors to be located in a noncombustiblestructure or area.Back to Headline List CopyrightMINE REGULATION REPORTER via NewsNetJUNE 18, 1993MSHA DIST. 6 INSPECTORS ACCUSED OFHARASSING COAL MINE OPERATORS     MSHA says it is looking into complaints thatMSHA inspectors are harassing operators in Dist. 6out of Pikeville, Ky.     According to a letter written by David Gooch,president of the Kentucky-based trade group CoalOperators & Associates Inc., Dist. 6 operators havehad "problems with plans, enforcement and threats. ... Most of the difficulties seem to be traceable toJesse Cole, the District Manager."     MSHA spokesperson Kathy Snyder said Cole isan "experienced and highly respected manager withMSHA," but added that the agency is investigatingGooch's concerns.     Gooch said his group has had meetings with Coleregarding his policies and "taken as many as 40operators with us at times." He said he even went toMSHA headquarters in Arlington, Va., to meet withCole's superiors.     Gooch says he is out to get evidence thatoperators are being harassed, and he has put hismembers on notice that they need to documentproblems.     "We need to be able to prove there is a pattern ofharassment, a pattern of inspectors and supervisorypersonnel who have intentionally gone above andbeyond the scope of their authority, a pattern ofinspectors being allowed to do their jobs in animproper manner," Gooch said.     Gooch said an "improper manner could beanything from loafing all day on your job, asking forsomething of value, making threats, writing citationsand orders for non-existent violations and other suchimproprieties."     Operators have been told to keep a record ofinspections and write down what the inspectors dowhile they are at the mine site. "If he sits in youroffice three hours drinking coffee and leaves, writethat down. If he makes a threat or says anything thatis not according to regulations and policy, write thatdown."     But all of the documentation the industry groupwants, Gooch said, will all be kept confidentialbecause many of the operators "are afraid ofretaliation from MSHA."     Meanwhile the local American Federation ofGovernment Employees union warned MSHAinspectors to "be careful."     Hugh Smith, the AFGE union president, toldMSHA inspectors in a memo: "It is evident that thereare coal operators trying to gather informationagainst you that could mean your job. Let's becareful out there. Write what you find anddocument!!!"Back to Headline List CopyrightMINE REGULATION REPORTER via NewsNetJUNE 18, 1993EASTERN FILES NLRB CHARGES AGAINST UMW; COURT GRANTSPEABODY RESTRAINING ORDER     Eastern Associated Coal Corp. has charged theUMW with threatening and intimidating thecompany's suppliers and vendors, while PeabodyCoal Co. was able to get a court order limiting strike-related activity.     The union has been on strike at these mines sinceJune 2.     In charges filed with the National Labor RelationsBoard, Eastern says UMW actions violate previouslyissued NLRB orders from strike-related cases withother companies.     Eastern is seeking to halt what it calls strike-related misconduct at its Federal No. 2 Mine inMonongalia County, W.Va.     The company filed four charges against the UMWinternational and its affiliated members.     The company filed two charges against theinternational and UMW Local 1570.     Eastern said the union has conducted "masspicketing in numbers as high as 40 to 50" at BerryTrucking of Rivesville, W.Va. Eastern said theUMW has threatened to use violence against BerryTrucking owners and threatened to damage Berry'sproperty.     Berry Trucking is an independent contractor forEastern and "has a preexisting relationship to haulcoal before the strike," according to the filing.Because of this, the union is actually conducting a"secondary boycott," which violates Sect. 8(b)(4) ofthe National Labor Relations Act, Eastern said.     Eastern spokesperson Tom Gallager said thecharges were filed against the international and localbecause local UMW members were picketing atBerry's property. Picketing must be authorized by theinternational. There was no evidence the district wasinvolved.     Two other charges are aimed at the international,the district and the local.     In this case, Eastern charges the three unionaffiliates with interfering and threatening suppliersand employees who try to enter or leave the mine.The union is also charged with trying to damagevehicles that have attempted to cross the picket line.Traffic on public roads halted, says Peabody     In the Peabody case, the Warrick County, Ind.,Circuit Court granted a temporary restraining orderpreventing the UMW from obstructing traffic at thecompany's Lynnville No. 1 mine near Lynnville, Ind.     The court ordered the union to limit the numberof picketers to no more than two at any of the threeintersections where the obstructions have occurred.     In its filing with the court, Peabody said thatUMW members were walking in "a slow and close-file line" at the mine entrance and at county roadcrossings adjacent to the mine. The union wasrefusing requests to let traffic through and forceddrivers to wait up to three hours, according to thecompany statement.Back to Headline List CopyrightMINE REGULATION REPORTER via NewsNetJUNE 18, 1993PEABODY, CONSOL HIT IN LATEST ROUNDOF UMW SELECTIVE STRIKES     The UMW has expanded its selective strike tomore than a dozen additional mines for PeabodyHolding Co. and CONSOL in West Virginia, Illinoisand Kentucky.     The fifth wave of the UMW strike against theBituminous Coal Operators' Assn. affects anadditional 3,000 miners and brings the total numberof strikers to 12,000. The job action addssubcontractors to the list of operations being struck,and the union said it will strike Peabodysubcontractors.     "We have targeted the two largest coal producersand the leadership of those companies, George 'Sam'Shiflett at Peabody and Bobby Brown at CONSOL,who are principal spokespeople for the BCOA," saidUMW President Richard Trumka.     "And you can always tell when a strike is havingan effect when the coal companies become morefrantic in their actions," Trumka said of Peabody'saction against 163 miners in Kentucky.     CONSOL operations hit in this latest phaseinclude Burning Star No. 2 in Illinois and RobinsonRun in West Virginia.     Peabody operations hit include Baldwin mine andRandolph preparation plant and related surfacefacilities in Illinois, and the Martwick mine inKentucky.     Eastern Associated was hit at Tygart River,Lightfoot No. 1 and Colony Bay mines as well as theRocklick plant in West Virginia. "The UMWA-elected officials are trying to damage EasternAssociated but in the process, they may be cuttingoff future job opportunities for our employees," saidEastern President Peter Lilly.Back to Headline List CopyrightMINE REGULATION REPORTER via NewsNetJUNE 18, 1993PEABODY BACKS OFF FIRING 163 UMW MINERS, INSTEADISSUES FOUR DAY SUSPENSION     Peabody Coal Co. has backed off its initial plansto fire 163 union members who allegedly tried toshout down company President Sam Shiflett.     Having originally announced it was suspendingthe Camp No. 1 employees with intent to fire,Peabody downgraded the punishment to a four-daysuspension without pay.     In explaining its decision, the company said theJune 3 episode was probably instigated by unionleaders, but individuals miners must be heldaccountable for their own actions. The mine resumedoperation Wednesday June 9 after being idle theprevious Friday, Saturday, Monday and Tuesday.     "We're glad they have come partially to theirsenses," said UMW spokesperson Greg Hawthorne.The union will still appeal the suspensions becausethe miners were exercising "protected" activity, hesaid.     Peabody had announced plans to fire the minersfor insubordination after they refused to give Shifletttheir attention during a company meeting, bychanting "contract, contract." UMW PresidentRichard Trumka the Peabody move a "high-handedtactic befitting a plantation owner."     But the critique by industry sources wasn't muchkinder.     One lawyer said Peabody was smart to back offits original hardline because attempting to sack theminers would be a "grievous blunder in laborrelations."     There was no way the firings would have everpassed muster with the National Labor RelationsBoard, the attorney said. It's silly for Peabody toexpect union miners would "sit there and listen to apropaganda speech" while there's a strike going on.     Another official expressed fear the UMW couldmake potential firings into the type of rallying issuesimilar to cancellation of retiree health benefitsduring the Pittston strike. The episode also adds fuelto the UMW argument that it's involved in an unfairlabor practices strike, at least in connection withPeabody, the source said.Back to Headline List CopyrightMINE REGULATION REPORTER via NewsNetJUNE 18, 1993DECERTIFICATION ELECTION UP IN AIR FORBUCK CREEK COAL CO. MINERS     The lawyer for a group of Buck Creek Coalemployees who want out of the UMW has renewed arequest for a decertification election, but the NationalLabor Relations Board said no such vote will happensoon.     A May 6 decision by a three-member panel of theNLRB was a mixed verdict for Buck Creek and theUMW.     The panel upheld an ALJ ruling that Buck Creekimplemented a flex schedule without first bargainingwith the union -- but also struck down the judge'sdecision to add nine months onto the union's"certification year." That's the time period in which aunion has to reach a labor contract with a newly-organized operation.     As a result of the latter development, Jim Hanson,a lawyer for the "Vote No Committee" at BuckCreek, has renewed his request that the NLRBproceed with a decertification election.     The board has yet to respond to Hanson's letter,but "at this point it does not look like there's going tobe an election any time soon," said an NLRBofficial.     Before the petition could move forward BuckCreek must comply with NLRB's May order. Alsocurrent unfair labor practice charges filed by theNLRB must be cleared up before any decert vote.The union went on strike against Indiana's biggestdeep mine in April. Although the operation wasorganized in late 1991, the two sides have failed toreach a contract.Back to Headline List CopyrightMINE REGULATION REPORTER via NewsNetJUNE 18, 1993VOTE SCHEDULED AT ZEIGLER SUBSIDIARY ON HEELS OFSUCCESSFUL MARROWBONE VOTE     With the UMW on an emotional high from itsapparent victory at Marrowbone Development, acertification vote is set June 28 for another non-union subsidiary of Zeigler Coal Holding.     Zeigler's SMC Mining stands behind the decisionof management at Wolf Creek Collieries to"vigorously oppose" the UMW drive, said companyofficial Vic Svec.     Wolf Creek is located just across the Kentuckyline from Marrowbone. The National LaborRelations Board confirmed that Marrowboneemployees had voted 256-to-151 to join the union.There were 33 challenged ballots. The company hadnot announced by press time if it planned tochallenge the election or the campaign leading up toit.     Industry opinions vary on whether Marrowbonesignals a brighter day for UMW or was merely aflash in the pan.     An official with a rival coal company subscribesto the latter theory. The UMW had some "reallystupid management helping them" at Marrowbone,he said. The source thinks the UMW also has anexcellent chance at Wolf Creek.     Wolf Creek returned to work in late-Mayfollowing a two-and-a-half week walkout sparked bychanges in retiree medical benefits, officials said. It'shard to say how the Marrowbone vote may affect theBituminous Coal Operators' strike. Most officialsthink it will hearten the UMW. Others think BCOA'sB.R. Brown could use it as evidence that the UMWcan organize mines without extensive job rights atnon-union operations.     Marrowbone has filed formal objections to theway the union conducted its campaign leading up tothe certification vote. The company claims UMWofficials made unlawful threats and promisesthroughout the campaign.     Among the claims in the two-page document is anallegation that the union said it would add 10 yearseligibility toward the UMW pension after two yearsof credited service, as an inducement to vote pro-union. "By such conduct, petitioner unlawfullyinterfered with employees in their exercise of freechoice in the election."Back to Headline List CopyrightMINE REGULATION REPORTER via NewsNetJUNE 18, 1993BCOA FILES SUIT TO STOP AMAX WITHDRAWAL; AMAX SAYS ITWILL BARGAIN WITH CYPRUS     The Bituminous Coal Operators' Assn. has filed alawsuit against AMAX Coal Co. to prevent AMAXfrom exiting the multi-employer bargaining group.     AMAX announced last week, following adecision to merge with Cyprus Minerals Co. ofEnglewood, Colo., that it would withdraw from theBCOA. Cyprus bargains independently of theBCOA, and its current contract does not expire untilJuly 1.     "If I were on BCOA I'd be furious and I'd filesuit," said an industry source the day before the suitwas filed.     BCOA has accused the union of "inducing" AMAX towithdraw from BCOA in the midst of contract talks toenable the nation's third-largest coal producer tonegotiate its own agreement. BCOA said the law isclear, and that once negotiations begin, companies ina multi-employer group must be bound by the contractnegotiated by that group. They cannot cut their owndeals.     AMAX said last week it is withdrawing from thegroup because it will be governed by the laboragreement that its merger partner, Cyprus Minerals,is negotiating with the UMW. Cyprus is talking withthe union about its Emerald and Cumberland minesin Pennsylvania and the Kanawha mine in WestVirginia.     But the provision that limits AMAX's or anyother company's right to leave BCOA is a murkyarea of labor law. Defections are acceptable under"unusual circumstances" -- a term that has neverbeen explicitly defined by the courts. Some think theCyprus-AMAX consolidation constitutes suchcircumstances.     One industry source finds the AMAX defectionfrom BCOA more puzzling now than if it had comebefore the merger announcement. AMAX's presencewould have given the Cyprus-AMAX hybrid insightinto BCOA bargaining. The source also describedAMAX as a "fairly soft" member of BCOA -- whileCyprus Minerals has not been reluctant to lock hornswith unions in the past.     The same industry official thinks it does the unionlittle good to knock off contract deals one-by-one.The union doesn't appear to have the ability toconduct more than one set of major talks at once, thesource said. Furthermore, the UMW is still not goingto make any real gains without eventually goingthrough Peabody and CONSOL, the source said.Back to Headline List CopyrightMINE REGULATION REPORTER via NewsNetJUNE 18, 1993VariancesMoving Machine Parts Variance Requests     Franklin Construction Inc., of Paradise, Calif.wants to modify 30 CFR 56.14107 to its FranklinSand Plant in Butte County, Calif.     The code requires moving machines parts shall beguarded to protect from contacting gears, sprockets,chains, drive, head, tail, and take up pulleys,flywheels, coupling shafts, fan blades, and similarmoving parts that can cause injury.     The company proposes to use substantial one-inchscreencloth guards on a small underhopper feederwith warning signs permanently installed adjacent tothe guards instead of suing the two 18-inch wideaccess slots, and to keep the guards in place when theelectrical disconnect switch for the machine is notlocked out [Docket No. M-93-03-M].     Hearing requests are due July 12.Methane Monitor Variances Granted     Falls Mining Inc. of Woodbine, Ky. was granted avariance for 30 CFR 75.313 to its No. 1 Mine inKnox County, Ky.     The code requires that methane monitors must beinstalled on any electric face-cutting equipment,continuous miner, longwall face equipment andloading machine. The monitor must degenerize theequipment when it is not working properly or whenmethane reaches 2%. It must sound alarm whenmethane reaches 1%.     The company proposed to use a hand-heldcontinuous-duty methane and oxygen monitor onpermissible three-wheel tractors with drag bottombuckets (MRR 11/20/92 p. 566) [Docket No. M-92-131-C].     Hearing requests are due June 27.Face Ventilation Control Devices Variances Denied       Turris Coal Co. of Elkhart, Ill. was denied avariance for 30 CFR 75.330 to its Elkhart Mine inLogan County, Ill.     The code requires face ventilation control devicesto be made on flame resistant material approved byMSHA and to protect against harmful gases, dusts,smoke and fumes. The devices must be installed nolater than 10 feet from the area of deepest penetrationthat the face has advanced unless an alterationdistance is specified and approved.     The company had proposed to modify a minimumof 9,000 cfm of intake air in the line of crosscuts toaugured and a minimum of 5,000 cfm of intake airpassing across the auger machine while auguring.The company would continuously monitor the airfrom the company face through a 3/4-inch pipe MRR1/29/93 p. 38 [Docket No. M-92-189-C].     Comments are due July 1.Construction of Seals Variance Requests     K and L Coal Co. of Shamokin, Pa. wants tomodify 30 CFR 75.335 to its No. 1 Slope inNorthumberland County, Pa.     The code requires that each seal constructed afterAugust 15, 1992 shall be constructed of solidconcrete blocks at least six inches by eight inches,laid in a transverse pattern with mortar between alljoints.     The company proposes to construct anoverlapping one-inch hardwood board to a minimumof two inches thick and coat with a flame retardantcoating as a seal for its anthracite coal mine, to makea daily visual inspections of the stopping, and to takeair measurements before and after a series ofstoppings [Docket No. M-93-75].     Hearing requests are due July 12. Air Courses and Belt Haulage Entry VarianceRequests     Genwal Coal Co. of Huntington, Utah wants tomodify 30 CFR 75.350 to its Crandall Canyon Minein Emery County, Utah.     The company proposes to use the belt air toventilate the face and to install a low-level carbonmonoxide detection system in all belt entries used asintake air courses as an early warning fire detectionsystem [Docket No. M-93-68-C].     Hearing requests are due July 12.Automatic Emergency Parking Brake Variances Granted     CH and S Coal Co. of Birchleaf, Va. was granteda variance for 30 CFR 75.523-3 to its No. 3 Mine onScott County, Va.     The code requires that except for personnelcarriers, rubber-tired, self-propelled electric haulageequipment used in the active workings ofunderground coal mines shall be equipped withautomatic emergency-parking brakes.     The company proposed to operate S&S 482scoops without emergency brakes because of theslope of the mine and coal bed undulation (MRR12/4/92 p. 597) [Docket No. M-92-149-C].     Hearing requests are due July 8.Preshift Examination Variance Requests     Costain Coal Inc. wants to modify 30 CFR 75.360(b) to its Baker Mine in Webster County, Ky.     The code requires that the person conducting thepreshift examination shall examine for hazardousconditions, test for methane and oxygen deficiency,and determine if the air is moving in its properdirection, at the following locations.     Due to the deteriorated conditions and roof fallsin the intake entry in the 2nd Submain Eastimmediately adjacent to the room necks, travel inthis entry would be unsafe. The company proposes toestablish two continuous monitoring stations withboth audible and visual alarm signals to monitor theair passing through the affected area [Docket No. M-93-66-C].     Hearing requests are due July 12.Methane Examination Variances Denied     Turris Coal Co. of Elkhart, Ill. was denied avariance for 30 CFR 75.362 (d) to its Elkhart Mine inLogan County, Ill.     The code requires a qualified person to test formethane, at 20-minute intervals, before equipment isenergized, taken into, or operated in a working place.The tests must be made at the last permanent roofsupports, unless the ventilation plan requires them tobe made closer to the working face.     The company proposed to have a qualified persontest before an auger machine is deenergized and touse the machine's continuous methane detectionsensor to test air before auguring begins. Thecompany would have continued testing at intervals of20 minutes (MRR 1/29/93 p. 40) [Docket No. M-92-188-C].     Hearing requests are due July 1.Weekly Examination Variances Granted     Consolidation Coal Co. of Pittsburgh was granteda variance for 30 CFR 75.364 (b) to its Osage No. 3Mine in Monongalia County, Pa.     The code requires that at least every seven days,an examination for hazardous conditions at thelocations shall be made by a certified persondesignated by the operator.     The company proposed to establish evaluationpoints to monitor the quantity and quality of air inthe affected area (MRR 10/9/92 p. 495) [Docket No.M-92-119-C].     Hearing requests are due June 23.     Bear Coal Co. of Somerset, Colo. was granted avariance for 30 CFR 75.364 (b) to its Bear No. 3Mine in Gunnison County, Colo.     The company proposed to establish evaluationpoints to monitor the quantity and quality of airentering and leaving affected area (MRR 10/23/92 p.520) [Docket No. M-92-118-C].     Hearing requests are due June 27.     McElroy Coal Co. of Pittsburgh was granted avariance for 30 CFR 75.364 (b) to its McElroy Minein Marshall County, W.V.     The company proposed to establish new checkpoints to monitor the quantity and quality of air bothentering and leaving the affected areas asserting thatthe proposed alternate method would provide at leastthe same measure of protection as would themandatory standard (MRR 11/20/92 p. 506) [DocketNo. M-92-142-C].     Hearing requests are due July 1.Weekly Examination Variances Requested     New Warwick Mining Co. of Mount Morris, Pa.wants to modify 30 CFR 75.364 (b) (1) to itsWarwick Mine in Greene County, Pa.     The code requires at least every seven days, anexamination for hazardous conditions at the locationsshall be made by a certified person designated by theoperator and in at least one entry of each intake aircourse, in its entirety, so that the entire air course istraveled.     Due to deteriorating roof conditions in certainareas of the intake aircourse, the company proposesto establish check points to monitor the affected areaweekly [Docket No. M-93-71-C].     Comments are due July 12.     Consolidation Coal Co. of Pittsburgh wants tomodify 30 CFR 75.364 (b) (2) to its Loveridge No.22 Mine in Marion County.     Due to deteriorating roof conditions, certain areason the return aircourse cannot be safely traveled. Thecompany proposes to establish evaluation checkpoints to monitor the methane and quality of air inthe affected area [Docket No. M-93-67-C].     Comments are due July 12.     Target Industries Inc. of Carmichaels, Pa. wantsto modify 30 CFR 75.364 (b) (2) to its Target MineGreene County, Pa.     Due to deteriorating roof conditions, certain areasof the mine cannot be safely traveled. The companyproposes to establish air monitoring stations tomonitor quantity and quality of air in the affectedarea [Docket No. M-93-76-C].     Comments are due July 12.     Jim Walter Resources Inc. wants to modify 30CFR 75.364 (b) (4) to its No. 3 Mine in JeffersonCounty, Ala.     The code requires that at least every seven days,an examination for hazardous conditions at thelocations shall be made by a certified persondesignated by the operator and at each seal alongreturn and bleeder air courses and at each seal alongintake air courses not examined under.     The company proposes to have a certified personcheck for hazardous conditions weekly at each sealalong the return and bleeder aircourses, to monitorair and gas near the roof fall where seals cannot bevisually examined, and to examine the south salesand monitor the pressure differential indicationdevice to determine that the seals are intact [DocketNo. M-93-70-C].     Comments are due July 12.Underground High Voltage Cables Variances Granted     Enlow Fork Mining Co. of Pittsburgh granted avariance for 30 CFR 75.704 (a) to its Enlow ForkMine in Greene County, Pa.     The code requires underground high-voltagecables used in resistance grounded systems shall beequipped with metallic shields around each powerconductor with one or more ground conductorshaving a total cross sectional area of not less thanone-half the power conductor, and with an insulatedexternal conductor not smaller than No. 8 (A.W.G.)or an insulated internal ground check conductor notsmaller than No. 10 (A.W.G.) for the groundcontinuity check circuit.     The company proposed to use a high-voltagecable with an internal ground check conductorsmaller than No. 10 (A.W.G.) as part of its longwallmining system MRR 12/4/92 p. 597 [Docket No. M-92-155-C].     Hearing requests are due July 1.Escapeways, Bituminous and Lignite Mine Variance Requests     Philippi Development Inc. of Morgantown,W.Va. has requested a variance for 30 CFR 75.380(d) (4) to its Sentinel Mine in Barbour County,W.Va.     The code requires that the escapeway bemaintained at least six feet wide except wherenecessary supplemental roof support is installed, theescapeway shall be not less than four feet wide.     The company proposes to keep the escapewayaround the coal storage bin and along the slope beltconveyor to the surface free from loose rocks,supplies and other material that would causestumbling hazards; to maintain handrail around thebin in good repair; and to maintain and periodicallycheck man doors to assure that they are openingproperly as an alternate to the 4-foot wide clearance[Docket No. M-93-72-C]; [Docket No. M-93-73-C]and [Docket No. M-93-74-C].     Comments are due July 12.Cabs and Canopy Variance Denied     Golden Oak Mining Co. of Whitesburg, Ky. wasdenied a variance for 30 CFR 75.1710-1 to itsGolden Oak No. 2 Mine in Knott's County, Ky.     The code requires that electric face equipment,including shuttle cars, must have substantiallyconstructed canopies or cabs to protect the minersoperating the equipment from roof falls and ribs andface rolls.     The company had proposed that because unsafeconditions would occur by using cabs and canopies,the operation should be exempt from this rule in thiscase MRR 12/4/92 p. 598 [Docket No. M-92-154-C].     Comments are due June 23.Oil and Gal Wells Variance Granted     Usibelli Coal Mine Inc. in Healy, Ala. wasgranted a variance for 30 CFR 77.1605 (k) to itsUsibelli Mine in Yukon River County in Alaska.     The code requires that berms or guardrails shallbe provided on the outer bank of elevated roadways.     The company proposed to use certain safetyprecautions a an alternative to berms and guardrailson haulage roads (MRR 5/7 p. 225) [Docket No. M-93-57-C].     Hearing requests are due July 1.Oil and Gas Wells Variance Requests     The Pittsburgh and Midway Coal Mining Co.wants to modify 30 CFR 77.1605 (k) to itsKemmerer Mine in Lincoln County, Wyo.     The company proposes to eliminate berms orguardrails and to install and maintain reflectors nearthe outer edge of the roadway in areas where there isa recovery zone between the outer edge of thetraveled roadway and the tangent of thisembankment slope [Docket No M-93-69-C].     Comments are due July 12.     Send comments to: MSHA, Office of Variancesand Standards, 4015 Wilson Blvd., Arlington, Va.22203. Hearing requests should be sent to MSHA'sadministrator for coal mine health and safety or theadministrator for metal/nonmetal at the same streetaddress.Back to Headline List CopyrightMINE REGULATION REPORTER via NewsNetJUNE 18, 1993IRREBUTABLE PRESUMPTION PROVISION OFKY. LAW CONSTRUED BY STATE COURT     The Kentucky Court of Appeals held that a minermust show exposure to coal dust caused his disabilityin order to be entitled to the irrebutable presumptionof total disability set forth in KRS 342.732(1)(c).     The miner argued he submitted the required X-rayevidence and met the necessary spirometric testvalues to trigger the statute's irrebutablepresumption. However, the court read into the statutethe requirement that a claimant must also prove thathe contracted pneumoconiosis from work-relatedexposure to coal dust (MRR Document No. 0527).     The court remanded the case and ordered the ALJto determine whether the claimant's disability wascaused by his cigarette smoking or exposure to coaldust. If his disability was caused by both factors, heis still entitled to an award of benefits if coal dustexposure was a "medically significant cause of therespiratory impairment," the court said.     The court read the necessary causationrequirement into the statute, finding the legislatureleft it out as an "oversight."     The court reversed an ALJ's award of totalpermanent disability benefits that was affirmed bythe Workers' Compensation Board.     Four judges dissented, stating that KRS342.732(1)(c) is "clear upon its face" and should beread "precisely as written." Under the statute, anirrebutable presumption of total disability resultingfrom exposure to coal dust is triggered if the requiredX-ray evidence and respiratory impairment testresults are submitted, the dissenting judges said,finding "nothing absurd or unreasonable in thisresult."     Newberg v. Elswick, Ky CtApp, No. 91-CA-2314-WC, 5/28/93.     Attorney for claimant Willie Elswick: R. RolandCase, Pikeville, Ky.     Attorney for Mine 29 Mining & Processing Inc.:Brett Davis, Prestonsburg, Ky.     Attorney for special fund: Cathy Utley Costelle,Labor Cabinet, Louisville, Ky.Back to Headline List CopyrightMINE REGULATION REPORTER via NewsNetJUNE 18, 1993ALABAMA COURT UPHOLDS BENEFITS AWARD TO MINER WHOEARNED MORE AFTER INJURY     A miner who returned to his same position andearned more money after he injured his arm may stillkeep his award of workers' compensation benefitsbased on a finding of 31% loss of earning capacity,an Alabama Appeals court ruled.     The Alabama Court of Civil Appeals said thatwhen a worker's post-injury earnings equal or exceedhis earnings at the time of the injury, there is apresumption of earning capacity commensurate withearnings.     However, the miner rebutted this presumption byintroducing independent evidence that his post-injuryearnings were an unreliable basis for estimating hisearning capacity, the court said (MRR Document No. 0519).     The miner showed his post-injury increase inearnings resulted primarily from collectivebargaining salary increases; his working hoursincreased since his 1986 accident; and he receivedassistance from co-workers, the court noted. Avocational rehabilitation expert also testified that theminer had lost access to a "significant number ofjobs" because of his injury.     U.S. Steel Mining Co. v. Riddle, Ala CtCivApp,No. CV-89-624, 5/21/93.Back to Headline List CopyrightMINE REGULATION REPORTER via NewsNetJUNE 18, 1993Review Commission Decisions     BOSWELL v. NATIONAL CEMENT CO.,6/7/93. Discrimination proceeding: See article p.297; document p. D-71 (decision by Chairman Holenand Commissioners Backley, Doyle and Nelson; No.SE 90-112-DM).Back to Headline List CopyrightMINE REGULATION REPORTER via NewsNetJUNE 18, 1993Judges' Decisions(will become final in 40 days unless orderedreviewed)     MSHA v. ADAMS STONE CORP., 6/9/93. Civilpenalty proceedings: A judge ordered a smallKentucky limestone operator to pay $3,425 inpenalties for six violations of Part 56 standards,discovered during an MSHA investigation of aserious accident at the quarry (MRR Document No. 0534).     An MSHA inspector issued six Sect. 104(d)(1)citations and orders after investigating the accident inwhich the assistant quarry superintendent fell 30 feetfrom the top of a primary crusher and sufferedpermanently disabling injuries.     The judge found that the operator committed anS&S violation of 30 CFR 56.15005 becauseunrebutted evidence established that the assistantsuperintendent was not wearing a safety belt or linewhen he fell. He agreed with MSHA that theoperator was guilty of "unwarrantable failure"because the assistant superintendent was an agent ofmine management and knew his actions were unsafe.He fined the company $1,600 for the violation.     MSHA cited the operator for a second S&Sviolation of 30 CFR 56.15005 after the inspectorobserved two miners working on top of the crusherwithout wearing safety belts or lines the dayfollowing the accident. The judge agreed theviolation was S&S and also caused by the operator'sunwarrantable failure, finding that mine managementhad an obligation to ensure that miners whocontinued to work on the crusher after the accidentwore safety belts and lines to prevent another seriousaccident. He fined the operator $1,000.     The judge ruled the operator also violated 30 CFR56.18009 because the inspector found six minersdismantling the primary crusher for repair without a"competent person" in charge as required by thestandard. He ruled the violation was S&S, but not theresult of unwarrantable failure because one memberof the crew, the crane operator, was an experiencedand trained employee who could take over in theevent of an emergency. He assessed a $225 civilpenalty.     The judge also assessed penalties totaling $600for three violations of explosives standards. He heldthat the company violated 30 CFR 56.6313, becausetwo large limestone boulders had been drilled andcharged with explosives and left unattended andunbarricaded for one week; 30 CFR 56.6320,because the operator exceeded the 72-hour time limitbetween charge and blast times; and 30 CFR56.6305, because unused explosive materials werenot moved to a protected area within a reasonabletime after the boulders were charged.     The operator argued that three separate citationswere not justified because they concerned a singlecondition. However, the judge found the citedstandards impose separate and distinct duties on theoperator and he ruled the three citations were notduplicative. He said the violations of 30 CFR56.6313 and 56.6305 were S&S, citing the hazards ofa premature detonation. However, he said MSHAfailed to prove that the operator was aware that theboulders had been drill and charged, and he ruled theviolations were not the result of its unwarrantablefailure (Koutras, Judge; Nos. KENT 92-604-M and92-770-M).     Attorney for Adams Stone: David Adams, P.O.Box 2853, Pikeville, Ky. 41402.     Attorney for Labor Dept.: Joseph Luckett, U.S.Labor Dept., 2002 Richard Jones Rd., Suite B-201,Nashville, Tenn. 37215.     JERRY IKE HARLESS TOWING INC. v.MSHA, 6/2/93. Contest proceeding: A company thatdredges sand from a riverbed is an operator under theMine Act and must file a legal identity report withMSHA as required by 30 CFR 56.1000, a judge ruled(MRR Document No. 0515).     The judge ruled the company violated 30 CFR56.1000 and ordered it to filed the required reportwithin 21 days.     He rejected as "frivolous" the company'sarguments that sand is not a mineral and that itextracted sand in liquid form. The judge noted thatMSHA routinely oversees sand and gravel dredgingoperations and said the company's extraction andpreparation of sand through its filtering process areclearly activities covered by Sect. 3(h)(1) of theMine Act.     However, the found that another corporationowned by the same individual that stores and sellsthe sand is not subject to the Mine Act (Feldman,Judge; No. CENT 92-276-RM).     MSHA v. MULLINS AND SONS COAL CO.,6/3/93. Civil penalty proceeding: A judge agreedwith a coal company that its conceded S&Sviolations of coal dust standards 30 CFR 75.400 and75.402 were not the result of its "unwarrantablefailure" (MRR Document No. 0535).     An MSHA inspector cited the operator after hediscovered loose coal, coal dust and float dustaccumulations ranging from three to six inches deepfor a distance of 180 feet. He described theaccumulations as black and found no evidence ofsignificant rock dust content.     The inspector based his unwarrantable failurecharge on the fact that the accumulations were notedin the pre-shift examiner's book. However, the judgefound that the notation acknowledging theaccumulations was a mitigating factor in assessingthe degree of the company's negligence.     The judge also noted that the accumulations hadexisted for only three hours and that the operator'sscoop was out of service and being charged.     While not guilty of unwarrantable failure, thejudge found the operator was moderately negligentand assessed a total of $1,000 in penalties (Feldman,Judge; No. KENT 92-669).     Representative for Mullins and Sons: DaleMullins, vice president, Mullins and Sons Coal Co.,Box 4028, Upper John's Creek Rd., Kimper, Ky.41539.     Attorney for Labor Dept.: Anne Knauff, U.S.Labor Dept., 2002 Richard Jones Rd., Suite B-201,Nashville, Tenn. 37215.     MSHA v. QUARTO MINING CO., 6/7/93. Civilpenalty proceeding: A judge fined a coal mineoperator $800 for an S&S violation of 30 CFR77.1606(c) because of a defective steering wheel ona front-end loader (MRR Document No. 0533).     The inspector discovered the malfunction whenhe asked the equipment operator to demonstrate thesteering on an idling Caterpillar 988 front-end loaderin the mine's supply yard. When the steering wheelwas turned to the right, it locked in position, forcingthe equipment operator to use both hands to breakthe lock. Then the wheel would spin very fast,causing a potential loss of control of the vehicle, thejudge found.     The equipment operator told the inspector thecondition was intermittent and that he had reportedthe malfunction to the shop foreman, who wasunable to correct the problem.     The judge found that the malfunctioning steeringwas an obvious safety defect. He ruled the violationwas S&S because it presented a hazard to theequipment operator, to pedestrians and to othervehicle drivers. He also found the operator guilty of"unwarrantable failure" because the shop foremanknew of the defect for several months and failed tocorrect the defect or remove the loader from service(Fauver, Judge; No. LAKE 92-309).     Attorney for Quarto Mining: Daniel Rogers,Consol Inc., Consol Plaza, 1800 Washington Rd.,Pittsburgh, Pa. 15241.     Attorney for Labor Dept.: Kenneth Walton, U.S.Labor Dept., 881 Federal Office Bldg., 1240 E.Ninth St., Cleveland, Ohio 44199.Back to Headline List CopyrightMINE REGULATION REPORTER via NewsNetJUNE 18, 1993Judges' Decisions Ordered Reviewed     MSHA v. SPURLOCK MINING CO., 5/12/93.Civil penalty proceedings: The commission willdecide whether the ALJ erred in failing to considerthe impact of the proposed civil penalties on theoperators' ability to continue in business (MRR 4/9,p. 203).     The operators' petition for review was granted byChairman Holen and Commissioners Doyle andNelson (Melick, Judge; Nos. KENT 92-380, 92-419,92-420, 92-306, 92-307, 92-323, 92-324, 92-608, 92-609, 92-701, 92-836, 92-837, 92-838 and 92-889).     Representative for operators: Hobart Anderson,president, Spurlock Mining Co. and Sarah AshleyMining Co., P.O. Box 989 Ashland, Ky. 41105.     Attorney for Labor Dept.: Anne Knauff, U.S.Labor Dept., 2002 Richard Jones Rd., Suite B-201,Nashville, Tenn. 37215.     MSHA v. W-P COAL CO., 5/18/93. Civil penaltyproceeding: The commission will decide whether theALJ erred in rejecting MSHA's attempt to cite amine owner that used contract-operators to mine itscoal as a "co-operator" on outstanding citationsissued against a contract operator that went out ofbusiness (MRR 4/9, p. 196).     MSHA's petition for review was granted byChairman Holen and Commissioners Backley, Doyleand Nelson (Melick, Judge; No. WEVA 92-746).     Attorney for W-P Coal: Kurt Miller, Thorp, Reed& Armstrong, One Riverfront Center, Pittsburgh, Pa.15222.     Attorney for Labor Dept.: Tana Adde, U.S. LaborDept., 4015 Wilson Blvd., Arlington, Va. 22203.Back to Headline List CopyrightMINE REGULATION REPORTER via NewsNetJUNE 18, 1993BONDS FROM TENNESSEE INTERIMPROGRAM MUST BE FORFEITED TO OSM     An insurance company must forfeit tworeclamation bonds to the federal government, eventhough the bonds were issued when the governmentdid not require bonding, a federal court ruled.     U.S. District Court for the Eastern District ofTennessee upheld an IBLA ruling that the bonds were"statutory bonds," and OSM became thesuccessor-in-interest to the bonds when it took overTennessee's program (MRR Document No. 0517). ExchangeInsurance Co. had challenged the IBLA decisionordering the company to forfeit two bonds worth$81,000.     Tennessee had enacted its program in 1980, onlyto kill it on Oct. 1, 1984. Exchange issued twoperformance bonds for two mining permits filedduring the state's interim program. The bonds wereissued when a bond was required by state law, butnot by federal law.     When the federal government was taking over thestate's program, it announced in the Federal Registerthat it would not assume responsibility over interimprogram bonds. In addition, the state's attorneygeneral said that bonds in which no forfeitureproceedings had started before Oct. 1, 1984, werevoided by the legislative repeal of the Tennesseeprogram.     But the attorney general also noted that thefederal government succeeded to any permanentprogram bonds in which forfeiture proceedings hadnot yet started.     Although the bonds were originally issued underthe interim rule, they were used to support secondpermits under the final rule. It was this point whenthe bonds became "statutory bonds."     Exchange tried to argue that when the federalgovernment took over the program it requiredpermittees to change the payee of the bonds toinclude the federal government as "co-payee" within30 days of the effective date of the new program.     Exchange never complied with this order, but itwas also never challenged by the government for notcomplying. Exchange said that this is evidence thatthe government did not consider the original bondspayable to it.     But because the bonds had been transferred tosecond permits, with Exchange's consent, to supportpermanent program permits, this made themstatutory bonds, and OSM the successor in interest.     Exchange Insurance Co. v. IBLA; USDistCt,EDistTenn No. CIV-3-92-683; 4/9/93.Back to Headline List CopyrightMINE REGULATION REPORTER via NewsNetJUNE 18, 1993ANDALEX TRUCK ROUTE TOO DANGEROUSBECAUSE OF SCHOOL, RESIDENTS SAY     Residents are up in arms over Andalex's plan torun double-trailer coal trucks through their townwhich is 100 miles away from the coal-rich Kaiparowitsarea in southern Utah.     Nearly 200 residents of Hurrican, Utah, whichlies on the state route that would be used to reachrail loadout points, turned out for a protest meetinglast week.     Townspeople say the 45-ton trucks would wearout the roads, cause air and noise pollution and addto the congestion already a problem with trafficheading to and from Zion National Park.     But they were particularly upset about the safetyof children at the school, which is at bottom of asteep two-mile long 8% grade hill on the truck route.They say the grade increases the danger of a runawaytruck.     Their concern was backed up by the SouthernUtah Wilderness Alliance (SUWA) who usedInsurance Institute for Highway Safety statisticsshowing double-trailer trucks are two to three timesmore likely to have an accident than single-trailertrucks.     The alliance has been fighting development ofcoal-rich Kaiparowits for decades.     A representative of a trucking firm working withAndalex said the latest trucks are better able tonegotiate the steep inclines because they have morebraking power per ton than those built a few yearsago.     The noisy protest meeting early this month addedto the controversy surrounding Andalex's plan tomine 400 million tons of coal from Smoky Hollowwhich lies between two wilderness areas and next toa national recreation area.     Andalex wants to use the trucks to get the coal torail lines in Utah and Nevada.Back to Headline List CopyrightMINE REGULATION REPORTER via NewsNetJUNE 18, 1993CALIFORNIA DESERT MUST BE PROTECTED FROM MINING,EXPLOITATION, SAYS BABBITT     Land exchanges will be used to preserve areas ofthe Southeast California desert if legislation makes itthrough the House and Senate.     Desert protection legislation would create 74wilderness areas and upgrade Joshua Tree NationalMonument and Death Valley National Monument tonational park status.    The House version would make the East MojaveDesert a national monument and the Senate versionwould make it a national park. The Senate version isthe most restrictive of the two, which theadministration prefers, Interior Secretary BruceBabbitt told the House subcommittee on nationalparks June 15.     Most of the land owned by the government, morethan 7 million acres, would be designated as"wilderness," closing the land to mining. If the landis designated a "national park," then mining may bepermitted.     Babbitt noted that in the California desert, "Youcan still see roads cut through sand by Conestogawagons," and "scars mark the mines that deliveredfortunes to claim settlers who would not be turnedaway."     The interior secretary said the desert is threatenedby "those who would pillage its subtle beauty."Many forms need protection, says Babbitt     Babbitt agrees with environmental groups thatlegislation is needed to protect sand dunes, extinctvolcanos, archaeological sites and rare plant andanimal life, and that protection is needed frommining and grazing.        Babbitt also stressed that the entire "ecosystem"needed protection, and not protecting one area wouldharm an entire region.     Additions proposed for the Joshua Tree NationalPark would include the Coxcombe Mountains, PintoBasin and Pinto Mountains, Little San BernardinoMountains and the Eagle Mountains.     "Resource protection would be greatly enhancedhere with the full ecosystem included under onemanagement entity," Babbitt said.     But Rep. Jerry Lewis, R-Calif., sees taxpayersending up with a huge bill to acquire the land orgiving up valuable federal lands in land exchanges.Company, schools own large parcels     One of the debates centered around land ownedby the Catellus Corp.     Babbitt supports land exchanges for the Catellusland and California school lands, which are the twoentities that own the vast majority of non-federalland in the area.    Lewis said that 355,000 acres owned by Catellusare worth between $750 and $1,500 an acre.     But Babbitt called these figures "absurd," and saidthe department would work out exchanges providingCatellus with federal land that had similarcharacteristics to the Catellus land that would be partof the protected area.     There is another area of the desert, however, thatposes a different problem.     The Lanfair Valley area contains about 1,000small, individually owned private parcels. Babbitt'sconcern is that these will be developed once the parkis established.     Babbitt said the government must think of an"innovative approach" to deal with the private landholdings or purchase the properties throughcondemnation.     Although Babbitt did not directly say that hesupports "zoning" the area, he did say that hesupports a "comprehensive land use plan for thevalley to promote park purposes while affordingprivate landholders the maximum flexibility tocontinue traditional and appropriate uses of theirland."Back to Headline List CopyrightMINE REGULATION REPORTER via NewsNetJUNE 18, 1993STATEMENTS AVAILABLE ON TWO PROJECTS     BLM in conjunction with the County of SanBernardino, Calif. has issued a draft environmentalimpact statement on a proposed mining project in theCalifornia Desert Conservation Area.     The Ft. Cady mining project will be a boric acidmine and processing facility that will cover 343 acresof land in San Bernardino County.     Copies of this file are available at the BarstowResource Area Office, BLM, 150 Coolwater Lane,Barstow, Calif. 92311-3221. Comments are due byAugust 3.     For more information contact Edy Seehafer at714-387-4099 at the Barstow area office.     The Forest Service's Kootenai National Forestand the Montana Dept. of State Lands have jointlyprepared an environmental impact statement for aproposed copper and silver mine in Noxon, Mont.     The Rock Creek Project will consist of anunderground copper and silver mine with associatedadits, a mill to process ore, a tailings impoundment,water disposal and access roads.     Comments are due by June 30 to Robert Schrenk,Kootenai National Forest, 506 U.S. Highway 2 West,Libby, Mont. 59923.     For more information contact Paul Kaiser at 406-293-62111.Back to Headline List CopyrightMINE REGULATION REPORTER via NewsNetJUNE 18, 1993COURT CONSIDERS AMAX PERMIT     With AMAX having mined out its Skyline GladyFork reserves, resolving the environmental concernsdelaying a new permit at the Tennessee operation hastaken on a new urgency.     While lawyers for AMAX and OSM argue themerits of the company's toxic materials handlingplan in a Knoxville courtroom, Skyline employeesare shipping from coal stockpiles to the TennesseeValley Authority's Widow's Creek.     "Basically, we've finished mining, we're minedout," said AMAX spokesperson Kevin Feeney.Skyline finished work on the Glady Fork section inmid-May. The company has enough stockpiled coalto satisfy the customer for several weeks, Feeneysaid.     Interior Dept. ALJ David Torbett is consideringSkyline's permit request to commence mining on theBig Brush section now that Glady Fork is mined out.Earlier this year AMAX was successful in getting afederal court order which reversed an OSM decisionthat stopped mining at Glady Fork (MRR 2/12, p.70).Back to Headline List CopyrightMINE REGULATION REPORTER via NewsNetJUNE 18, 1993OSM, MONTANA HOLD ENFORCEMENT MEETING;  MERIDIANSUSPENDS WORK UNTIL SEPTEMBER     Montana regulators and OSM plan an informalconference June 30 in Billings to discuss the state'senforcement of SMCRA.     Earlier this month Northern Plains ResourceCouncil asked OSM to take over that portion of theMontana Dept. of State Lands program, whichoversees Meridian Minerals' plans for a major newlongwall operation (MRR 6/4, p. 285).     OSM Acting Director Hord Tipton found merit inthe environmental group's concerns and instructedthe state to suspend the Bull Mountains No. 1 permitbecause Montana was not effectively enforcing thelaw.     Meridian has "voluntarily entered into a cessationof operations" until Sept. 1, said Bonnie Lovelace,who oversees coal and uranium reclamation for theMontana program. The company wants to commenceroad construction at the coal complex prior toMontana's snowfall season -- which hits high gear inNovember, officials said.     Meanwhile "we'll be making our points" at theconference. The state will try to convince OSM thatTipton's concerns have been addressed. It will alsoquestion the legality of OSM potentially suspendingprimacy in one regard to an individual permit.     Montana officials say any shortcomings onMeridan's Bull Mountains Mine enforcement, suchas failure to file certain public notices, hardly justifypotential suspension of primacy. State officials alsosay the Resource Council has been involved in everystep of the permit process at Bull Mountains.     OSM representatives have said their goal isn'trevoking Montana's primacy but merely ensuringSMCRA is enforced properly.Back to Headline List CopyrightMINE REGULATION REPORTER via NewsNetJUNE 18, 1993EPA PROPOSES OFF-ROAD EQUIPMENT RULE FOR ENGINESBIGGER THAN 50 HORSEPOWER     It's finally come to this: a rule so big thegovernment can't or won't publish it in the FederalRegister.     Twelve hundred pages of an EPA nonroad engineregulation proposal, including uncondensable graphsand diagrams, are available on computer disk. EPAwas kind enough, however, to publish the proposedrule's 36-page preamble.     According to the preamble, nonroad equipmentwith engines more than 50 horsepower, includingconstruction, logging and mining machines, wouldbe regulated for nitrogen oxides (NOX) and smokeemissions.     Engines that would be excluded from regulationinclude those that are regulated by MSHA forunderground use.     Under authority of the 1990 Clean Air Act, whichby the way was just 313 pages long, EPA beganstudying emissions from nonroad engines andvehicles and determined that the equipment kept atleast one area of the U.S. from meeting nationalambient air quality standards for ozone and carbonmonoxide.     A critical part of the problem, the agency said, isthe formation of ozone in and downwind of bigcities. EPA said these emissions can also cause areasoutside big cities to fall below federal standards.     But the American Mining Congress disagreeswith EPA. Mines are located mostly in remote,undeveloped areas and do not cause those regions tofall below the federal ambient area standards, anAMC source said.     While the optimal engine cutoff size has not beendetermined, engine manufacturers and other industrysources have suggested a cutoff in the range of 450to 750 horsepower -- a far cry from the 50-horsepower minimum under the EPA proposal.     Engines used to propel vehicles or powerequipment, such as mobile cranes, or those used asauxiliary engines, such as for refrigerated trailers,would be regulated as well.Emission credit program proposed     EPA has proposed an averaging, banking andtrading program for large nonroad compression-ignition engines in the hopes of providingmanufacturers "flexibility in meeting the proposedNOX standard without reducing environmentalbenefits."     The program would allow manufacturers to earnemission "credits" and bank them for futureaveraging or trading. The credits could then beapplied to engines that are difficult to standardize.     Engines in California would be excluded from thecredit program because the state requires that allengines sold there meet the NOX standard.     If manufacturers use the program, changes inequipment design would be minimal, according toEPA. There would be no effects on 50- to 100-horsepower equipment, while flexibility would beallowed for those engines requiring substantialchanges.     Given that all manufacturers participate in theemission credit program, the average annual cost todevelop and make engines meeting NOX and smokeemissions standards would be $29 million.     EPA assumes that manufacturers will pass anyincreased costs of regulation to the consumer byraising the prices of their engines. EPA's estimatedaverage price increase for 1996 is $110 per engine.     AMC says the mining industry disputes thisfigure and believes that the real cost per engine couldbe much higher.     EPA's Selective Enforcement Auditing programwould require nonroad engine manufacturers to testnewly assembled engines for emissions compliance.This section of the proposed rule was designed toestablish an annually limited number of audits foreach manufacturer.     EPA will hold a hearing on the proposedregulation in Ann Arbor, Mich., on June 25. Writtencomments to EPA are due July 27.     To obtain a copy of the proposal or to order thecomputer disks contact: EPA, Air Docket, Mail CodeLE-131,  401 M St. S.W., Room M-1500,Washington, D.C. 20460, or call 202-260-7548.Refer to Docket No. A-91-24.Back to Headline List CopyrightMINE REGULATION REPORTER via NewsNetJUNE 18, 1993ASARCO NAMED PRP AT TRIUMPH     ASARCO Inc., the Idaho Dept. of Lands andTriumph Minerals Inc. have been named as thepotentially responsible parties at the Triumph MineTailings Piles site, which was recently proposed forSuperfund listing.     EPA is continuing a search for PRPs and isplanning an expedited protective action to preventcontinued exposure to residents.     A risk assessment identified arsenic as theprimary contaminant of concern. Several areas,including tailings piles, a mine process foundationarea and several residential yards, pose acute andchronic exposure risks from arsenic levels.     Preliminary bioavailablity study results showarsenic is more readily absorbed than lead. The studywas done by feeding dirt from the site to pigs.     EPA is evaluating results of the risk assessment toidentify the arsenic concentration that should be usedas the action level for expedited response.     For additional information contact: Chris Field,EPA on-scene-coordinator at 206-553-1674.Back to Headline List CopyrightMINE REGULATION REPORTER via NewsNetJUNE 18, 1993GOVERNMENT CLOSES 13,886 ACRES OPENS ONLY 130 ACRES     In land closure action, BLM and the ForestService have closed or proposed to close a total of13,886 acres throughout the West.     BLM proposes to withdraw 820 acres of publicland and federal minerals, 1,800 acres of publicsurface, and 3,200 acres of federal mineralsunderlying private lands in Teton County, Wyo., forup to two years from surface entry and mining.     The land was closed on June 3 for the protectionof recreation, scenic, riparian, and wildlife values. Itwill remain open to mineral leasing.     Comments are due by September 1 at theWyoming State Director's Office, BLM, P.O. Box1828, Cheyenne, Wyo. 82003.     For further information contact Arlan Hiner at307-367-4358.          BLM has proposed to withdraw 290.02 acresin Oregon for up to two years to protect therecreational values along Galic Creek.     The land, which was closed June 3 to surfaceentry and mining, will remain open to mineralleasing.     Comments are due by September 1 to the OregonState Director, BLM, P.O. Box 2965, Portland, Ore.97208-2965.     For further information contact Donna Kaufmanat 503-280-7162-.     BLM proposes to withdraw 7,544 acres in MonoCounty, Calif., to protect the Bodie Bowl Area ofCritical Environmental Concern.     In lieu of aid of legislation currently underconsideration by Congress, BLM has asked for a fiveyear closure. In the meantime, the land, which closedJune 4, will remain closed for up to two years tosurface entry and mining but remain open to mineralleasing.     Comments are due by September 2.     For further information contact Viola Andrade,California State Office, BLM, 2800 Cottage Way,Room E-2845, Sacramento, Calif. 95825; 916-978-4820.     The Forest Service has proposed to withdraw232.50 acres in New Mexico for up to two yearsfrom location and entry under U.S. mining laws.     The proposal was initiated to protect theinvestment the Forest Service made in the CoyoteRanger District facilities.     The land, closed on June 4, will remain open toall other uses which may be made of National Forestland.     Comments are due by September 2.     For further information contact Margie Martinez,Albuquerque District Office, BLM, 435 Montano RdNE, Albuquerque, N.M. 87107; 505-761-8907.     BLM has reopened the 120 acres to surface entryeffective June 4.     The land, closed two years previously to surfacemining due to fish hatchery and recreational useadjacent to Cutter Dam, expired May 8.     For further information contact GeorgianaArmijo, New Mexico State Office, BLM, P.O. Box27115, Santa Fe, N.M. 87502-0115; 505-438-7594.     BLM has reopened 10 acres in Wyoming thatwere originally included in an application forexchange in the Bridger-Teton National Forest.     The lands were opened on June 4 to all lawsunder National Forest System lands which includelocation and entry under U.S. mining laws.     For further information contact Janet Booth,Wyoming State Office, BLM, 2515 Warren Ave.,P.O. Box 1828, Cheyenne, Wyo. 82001; 307-775-6124.Back to Headline List CopyrightMINE REGULATION REPORTER via NewsNetJUNE 18, 1993Discovery     UNITED STATES V. MIKE POLESCHOOKAND PETER POLESCHOOK, 4/12/93, CACA29892. OHA declared a placer mining claim voidbecause of lack of valuable discovery of gold,despite the placer holder's willingness to expendmore time and effort to locate valuable mineraldeposits.     The government brought the case before OHA onthe basis of a finding of an inspector from the U.S.Forest Service that the Bend Ten placer mining claimin Butte County, Calif., cannot be mined at profit.This finding was made on the basis of the value ofthe gold so far extracted and despite the fact thatPoleschook testified that he believed the gold couldbe found in a deep hole on the site.     OHA noted Poleschook had not mined in thathole and that the hole is in accessible. This means itwould not be possible to mine it in a manner thatwould be economical according to the standards of"the prudent person." Further, the appeals panelfound, "Mr. Poleschook's willingness to expend hislabor and means is not in itself enough to meet theprudent person test."     U.S. V. JOHN R. PICHOWICZ, 5/12/93, A MC303306-303313. OHA ruled eight mining claims tobe null and void for failure to discover valuablemineral deposits, after rejecting the contestee's claimthat the government should have gone beyond themining work done by the contestee to identify morevaluable samples.     OHA found BLM presented a solid prima faciecase that valuable gold deposits had not beenidentified. BLM's mineral report and cost analysisshowed John Pichowicz would have to expend$3.59/cubic yard to mine the claims, which werelocated within Arizona's Muggins Mining District.That fact was not rebutted by Pichowicz. OHA said,though, the analysis might have underestimated thecost to mine the claims because reclamation,operating dry concentrations and other issues werenot taken into account.     OHA felt BLM also overestimated the value ofthe gold by failing to account for a 5-15% loss ingold recoverability that would result from the dryplacer methods Pichowicz proposed to use. Thehighest gold value BLM identified was $2.44/cubicyear. So, using the best sample, it would be expectedPichowicz would lose $1.15/cubic yard of materialmined, OHA said.     The contestee did not offer any substantialevidence of discovery, but instead criticized BLM'ssampling methods for failing to reach the bedrock.But, OHA held, "a government mineral examiner hasno obligation to explore or sample beyond themining claimant's workings or to perform sufficientwork to reach a definite conclusion as to whether avaluable mineral deposit does or does not exist"within the claim. "If a valuable mineral depositexists, it is incumbent upon the claimant to discoverit" at the time of the hearing, OHA held.     OHA also rejected Pichowicz's request forcompensation for the fair market value of his claims."The federal government may withdraw its land frommineral entry regardless of any right a prospectormay have to exclude others from the claim under thedoctrine of pedis possessio," OHA held.Back to Headline List CopyrightMINE REGULATION REPORTER via NewsNetJUNE 18, 1993Jurisdication     CONSOLIDATED COAL CO. V. OSM, CH 91- 9-R,4/12/93. OHA rejected a challenge to a NOV because thechallenge should have been brought not before thehearings division but in a U.S. district court.     OSM issued a NOV charging that ConsolidatedCoal Co. failed to: regrade, protect and stabilize allareas disturbed by coal mining; control discharge tostop erosion; establish sediment control for ahaulroad; establish a permanent vegetative cover ona disturbed area; and compact material used tobackfill and maintain drainage for the northeasternportion of the permit area.     Consolidated did not dispute the facts. Rather, itclaimed that OSM did not have the power to issuethe NOV because SMCRA does not authorize OSMto issue such NOVs in states with approvedregulatory programs, such as Pennsylvania, unlessthere is a finding of widespread enforcementdeficiencies within that program and no such findinghas been made, Consolidated argued.     The ALJ said however, that Consolidated'schallenge must fail because it is well settled that achallenge to SMCRA regulations must be brought inthe U.S. District Court for the District of ColumbiaCircuit within 60 days of promulgation of theregulations (30 U.S.C. Sect. 1276(a)(1)(1982)). "TheDistrict of Columbia circuit has exclusivejurisdiction over such challenges," the judge said.Back to Headline List CopyrightMINE REGULATION REPORTER via NewsNetJUNE 18, 1993Placer Mining     U.S. V. JAMES UBERT, RITA AUBERT,RENEE AUBERT AND JASON OTEN, 4/12/93,CA MC 244967-244968. OHA ruled a placer miningoperation should not be allowed when it was foundto be unprofitable, while at the same time it wouldreduce the income from recreational use of a riverwithin the permit area.     BLM's California office transmitted to theHearings Division a dispute involving the Mote A-Band Mote C placer mining claims, which werelocated in a power site withdrawal on theMokelumne River.     Despite adequate notice the contestees (the claimholders) did not appear at the hearing.     At issue was the question whether the miningoperations would substantially interfere with otheruses of the lands covered by the claim. A BLMgeologist testified that the mining operations woulddisturb nearly a mile of the Mokelumne River,interfering with recreational uses of the river. Also,an official with the East Bay Municipal UtilityDistrict said siltation generated by eight suctiondredges to be used in the operation could impact thestorage capacity of the downstream PardeeReservoir.     The OHA administrative law judge looked at therevenues over five years from recreational activities-- $2,000,000 -- that would be substantially reducedby the mining activity. He compared that with the 20people who would be employed by the miningactivity and the $100,000 loss the gold miningoperation would suffer over five years. Based on thiscomparison, OHA found "placer mining wouldsubstantially interfere with other land uses and thatplacer mining should be prohibited" in the areas inquestion.Back to Headline List CopyrightMINE REGULATION REPORTER via NewsNetJUNE 18, 1993Reclamation     GATLIFF COAL CO. V. OSM, 5/11/93, NX 92-6-R.     OHA sustained a NOV after ruling thatOSM's prima facia case that permit violations hadoccurred was not refuted by a claim that actionstaken in violation of a permit were just as effectiveas the original requirements in reclaiming the land.     OHA faced review of a NOV for drainageproblems on a permit. OSM cited Gatliff Coal Co.for:     > "Failure to construct and maintain Basin 703 in       accordance with approved plans.     > Failure to construct [diversion ditch] No. 18 in       accordance with approved plans."     An OSM inspector said that Basin 703, whichwas depicted in the permit as a permanentimpoundment, had been mined through. Theinspector further found that the diversion ditchdrained into Basin 704, instead of Basin 703 as thepermit required.     The NOV required reconstruction of Basin 703and a change in drainage from the diversion ditch.Gatliff completed the first remedial measures andfiled for review of the NOV.     OHA noted that in reviewing the NOV, theburden of establishing a prima facia case would beOSM's, while the ultimate burden of persuasionwould rest with the challenger.     OSM "clearly carried its burden of proof," theOHA administrative law judge held, because itprovided unrefuted evidence two aspects of thepermit were violated. Gatliff did not provideevidence rebutting that prima facie case and"attempted to show only that the structures it had inplace were just as effective as those which shouldhave been constructed." Since the rebuttal failed, theNOV was sustained.Back to Headline List CopyrightMINE REGULATION REPORTER via NewsNetJUNE 18, 1993UNUSED FORFEITED BOND COULD BE RETURNED IF SITE ISMINED BY ANOTHER OPERATOR     Kentucky has submitted proposed amendments toOSM on bond forfeitures and general provisions forinspection and enforcement.     Under bond forfeiture, the permittee and\oroperator, not just the operator as it stands now,would be liable for the additional cost necessary toachieve reclamation if the amount of the forfeitedbond is insufficient to pay the full cost of thereclamation.     It would also require that an unused forfeitedbond be returned to its owner if the state has notcompleted the reclamation plan on the forfeited siteand the site is completely over-lapped by anotherpermit and completely disturbed by that over-lappingpermittee.     Under inspections, the federal section of the rulestates that regular monthly partial inspections neednot be continued at minesites that are in temporarycessation, although quarterly complete inspectionsmust continue.     However Kentucky program rules do not providefor a reduced inspection frequency at minesites intemporary cessation. If approved, the newamendment will provide reduced frequency ofinspections at such minesites.     Copies of this file are available at the LexingtonField Office, OSM, 2675 Regency Road, Lexington,Ky. 40503-2922.     Hearing requests are due June 28.     For further information contact William Kovacicat 606-233-2894.Back to Headline List CopyrightMINE REGULATION REPORTER via NewsNetJUNE 18, 1993CIVIL PENALTY MODIFICATION APPROVED     OSM has given Ohio final approval on civilpenalty language.     The rule allows the Ohio Reclamation Board toforward penalties or remaining penalty balances tothe Dept. of Natural Resources for deposit in the coalmining reclamation fund.     Other amendments had called for revisions to 13sections of the Ohio Revised Code which concernsthe retention of State civil penalties; refund of permitfees, confidential information regarding exemptionrequests for incidental coal extraction; and both theReclamation Supplemental Forfeiture Fund and theCoal Mining Performance Bond Fund.     It also concerns the limitations on award of costsand expenses, reclamation contracts with surfacemine operators, reclamation of interim forfeitedareas, and many others.     However, these statutory provisions are to beincorporated into a state bill, which had not yet beendrafted. OSM will make a decision on the languageonce the legislation is introduced and a copy of thebill sent to OSM.     Information on the language can be obtained fromthe Columbus Field Office, OSM, 2242 S. HamiltonRd., Room 202, Columbus, Ohio 43232.     For further information contact Richard Seibel at614-866-0578 at the Columbus Field Office.Back to Headline List CopyrightMINE REGULATION REPORTER via NewsNetJUNE 18, 1993AMENDMENTS FACE COURT CHALLENGE     The Pennsylvania Coal Assn. is challengingOSM-approved provisions of the state's surfacemining program that go by the adage "ignorance isno excuse."     An OSM-approved amendment allows the state toassess individual civil penalties against corporateofficers who do not knowingly and willfullyparticipate in a violation.     Changes also approved by OSM overridePennsylvania's "dual opportunity" appeal process.The state has eliminated an operator's right to appeala violation when a civil penalty is appealed.     Stephen Allen of Buchanan Ingersoll said thisprovision is directly contrary to a 1988 courtdecision, Kent Coal Mining Co., which upheld anoperator's right to appeal both a violation and anexcessive penalty.     The association has asked the court topermanently enjoin the state and OSM fromenforcement of both provisions and is asking forattorney fees.Back to Headline List CopyrightMINE REGULATION REPORTER via NewsNetJUNE 18, 1993BONDING LANGUAGE PROPOSED     OSM has received two proposed amendmentsfrom Pennsylvania regarding self-bonding andfinancial instruments permitted for postingperformance bonds.     The new amendment would provide the permitapplicant with the option to use a self-bond as thefinancial tool instead of a surety or collateral bondfor the performance bond. Performance bond's aremust be presented before a coal mine permit may beissued or coal mining activities can begin.     The state also wants to amend what is accepted asa financial instrument for a performance bond.     The state would like to add the options of lifeinsurance policies, annuities or trust funds asacceptable financial instruments for postingperformance bonds.     Comments are due by July 7, hearing requestsJune 22.     For additional information contact Robert Biggi,OSM Harrisburg Field Office at 717-782-4036.Back to Headline List CopyrightMINE REGULATION REPORTER via NewsNetJUNE 18, 1993MSHA HEALTH AND SAFETY COURSES AVAILABLE UPON REQUESTThe following courses are available to MSHA andindustry personnel and will be presented uponrequest by an individual or a company.     First Aid Basic or Refresher, John Hymes,National Mine Safety and Health Academy, P.O.Box 1166, Beckley, W.Va. 25802-1166; 304-256-3313; FTS 930-3313.     Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation (CPR) Training,Basic Instructor, Basic Rescuer and Heart SaverCourses, Kenneth Scott, National Mine Safety andHealth Academy, P.O. Box 1166, Beckley, W.Va.25802-1166; 304-256-3313; FTS 930-3313.     Fundamentals of Human Factors Engineering,Kenneth Scott, National Mine Safety and HealthAcademy, P.O. Box 1166, Beckley, W.Va., 25802-1166; 304-256-3313; FTS 304-930-3313.     Approval Procedures Seminar with Training forElectrical Safety in Hazardous Locations, RobertMarshall, MSHA Approval and Certification Center,R.R. 1, Box 251, Industrial Park Rd., Triadelphia,W.Va. 26059; 304-547-0400; FTS 304-273-1301.     Electrical Safety, William Helffrich, BrucetonSafety Technology Center, Cochrans Mill Rd., P.O.Box 18233, Pittsburgh, Pa. 15236; 412-892-6959;FTS 412-723-6959.     Industrial Electrical Retraining, DonaldHutchison, Denver Safety and Health TechnologyCenter, P.O. Box 25367, Denver Federal Center,Denver, Colo. 80225; 303-231-5430; FTS 303-554-5430.     Automated Temporary Roof Support Systems orRoof Control Specialists - Coal - Refresher Training,Terry Hoch, Bruceton Safety Technology Center,Cochrans Mill Rd., P.O. Box 18233, Pittsburgh, Pa.15236; 412-892-6904; FTS 412-723-6904.     Surface Mining Seminar on Ground Control,Terry Hoch, Bruceton Safety Technology Center,Cochrans Mill Rd., P.O. Box 18233, Pittsburgh, Pa.15236; 412-892-6904; FTS 412-723-6904.     Bolting Practices for Limestone, Robert Ferriter,Denver Safety and Health Technology Center, P.O.Box 25367, Denver Federal Center, Denver, Colo.80225; 303-231-5428; FTS 303-554-5428.     Coal: Its Storage, Handling and Processing, CleteStephan, Bruceton Safety Technology Center,Cochrans Mill Rd., P.O. Box 18233, Pittsburgh, Pa.15236: 412-892-6094; FTS 412-723-6904.     Coal Mine Ventilation, Jerry Herndon, NationalMine Safety and Health Academy, P.O. Box 1166,Beckley, W.Va. 25802-1166; 304-256-3313; FTS304-930-3313.     Dust Collection Systems, George Dvorznak,Approval and Certification Center, R.R. 1, Box 251,Industrial Park Rd., Triadelphia, W.Va. 26059; 304-547-0400; FTS 304-723-1301.     Organic Vapor Monitoring, P.D. Blumenstein,Denver Safety and Health Technology Center, P.O.Box 25367, Denver Federal Center, Denver FederalCenter, 80225; 303-231-5441; FTS 303-554-5441.     Mine Ventilation for MSHA CMS&H Specialistsof MSHA Supervisors, Edward Miller, PittsburghHealth Technology Center, 4800 Forbes Ave.,Pittsburgh, Pa., 15213; 412-578-3760; FTS 412-721-3760.     Practical Noise Control in Mining, Richard Goff,Denver Safety and Health Technology Center, P.O.Box 25367, Denver Federal Center, Denver, Colo.80225; 303-231-5443; FTS 303-554-5443.     Inspection of Mine-Wide Monitoring Systems,Robert Marshall, Approval and Certification Center,R.R. 1, Box 251, Industrial Park Rd., Triadelphia,W.Va. 26059; 304-547-0400; FTS 304-723-1301.     Mine-Wide Monitoring Systems-Compliancewith MSHA Requirements,  Robert Marshall,Approval and Certification Center, R.R. 1, Box 251,Industrial Park Rd., Triadelphia, W.Va. 26059; 304-547-0400; FTS 304-723-1301.     Inspection of Tailings Embankments, John Odell,Denver Safety and Health Technology Center, P.O.Box 25367, Denver Federal Center, Denver, Colo.80225; 303-231-5434; FTS 303-554-5434.     Mine Waste Impoundment for MSHA FieldSpecialists or Industry,  Kevin Wu, Bruceton SafetyTechnology Center, Cochrans Mill Rd., P.O. Box18233, Pittsburgh, Pa. 15236; 412-892-6903; FTS412-723-6903.     Refuse Impoundment: Qualification for IndustryPersonnel, Jerry Herndon, National Mine Safety andHealth Academy, P.O. Box 1166, Beckely, W.Va.25802-1166; 304-256-3313; FTS 304-930-3313.     Load Locking Valves, George Dvorznak,Approval and Certification Center, R.R. 1, Box 251,Industrial Park Rd., Triadelphia, W.Va. 26059; 304-547-0400; FTS 304-723-1301.     Permissibility Checklists for Diesel Equipment,George Dvorznak, Approval and CertificationCenter, R.R. 1, Box 251, Industrial Park Rd.,Triadelphia, W.Va. 26059; 304-547-0400; FTS 304-723-1301.     Permissibility Training for Metal and Non-MetalMine Safety and Health Personnel, Robert Marshall,Approval and Certification Center, R.R. 1, Box 251,Industrial Park Rd., Triadelphia, W.Va. 26059; 304-547-0400; FTS 304-723-1301.     Permissibility for Coal, Donald Hutchison,Denver Safety and Health Technology Center, P.O.Box 25367, Denver Federal Center, Denver, Colo.80225; 303-231-5430; FTS 303-554-5430.Radiation Monitoring and Control, Wade Cooper,Denver Safety and Health Technology Center, P.O.Box 35367, Denver Federal Center, Denver, Colo.80225, 303-231-5434: FTS 303-554-5434.     Wire Rope, Donald Hutchison, Denver Safety andHealth Technology Center, P.O. Box 25367, DenverFederal Center, Denver, Colo. 80225; 303-231-5430; FTS303-554-5430.Meetings Use of AutoCAD for Mining,Geology and Environmental Mapping, Jan. 14-16, Houston(Gibbs Associates, P.O. Box 706, Boulder, Colo. 80306-0706; 303-444-6032).     Drilling and Blasting Techniques forConstruction, Quarrying, Open Pit Mining,Trenching and Pipelines, Jan. 25-29, Seattle, Wash.(Susan Stone, Engineering Continuing Education,University of Washington, College of Engineering,4725 30th Ave. NE, Seattle, Wash. 98105; 206-543-5539 or FTS 206-543-2352).Back to Headline List CopyrightMINE REGULATION REPORTER via NewsNetJUNE 18, 1993MeetingsJune     National Coal Assn. Annual Convention, June 17-20, White Sulphur Springs, W.Va. (Karen Dugan,National Coal Assn., 1130 17th St. N.W.,Washington, D.C. 20036; 202-463-2614).     3rd International GPS/GIS Conference &Training Program, June 21-25, Seattle, (ConferenceCoordinator, C/O GeoResearch Inc., 115 N.Broadway, Billings, Mont. 59101; 406-248-6771).     Rocky Mountain Coal Mining institute, June 27-29, Beaver Creek, Colo. (Doris Finnie, 303-238-9099).     34th U.S. Symposium on Rock Mechanics, June27-30, Madison, Wis. (Bazalel Haimson, Dept. ofMaterials Science and Engineering, University ofWisconsin, 1509 University Ave., Madison, Wis.53706; fax: 608-265-3021).July     Third Annual Mine Waste and RemediationTechnology Conference, July 6-9, Butte, Mont.(Pheobe Boelter, Conference, Coordination Office;312-988-7667).     Oregon State Mining Champsionships, July 14-16, Baker City, Ore. (Lorna Tonack, Oregon StateMining Championships, 3345 Estes St., Baker City,Ore. 97814; 6503-523-2801).     39th Annual Rocky Mountain Mineral LawInstitute, July 17, Vail, Colo. (Rocky MountainMineral Law Foundation, Porter AdministrationBldg., 7039 E. 18th Ave., Denver 80220; 303-327-8100).August     Energy and Mineral Resources of CentralMontana, August 26-28, Billings and Lewistown,Mont. (Roy Boles, Montana Geological Society, Box844, Billings, Mont. 69103; 406-656-0069).September     Conference Mine Subsidence in Urban andDeveloped Areas, September 9-10, Rock Springs,Wyo. (Timothy Richmond, Wyoming Department ofEnvironmental Quality, 122 W. 25th St., Cheyenne,Wyo. 82002; fax:  307-634-0799).     Rocky Mountain Association of EnvironmentalProfessionals Annual Conference, Sept. 15-17,Denver, (Glenn Eurick, RMAEP, P.O. Box 46171,Denver;  801-268-4447).     American Mining Congress Mining Convention,September 19-22, San Francisco, Calif. (AMC, 1920N. St., N.W., Suite 300, Washington, D.C. 20036;202-861-2800 or fax: 202-861-2821)     National Assn. of State Land Reclamationists andInterstate Mining Compact Commission JointMeeting, Sept. 27- 29, Raddision Plaza LordBaltimore Hote, Baltimore, MD (Beth Botis, IMCC,703-709-8654).     Nevada Mining Association, Tahoe, Nev.(Nevada Mining Assn, 5250 S. Virginia, #220, Reno,Nev. 89502; 702-829-2121.     Utah Mining Assn, Park City, Utah (Utah MiningAssn., 825 Kearns Bldg., Salt Lake City, Utah84101; 901-364-1874).     Tenth Annual Pittsburgh Coal Conference,Pittsburgh, Pa. (Ann McDonald, Pittsburgh CoalConference, University of Pittsburgh, 1140 BenedumHall, Pittsburgh, Pa. 15261; 412-624-7440 or fax:412-624-1480).     National Coal Association Coal IssuesConference, Washington, (Gloria Runyon, NCA,1130 17th St., N.W., Washington, D.C. 20036; 202-463-2656).     Annual Meeting of the Illinois Mining Institute,Collinsville, Ill. (Phyllis Godwin, IMI, P.O. Box 20,Pesotum, Ill. 61863; phone/fax: 217-867-2791).     22nd Annual Coal Lawyers Conference,St.Petersburg Beach, Fla. (Juanita Dukes, NationalCoal Assn., 1130 17th St., N.W., Washington 20036;202-463-2614).October     Biennial Conference of The Institute forBriquetting and Agglomeration, Seattle (RalphWeggel, IBA, 179 Riverview Acres Road, Hudson,Wis. 54015; 715-549-6342 or fax: 715-549-5678).November     Northwest Mining Association's 99th AnnualConvention, Short Course and Trade Show, Nov. 28- Dec. 3, Spokane, Wash. (NWMA, 10 N. Post, Suite414, Spokane, Wash. 99201; 509-624-1158 or fax:509-623-1241.)     Alaska Miners Association Convention,Anchorage, Ala. (AMA, 501 W. Northern Lights,Suite 203, Anchorage, Ala.  99503; 907-276-0347).     Eastern Oil Shale Symposium, Lexington, Ky.(Geaunita Caylor, University of Kentucky, 643Maxwelton Ct., Lexington, Ky. 40506; 606-257-2820 or fax: 606-258-1049).     Pennsylvania Blasting Conference, UniversityPark, Pa. (Barbara Impellitteri, ConferenceCoordinator, Penn State University, 410 KellerConference Center, University Park, Pa. 16802; 814-863-1738 or fax: 814-865-3749).Call for Papers     Automation in the Stone Industry: The Key toFuture Profitability, Oct. 2-4, Columbus, Ohio (F.A.Renninger, National Stone Assn., 1415 Elliot PlaceN.W., Washington, D.C. 20007; fax: 202-342-0702.Back to Headline List WT02-B35-33IA086-000616-B013-9http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/ey97.html 205.156.212.5 19970122000726 text/html 75833HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 00:05:24 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:40:38 GMTContent-length: 75646Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ey97.html Sample Issue Copyright NORTH SEA LETTER via NewsNet January 10, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES TESTS CONFIRM SAGA HAS MAJOR GAS FIND IN 6406/2 (321 words) AKER, ABB AND MARITIME TENTECH WIN MAJOR AASGARD SHIP CONTRACT (431 words) ESSO CONTRACTS ABB FOR SUBSEA PART OF BALDER (130 words) ROCKWATER PUTS VALUE ON TELFORD EPIC (135 words) NSL CONSTRUCTION SURVEY - NW EUROPEAN SHELF (209 words) SHELL INITIATES COMPETITION FOR SHEARWATER DESIGN (261 words) STATOIL AWARDS DRESSER RAND TURBO-MACHINERY FRAME CONTRACT (187 words) TEXACO ISSUES NOTICE FOR PIPELINE SYSTEM WORK (147 words) MANNESMANN WINS CONTRACT TO SUPPLY BRITANNIA LINEPIPE (129 words) BARMAC PLANS MAJOR INVESTMENT IN NIGG TO MEET CONSTRUCTION NEEDS (390 words) PHILLIPS TARGETS POSSIBLE JACQUI START-UP AT END-1997 (184 words) NEWS STATOIL ENGINEERS SEEK PATENTS FOR VESSEL AND LIFTING SOLUTIONS (118 words) BHP ACHIEVES FIRST GAS FROM LIVERPOOL BAY HAMILTON NORTH FIELD (118 words) MAERSK BRINGS ROAR ON STREAM (86 words) AMERADA AND DONG ASSESS POTENTIAL OF NEW DANISH GAS SYSTEM (181 words) STUDY SHOWS ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT OF AASGARD GAS WILL BE LIMITED (164 words) PUBLICATIONS REVIEW IEA FORECASTS NEW PEAK FOR NORTH SEA OIL PRODUCTION (321 words) NEWS GASUNIE RAISES GAS RESERVES ESTIMATES (34 words) NIGG TERMINAL CARRIES OUT FIRST TRANSFER OF ALBA CRUDE (157 words) CHEVRON WINS APPROVAL TO SWITCH FROM UNST TO SCATSTA (124 words) CONOCO UPS MURDOCH RESERVES ON BACK OF NEW WELL (334 words) JOHN SHAW BACK IN MARKET AFTER SHELL DEFERS KINGFISHER START (178 words) TOTAL TAKING SOVEREIGN EXPLORER FOR UK AND EIRE DEEPWATER PROGRAMME (146 words) ELF INVITES BIDS FOR ELGIN/FRANKLIN DRILLING (317 words) BP RENEWS BENREOCH FOR A FURTHER 12 MONTHS TO MAY 1997 (225 words) BP TENDERS FOR WELL AND EXTENDED TEST ON ROSS (116 words) ROWAN SECURES DUTCH FIXTURES FOR JACK-UP RIGS (209 words) MAERSK OIL CHECKS MARKET AGAINST EXPIRY OF DANISH JACK-UP CONTRACTS (134 words) BHP ISSUES INQUIRY FOR UK JACK-UP PROGRAMMES (199 words) NORSK HYDRO REMAINS OPEN FOR EXPLORATION SEMI FOR 1997 (281 words) WEST ALPHA EN ROUTE FROM CHINA TO NORTH SEA (296 words) SIRI DISCOVERY COULD BE FAST-TRACKED FOR 1998 START (226 words) AMOCO ABANDONS NOEKKEN DUSTER (73 words) HYDRO PREPARES TO RUN ONE TEST ON OSEBERG AREA DISCOVERY (145 words) VESLEFRIKK WILDCAT TURNS UP SMALL FIND (88 words) DRILLING ACTIVITY UPDATE, NEW SPUDS AND COMPLETIONS (724 words) ENTERPRISE BOOSTS NELSON AREA ACREAGE IN FARM-IN DEAL WITH BP (284 words) NESTE OFFLOADS 50% STAKE IN SOVEREIGN EXPLORATION (79 words) HITEC ACQUIRING MARINE CONSULTING GROUP (78 words) ABBOT LAUNCHES #7.8M BID FOR OIS (102 words) CAIRN ARRANGES SHARE PLACING TO HELP FUND ACTIVITIES (73 words) HSE INVESTIGATES UK YARD BLAST THAT CLAIMED THREE LIVES (173 words) ENSCO 92 ACCIDENT VICTIM DIES (140 words) OIL INDUSTRY PEOPLE (165 words) OIL INDUSTRY NEWS IN BRIEF (74 words) OIL INDUSTRY NEWS IN BRIEF (87 words) OIL INDUSTRY NEWS IN BRIEF (88 words) OIL INDUSTRY NEWS IN BRIEF (63 words) OIL INDUSTRY NEWS IN BRIEF (87 words) OIL INDUSTRY NEWS IN BRIEF (87 words) OIL INDUSTRY NEWS IN BRIEF (72 words) OIL INDUSTRY NEWS IN BRIEF (26 words) OIL INDUSTRY NEWS IN BRIEF (53 words) OIL INDUSTRY NEWS IN BRIEF (65 words) OIL INDUSTRY NEWS IN BRIEF (47 words) OIL INDUSTRY NEWS IN BRIEF (64 words) CopyrightNORTH SEA LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996TESTS CONFIRM SAGA HAS MAJOR GAS FIND IN 6406/2Saga Petroleum, operator of last year's most significant Norwegiandiscovery - 6406/2-1, southwest of Smoerbukk - is believed to be takinga more sober view of likely recoverable reserves after an extensivetest programme confirmed reservoir variability.  According to the NPD,a seven-DST test programme proved that reservoir quality varies greatlyover the thick gross pay section with some zones very dense whileothers exhibit good production qualities.Nevertheless, preliminary estimates confirm the find to be of majorimportance containing recoverable reserves in the order of 50-100 MMcmof oil equivalents, reports the NPD.  Informed sources suggest thisrange is too conservative and 100 MMcm may be a more realisticestimate.  Most of the reserves are in the form of gas, but largequantities of condensate are also present.  The results of the wellcurrently being drilled into the southern part of the structure -6406/2-2 - will allow the find's size to be estimated with morecertainty, according to the NPD.The test programme is said to have yielded maximum gas flowrates of27.534 MMcfd and 1,572 b/d of condensate through a 28.58-millimetrechoke.  It is believed the water contact proved to be higher than firstthought and the Tilje formation was a disappointment.  As expectedbefore testing the Ile proved to be the best zone and contains themajority of the reserves.Exploration well 6406/2-1 first discovered gas last Spring, but wassuspended short of TD in March due to fisheries and environmentalrestrictions (NSL 1000/13).  The well was re-entered late in Augustwith the semisub Ross Isle and deepened to a TD of 5,766 metres, makingit the deepest exploration well ever drilled on the Norwegian Shelf.More core material was recovered than on any other Norwegian well -over 600 metres.  The well was finally suspended on January 7 and theRoss Isle is preparing to spud Smoerbukk prospect appraisal well6506/11-4S for Statoil.Back to Headline List CopyrightNORTH SEA LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996AKER, ABB AND MARITIME TENTECH WIN MAJOR AASGARD SHIP CONTRACTA consortium comprising Aker, ABB and Maritime Tentech has won theprestigious contract to build the world's largest monohull productionvessel for Statoil's Aasgard oilfield development.  The contractorswill form an alliance with Statoil to implement the project, sharingprofits above a target price for the facilities as well as the risk ofcost overruns.  Maritime Tentech has been given responsibility fordelivering the hull, which will be built by Hitachi in Japan.  Thiscontract is valued at Kr 1.52bn ($239m).  Aker Engineering and ABB willhave responsibility for engineering and purchase of the plant to beinstalled on the deck of the vessel, a contract which amounts to aroundKr 140m.  Aker Stord will assemble and hook-up the vessel - work valuedat Kr 300m.The contracts with ABB, Aker and Tentech, which are subject togovernment approval of the field development plan, include options ofaround Kr 450m for further fabrication and marine installation.  Thevessel's deck plant, due to be purchased this Spring, is not includedin the contracts awarded to date.The oil production vessel for Aasgard is due for delivery from Stord atend-May 1998 for first oil in August 1998.  The ship will have aproduction capacity of around 200,000 b/d of oil and gas processingcapability of up to 16 MMcmd.  Storage will be provided for 150,000 cmof oil.  The vessel will measure 276 metres long by 45.4 metres acrossthe beam with a draught of 26.6 metres.Aker also announced the Kr 380m contract for electrical work on theAasgard Field had been awarded to Aker Elektro.  The company willsupply systems for the production vessel and the gas platform with thecontract encompassing engineering, follow-up work at the shipyards,hook-up, testing and commissioning plus an option for operatingmaintenance and the supply of spare parts during the operational phase. Preparatory work will begin at once and the project is planned tostart in March 1996.  The gas platform is due for completion in October2000.  Aker Engineering and Cegelec UK will be Aker Elektro's mainsubcontractors.At the same time Aker said Statoil had awarded Aker Engineering a Kr30m contract to design the production systems for the Aasgard Field gasplatform.  Design work will get under way immediately and continueuntil April 1997.  The scope of Aker Engineering's contract may beexpanded, depending on how the project is implemented.  A decision onwhether detailed engineering and construction will be separatecontracts will be made later this year.  If they are, Aker will carryout detailed engineering.Back to Headline List CopyrightNORTH SEA LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996ESSO CONTRACTS ABB FOR SUBSEA PART OF BALDEREsso Norway has awarded an ABB/Coflexip Stena partnership a Kr 650-700m($102.3-110.2m) contract to design, procure and install all the subseaequipment for the Balder Field development.  ABB will be responsiblefor the wellhead equipment and controls, while Coflexip Stena will beresponsible for the risers and flowlines.  The contract was signed justbefore Christmas and engineering work has already started.  The initialphase of the work, comprising 15 wells, is to be completed by 1998,with equipment for the first well to be delivered by October this year. There is an option for a second phase involving an additional 10-12wells.*  Amerada Hess is thought to be close to a contract award for thesubsea part of Durward/Dauntless, with Stolt Comex Seaway believed tobe well placed.Back to Headline List CopyrightNORTH SEA LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996ROCKWATER PUTS VALUE ON TELFORD EPICThe EPIC contract for the Telford development, awarded recently byoperator Amerada Hess to Rockwater, is worth #40m ($62m), thecontractor reports (NSL 1028/3).  The work includes the fabrication andinstallation of two, 180-tonne manifolds, a 100-tonne shutdown valvestructure and a 150-metre, 220-tonne riser caisson which will beinstalled on the Scott production platform.  Also included in theworkscope is the provision of flowlines, services lines, controlequipment and umbilicals and the supply of tie-in spools and jumpers.Brown & Root will handle the initial design engineering phase of theproject which is worth #1.3m, while Barmac will undertake a #3mcontract for the fabrication of the structures and riser caisson.Pipelay and trenching will be carried out by Coflexip Stena under a#12m sub-contract.  Installation will be carried out using the Regalia.Back to Headline List CopyrightNORTH SEA LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996NSL CONSTRUCTION SURVEY - NW EUROPEAN SHELFPipelay/Underwater Contracting January 1996Current biddingOperator       Sector  Field        Type of WorkAmerada        UK      Durward etc  Subsea installationClyde          NL      P2/P6        PipelayElf Enterprise UK      15/17 etc    PipelayEsso           Nor     Balder       EPCI subsea tiebackInterconnector UK/Bel  UK/Bel       PipelayMaersk         DK      Dan FF       PipelayMaersk         DK      Various      ROV pipeline inspectionMarathon       ER      Kinsale etc  EPIC subseaMarathon       UK      West Brae    EPIC subsea tiebackPhillips       Nor     Ekofisk II   Subsea workSaga           Nor     Varg         Subsea installationShell          UK      Tern/Eider   Replacement water injection lineShell          UK      Gannet       PipelaySLP            UK      MacCulloch   SubseaStatoil        Nor     Aasgard etc  Framework pipelayBids expectedOperator       Sector  Field     Type of Work      Bids OutArco           UK      Blenheim  Subsea tieback    Pre-qualificationBG             UK      Various   Air/mixed gas     Pre-qualification                                 diving supportLasmo          UK      Various   1996 diving       Pre-qualification                                 support vesselMaersk         DK      Various   1996 IRM          Pre-qualificationMarathon       UK      Various   Long-term IRM     Pre-qualificationNAM            NL      Various   Pipeline work     Pre-qualificationOccidental     NL      Various   Air diving/ROV    Pre-qualification                                 servicesOccidental     NL      Various   Diving support    Pre-qualification                                 vesselShell          UK      Curlew    Subsea            ShortlyTexaco         UK      Unnamed   Subsea            Pre-qualificationTexaco         UK      Galley    Pipelay           Pre-qualificationWintershall    UK      Windermere Pipelay          Pre-qualificationRecent awardsOperator       Sector  Field     Type of work      ContractorAmoco          UK      Arkwright Pipelay           AllseasNorsk Hydro    Nor     Njord     Risers/service    Coflexip Stena                                 lines             OffshoreShell          UK      Fulmar    Pipelay/diving    Allseas/CSOBack to Headline List CopyrightNORTH SEA LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996SHELL INITIATES COMPETITION FOR SHEARWATER DESIGNShell is proposing that the main development contract(s) for theShearwater Field in the Central North Sea will be awarded following adesign competition.  The scope of work will include detailed design,fabrication, installation, hook-up and commissioning of topsides for upto two lightweight wellhead structures bridge-linked to a PUQ platform,topsides for which will weigh about 15,000 tonnes, plus the supportingstructure for the PUQ only.  The value of the work is put at #450m($697m).  Written applications to participate in the designcompetition, requests for copies of the pre-qualification andcontractor screening questionnaires need to be received by January 12(10.00 hrs).*  Shell, Aberdeen, is pre-qualifying companies for a variety ofcontracts, in relation to the development of its North Sea fields.  Thelist includes: engineering design, project support and procurement;pipelines, flowlines and umbilicals; pipeline tie-ins; fabricationincluding topsides facilities modules of up to 2,000 tonnes, 5,000t and10,000t and accommodation modules up to 2,500t, substructure and subseamanifolds and structures; installation; hook-up and commissioning.Written applications for documents must be received by January 12.In a separate entry, Shell is pre-qualifying contractors for the supplyof a subsea pipe-in-pipe thermal insulation system for Etap.  This willconsist of a carbon steel carrier sleeve around a carbon steel productlinepipe, about 47 kms in length with an outside diameter in the sizerange of 16-24 inches, carrying hydrocarbon product at temperatures inexcess of 160 deg C.  The estimated contract value is #17m.  Thenotices cover the period until the OSCAR scheme is fully operational.Back to Headline List CopyrightNORTH SEA LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996STATOIL AWARDS DRESSER RAND TURBO-MACHINERY FRAME CONTRACTStatoil has awarded Dresser Rand a frame contract worth some Kr 1.5bn($236m) for delivery of turbo-machinery.  The five-year contract,including options for extensions by three and two years, is forexisting and new projects, such as Aasgard and the Gullfaks satellites,and covers complete gas-turbine-driven compressor trains andintegration of electrically-powered compressor trains with gas-turbine-driven generators.  The work also includes the purchase of technicalsupport and spare parts, with options for service and maintenance.Equipment supplied will be used to export and reinject gas and forpower generation on installations.  Statoil expects the deal to achievecost savings of about 10% compared with earlier purchases in the samearea.*  Bids close with Statoil early next month for a long-term frameworkagreement involving a number of pipelay projects, including Aasgard.Statoil has also advertised in the Official Journal requirements for awide range of products and services, including equipment and servicesrelating to the Heidrun, NorFra, Aasgard and Europipe II projects.  Thelists cover equipment and services for new pipelines, platforms, FPSOsand terminals, plus ongoing maintenance and modifications, officeequipment and computer supplies.Back to Headline List CopyrightNORTH SEA LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996TEXACO ISSUES NOTICE FOR PIPELINE SYSTEM WORKTexaco, London, has advertised a requirement for the detailedengineering, procurement, installation, testing and pre-commissioningof oil and gas pipeline systems in the UK Central North Sea.  The entryis thought to refer to the proposed Galley development in block 15/23.The pipelines are expected to be between six inches and 12 inches indiameter and are required for the export of processed oil and processedor unprocessed gas.  The water depth is up to 150 metres.  Pipelinelength will be between seven kms and 30 kms. The workscope may includethe design and installation of spool connections, SSIVs and platformriser installation.Pipelay and pre-commissioning of tie-ins is to be completed by thethird quarter of 1997.  The pipeline will link a new installation to anexisting host platform.  Replies are due back by January 18 and ITTsare expected to be dispatched in February.Back to Headline List CopyrightNORTH SEA LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996MANNESMANN WINS CONTRACT TO SUPPLY BRITANNIA LINEPIPEBritannia Operator has awarded Mannesmann Handel a contract for thesupply of 185 kms of 27-inch OD linepipe for the export trunkline fromthe platform to Mobil's SAGE terminal.  A total of 50,000-55,000 tonneswill be supplied by Mannesmann's Europipe mill in Mulheim, Germany.First deliveries to a North Sea coating site will be made in June andshould be completed in mid-August.  The pipe coating contract is duefor award in April.  A pipelay contract was awarded to EMC last Autumn.BOL said that careful timing of procurement and more functionalspecifications had saved several million pounds on the contract.  Thechoice of an outer diameter of 27 inches on its own had saved some #2m($3.1m) compared with opting for the larger standard 28-inch diameterlinepipe.Back to Headline List CopyrightNORTH SEA LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996BARMAC PLANS MAJOR INVESTMENT IN NIGG TO MEET CONSTRUCTION NEEDSBarmac is planning a multi-million investment programme to upgradefacilities at its Nigg yard in the north of Scotland.  The initiativeforms part of the company's strategic plan to address the needs of thechanging offshore construction market, which has seen the decline oftraditional fabrication markets due to depressed oil and gas prices,new technologies and the maturity of the North Sea.  At the same timethis is being offset by a growing requirement for floating productionsystems, decommissioning of redundant offshore structures, productionjack-ups, concrete structures and other dry-docking work.  The newbusiness could become equal in size to the old within the next fiveyears, it says.The Ardersier yard will continue to concentrate on servicing thereduced requirement for traditional structures, while Nigg and itsgraving dock will form the focus for the new business areas.  "Althoughthe traditional market is in decline, we believe it will stabilise ataround 10m manhours a year to the year 2000.  With this volume of workavailable and the continuous improvement in competitiveness we can winenough work to sustain a viable and profitable business concentrated inthe Ardersier facility," says Barmac.Up to #8m ($12.4m) is being targeted for modifications to the existinggraving dock at Nigg and for the creation of a custom-builtdecommissioning facility.  It is expected that the funding will comefrom Barmac's parent companies and the public sector.  Barmac aims toobtain planning permission and a waste disposal licence for the Niggsite, with a capital investment of around #0.5m envisaged to establisha custom-built facility capable of the containment and collection ofwaste materials for subsequent treatment and disposal.Other opportunities for business in an upgraded dock include buildinglarge production jack-ups similar to that used by BP for the HardingField.  Possible collaboration with civil contractors to build offshoreconcrete structures is also being investigated, as are thepossibilities of drydocking large semi-submersible and jack-up rigs forinspection and modification.  "This potential major infrastructureinvestment is a clear indication of the confidence our parent companieshave in our ability to win a significant share of growing new markets,of our employees' ability to adapt in order to capitalise on thesemarkets and of our determination to build a sustainable future for theyards," says Barmac general manager Don Wright.Back to Headline List CopyrightNORTH SEA LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996PHILLIPS TARGETS POSSIBLE JACQUI START-UP AT END-1997Phillips' Jacqui prospect, in UK block 30/13, could be on stream by theend of 1997 if reserves are firmed up by two back-to-back appraisalwells to be drilled by the Galaxy 1, according to quadrant 30development director Pat Dinan, in a house paper.  The drilling of thesecond well is contingent on what is found with the first.  Of the twowells drilled so far on Jacqui, one indicated a gas condensatereservoir, while the other produced gas, he said.  A high pressure/hightemperature exploration well is being drilled by the Monitor on theJade prospect in block 30/2C.  If it is successful, two appraisal wellswill be drilled on Jade in 1997, with first production planned for latein 1998.Trafalgar John Brown and Kvaerner Engineering have recently completedsome conceptual engineering studies for Phillips to help identify thebest way of developing some of the remaining quadrant 30 prospects,confirming Phillips' view that they would benefit from a shareddevelopment plan.  Added impetus is given by the fact that theJudy/Joanne processing and transport system is now in place.Back to Headline List CopyrightNORTH SEA LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996STATOIL ENGINEERS SEEK PATENTS FOR VESSEL AND LIFTING SOLUTIONSPatents are being sought by Brian Stead and Ove Gudmestad of Statoilfor vessel and lifting solutions which are claimed to offer cheaperremoval and transport of topsides and jackets to land.  For the largestplatforms a U-shaped main hull is proposed with a smaller removablehull inside.  For topsides weighing less than 1,500 tonnes asubmersible barge or ship with eight-metre steel shafts, plus a shearleg, is proposed.  Stead, in a recent house paper, says dayrates for abarge/ship and a shear leg would be only 10-15% of the daily cost ofthe large semi-submersibles.  For jacket and subsea template removalthe suggestion is a supply vessel with winches or wire jacks attachedto its sides.Back to Headline List CopyrightNORTH SEA LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996BHP ACHIEVES FIRST GAS FROM LIVERPOOL BAY HAMILTON NORTH FIELDBHP Petroleum achieved first gas from the Liverpool Bay Hamilton NorthField on December 20.  The initial output is being used to commissionsystems and pipelines offshore and onshore and subsequently PowerGen'snew power station at Connah's Quay before full contract deliveriesbegin in mid-1996 (NSL  1033/5).  Oil from Douglas and Lennox isexpected to flow in the next few weeks marking the start-up of firstoil production off Britain's west coast.  Gas production from theHamilton Field is scheduled for early this year and from Lennox inseveral years' time.  Recoverable gas reserves from the development areestimated at 1.2 Tcf.  Peak gas capacity of the offshore developmentand Point of Ayr terminal is currently 300 MMcfd.Back to Headline List CopyrightNORTH SEA LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996MAERSK BRINGS ROAR ON STREAMMaersk Oil and Gas's Roar Field came on stream on January 7, around 10months ahead of project schedule.  The small field will produce oil andgas from two horizontal development wells.  Roar has been developed asan unmanned satellite of the Tyra Field using a slimline STAR designwellhead platform.  Oil and gas are separated and sent via twopipelines 11 kms to Tyra East.  Initial production rates were notavailable.  Total recoverable gas reserves are estimated at 14 Bcm with12-18m barrels of liquids.Back to Headline List CopyrightNORTH SEA LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996AMERADA AND DONG ASSESS POTENTIAL OF NEW DANISH GAS SYSTEMAmerada Hess and DONG have agreed to investigate jointly the technicaland economic feasibility of building a new natural gas transport systemin the Danish sector of the North Sea.  Depending on which technicalsolution is the most attractive, the system could require an investmentof some DKr 1.5-2.5bn ($269-449m).  A new transport system would beable to gather gas from Amerada's South Arne Field, on which apromising production test was run last year, as well as other smallerfields and could also be linked to the Norwegian system.  There may bea further possibility to transport gas to Denmark from the UK, Germanand Norwegian sectors.The existing Danish system has an annual transport capacity of about7.5 Bcm of gas, which corresponds to the total amount of gas which DUC(until now DONG's sole supplier) is able to deliver to DONG from 1997.With these deliveries the existing system will be nearing its capacity. From the turn of the century, DONG expects to be able to selladditional gas in the region of 2 Bcm a year.Back to Headline List CopyrightNORTH SEA LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996STUDY SHOWS ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT OF AASGARD GAS WILL BE LIMITEDThe environmental impact of processing gas from the Aasgard Field willbe limited regardless of whether it takes place at Kaarstoe, north ofStavanger, or Kollsnes, near Bergen.  This is the conclusion of theimpact assessment submitted by Statoil and Saga Petroleum to theenergy/industry ministry in December.  The study covered expandingexisting gas processing facilities at the two sites as well as exportsand onshore pipelines.  Aasgard gas is relatively high in carbondioxide and because Kaarstoe has limited opportunities for dilutingthis content by mixing in other export gas, the carbon dioxide may haveto be removed after 2005.  This does not pose a problem at Kollsnes,which would be able to add Troll gas low in carbon dioxide beforeonward transmission to Continental Europe.The possible cost of a new fractionating plant at Kollsnes is put at Kr4.3bn ($677m), including the landfall.  Taking the gas to Kaarstoewould cost Kr 3bn, involving new construction and modifications toexisting facilities.Back to Headline List CopyrightNORTH SEA LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996IEA FORECASTS NEW PEAK FOR NORTH SEA OIL PRODUCTIONNorth Sea oil output is set to reach new heights by the end of thedecade, according to the International Energy Agency.  In a newforecast, the Paris-based agency says production will peak in 1999 atthe earliest, at around 7m b/d, or some 1.6m b/d higher than lastyear's level.  Just under half of this - 3.2m b/d - will come from theUK sector and the rest from Norway, with small amounts from minorproducers such as Denmark and the Netherlands.  The IEA believes thisyear's increase will amount to 740,000 b/d, "split almost equallybetween the two sectors".The agency says the common view has long been that North Sea productionwould reach its peak in the mid-1990s and fall away quite sharply afterthat.  But the new peak "is substantially higher and later than recentconventional wisdom would have suggested, with consequent repercussionsfor the medium-term oil market".  The IEA also expects that thesubsequent decline will be more gentle than forecast as more largefields are brought on stream and smaller satellite fields are developedalongside existing ones.The IEA says earlier estimates suggested the decline rate for the NorthSea would be more than three times as large as that now predicted.  Itattributes the surge in North Sea oil production to improvements inrecovery technology, a highly skilled local workforce and heightenedfiscal incentives for offshore oil companies.  The growing role of gasalso enables more mixed oil and gasfields to be developed.The study also shows that original reserve estimates have tended to betoo conservative.  Technology-induced cost reductions have enabledcompanies to re-classify as economically recoverable oil that was onceconsidered to be uneconomic to produce.  The agency notes that of the400 oil and gas prospects identified in the UK sector during the past30 years, only 143 had been brought into production by the end of 1994.Back to Headline List CopyrightNORTH SEA LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996GASUNIE RAISES GAS RESERVES ESTIMATESDutch gas monopoly Gasunie has raised its natural gas reservesestimates by 150 Bcm to around 2.5 Tcm.  The increase will pave the wayfor additional exports to existing and new customers, it says.Back to Headline List CopyrightNORTH SEA LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996NIGG TERMINAL CARRIES OUT FIRST TRANSFER OF ALBA CRUDEThe first Alba ship-to-ship crude oil transfer to use the Nigg terminalin northeast Scotland took place last December, Chevron reports.  Usinga berth at the terminal, 510,000 barrels were transferred from theshuttle tanker Tove Knudsen to the 97,000-tonne Vesta for onwardshipment to a Chevron refinery in the Gulf of Mexico.  Previously, Albacargoes destined for buyers outside Europe were transhipped through theNorwegian port of Mongstad.  But with new Norwegian fields coming onstream the Alba asset team had to look elsewhere for a transhipmentfacility.  Alba's current average production of 86,000 b/d requiresoffloading from the FSU to the shuttle tanker every seven days.*  A further #0.5m has been shaved from Britannia drilling costsfollowing the elimination of the entire 133/8-inch casing string fromwell M4, drilled by the Sovereign Explorer at the subsea centrelocation.  The drilling programme, which also involves the Sedco 711,is already 11% ahead of schedule.Back to Headline List CopyrightNORTH SEA LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996CHEVRON WINS APPROVAL TO SWITCH FROM UNST TO SCATSTAThe Shetland Islands Council has agreed to Chevron's proposal to usethe airfield at Scatsta for transfers of flights between Aberdeen andNorthern North Sea oilfields.  As a result, from April 1 this year thecompany together with joint venture partners Unocal and Oryx will ceaseusing Unst.  Chevron procurement and logistics services manager BrianMountain said the decision had been based on economic factors.  The SICalso granted outline planning permission for a hangar for twohelicopters which will be erected after flights begin.  The contractsfor airline services on the new route have yet to be awarded.  The useof Scatsta allows the joint venture to be expanded by the inclusion ofBP, which further enhances the economics of the new routing.Back to Headline List CopyrightNORTH SEA LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996CONOCO UPS MURDOCH RESERVES ON BACK OF NEW WELLConoco has increased its estimate of gas reserves in the Murdoch Fieldfrom a 1994 figure of 222.5 Bcf to 351 Bcf following results from a newproduction well and better-than-expected reservoir performance.  WellD6 was drilled in an area initially thought to be unpromising after anearly discovery well performed poorly and the area had been avoidedwhen the field's five original producers were drilled.  However,analysis of the geology and the results of a major 3D seismic surveysuggested the initial well had intersected a badly-faulted area,missing the high permeability sweet spots in the reservoir.D6 was drilled horizontally and has become the best performing well inthe field, and possibly even the best producing Carboniferous well inthe Southern North Sea, says Conoco in a house paper.  With ahorizontal section of 1,635 ft, it is also the longest horizontal welldrilled in the formation, it adds.  Existing production wells have alsoperformed better than expected and it is estimated they will ultimatelyrecover more than 90% of the gas to which they are connected.Murdoch's field life is also likely to be extended by a number of yearsfollowing the installation of a compression platform this year andcommercial agreements with other operators to use the facilities as ahub for developments in the area.  Agreements are being finalised forMurdoch facilities to handle production from Shell's Schooner Field andthere are several other potential tie-in prospects in the area, none ofwhich would be economic on a stand-alone basis.  Further 3D seismicwill shortly be evaluated and three more exploration wells are likelyto be drilled over this year, with perhaps two more in 1997.*  The decision to pipe excess associated gas in MacCulloch rather thanflaring it put the cost of development above Conoco's #6 ($9.3) abarrel development target, the company says.  However, during thedesign and construction phase the project will be fine-tuned to reducecosts to meet the #6 target.Back to Headline List CopyrightNORTH SEA LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996JOHN SHAW BACK IN MARKET AFTER SHELL DEFERS KINGFISHER STARTThe Sonat Offshore semi-submersible John Shaw is back in the marketfrom November 1996 as a result of Shell deferring plans to develop theKingfisher Field in the UK sector.  Drilling of an initial sixdevelopment wells was scheduled to begin in the fourth quarter of 1996and a provisional letter of intent had been issued to Sonat for theJohn Shaw subject to the project go-ahead (NSL 1037/10).  It isunderstood that Shell deferred the project after the failure to find asatisfactory export solution and concerns over prevailing low gasprices.  No details are known of any revised schedule for thedevelopment.  The John Shaw is currently on contract with Amerada Hessin the UK until the end of October 1996.Shell still has potential requirements for semi-submersibles for CurlewField drilling from the fourth quarter of 1996 and a possibleexploration programme starting in the second half of the year.  TheJohn Shaw together with the Sedco 711 are likely to be a candidates forboth these programmes should they be progressed by Shell.Back to Headline List CopyrightNORTH SEA LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996TOTAL TAKING SOVEREIGN EXPLORER FOR UK AND EIRE DEEPWATER PROGRAMMETotal Oil Marine is finalising the fixture of the Sedco Forex semiSovereign Explorer for a five-well deepwater drilling programme in theUK and Eire starting around August 1996.  The contract is expected tolast around a year and includes three deepwater wells in the UK sectorwest of Shetland plus a well in the Porcupine Trough west of Eire.  Theprogramme is also understood to include a high pressure well in thenorthern UK sector of the North Sea.  It is possible that one of thewest of Shetland slots could be assigned to another operator and it isunderstood that Conoco could be one prospect.The Sovereign Explorer is currently drilling development wells forChevron on the Britannia Field together with the Sedco 711.  Based oncurrent progress both rigs are expected to complete the Britannia workin the third quarter of 1996.Back to Headline List CopyrightNORTH SEA LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996ELF INVITES BIDS FOR ELGIN/FRANKLIN DRILLINGElf has issued tender invitations for two heavy-duty jack-uprequirements for Phase II development drilling on its Elgin/Franklinproject starting in 1997 and 1998.  Water depth at the central UKsector location is 92 metres and the programme involves drilling ofdeep high pressure, high temperature wells lasting about six monthsapiece.  Rig 1 is planned to start in mid-1997 and Rig 2 in mid-1998.Both units are being offered a firm contract of 30 months plus four,one-well options plus a further six, one-month completion options.  Theclosing date for the submission of bids is February 19.Elf has already fixed the jack-up Galaxy I for Phase I developmentdrilling starting in October 1996.  The Santa Fe unit has beencontracted for a firm period of 18 months but this could be extended tosix years.  It appears that, depending on the approach adopted, one ofthe Phase II requirements could be against the extension of the GalaxyI.  However, it is also possible that Elf could opt to use three rigson the project by drilling simultaneously on Elgin with two jack-ups.Availability of suitable existing rigs for Elf's requirement is fairlylimited.  Another Santa Fe jack-up, the Magellan, should be free in thethird quarter of 1997, while the Rowan Gorilla II and Rowan Gorilla IVare both currently available in North America and Trinidad from thethird quarter of 1996.  The Rowan newbuilding Rowan Gorilla V is duefor delivery in 1998.The Maersk Guardian is expected to complete the firm phase of itscurrent contract with Amoco Norway in March 1998, while the MaerskGallant is firm with Phillips Petroleum Norway until October 1997.However, both rigs have extension options outstanding.  A number ofcontractors are planning to offer newbuilding units to Elf, but thesewould only be an option for the mid-1998 programme given the lead timesinvolved.Back to Headline List CopyrightNORTH SEA LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996BP RENEWS BENREOCH FOR A FURTHER 12 MONTHS TO MAY 1997BP has negotiated a new fixture of the semi Benreoch for 12 months fromMay 1996.  The rig was bought recently from Ben Line by Stena Offshore,which has negotiated the new deal with BP.  The Benreoch is currentlyon contract with BP until April.  It has completed a one-wellassignment to Texaco and is waiting on weather to return to BP to drillwell 9/9C-16, which is expected to last about 90 days.  The rig is thendue to undergo inspection and survey before beginning the new BPcontract.BP still has gaps in its drilling sequence with the Benreoch but isexamining the requirements of its internal asset groups before makingany firm moves to assign slots externally.  However, it is understoodthat both Conoco and Shell could be interested in taking sublets of therig in 1996 should the opportunity arise.  In addition to the Benreochfixture, BP still has a requirement for a semi to drill an HPHT well incentral UK sector block 22/25 spudding around September 1996.*  BP has confirmed a one-well extension of the jack-up F G McClintockretaining the rig in the southern UK sector until May 1996.  ThereafterBP's plans are not yet firm, but it is thought likely the operator willretain the Neddrill 7 through the year while releasing the McClintock.Back to Headline List CopyrightNORTH SEA LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996BP TENDERS FOR WELL AND EXTENDED TEST ON ROSSBP has tendered for the provision of a semi-submersible, well testspread, flowlines and tanker to drill a 90-day well on the Ross Fieldand undertake a 30-day extended well test.  The programme is scheduledto start around June 1996.  The closing date for bids is January 15.The extended test programme will be the final stage in the evaluationof the field before proceeding in 1997 with a floating productiondevelopment.BP is currently carrying out an early production programme on theMachar Field with the TAPS group and the Sedco 707.  TAPS is alsoslated to carry out an extended test programme on the Clair Field fromApril 1996 using the Sedco Explorer.Back to Headline List CopyrightNORTH SEA LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996ROWAN SECURES DUTCH FIXTURES FOR JACK-UP RIGSRowan Drilling has secured fixtures for two of its jack-ups in theNetherlands.  The Cecil Provine has been contracted by Elf Petroland todrill two wells starting early in March plus an option for a thirdwell.  The Rowan California has been fixed by Wintershall, also for atwo-well programme, but starting at the end of January and with optionsfor up to three additional wells.  The firm wells are in blocks K/10and L/8 and are expected to last a total of 160 days.Both jack-ups are currently in the UK but their transfer to Holland isindicative of increasing demand in the Dutch market taking up the slackin the UK being created partly by concerns about the gas price.  TheRowan California is currently stacked off Great Yarmouth after beingreleased by Phillips Petroleum.  The Cecil Provine is drilling itsfinal well for Amoco after the operator chose not to exercise its lastone-well option.Elf Petroland in turn has chosen not to exercise its final one-welloption with the jack-up Ensco 85, which it will now release early inMarch.  The rig will then enter the yard a modification programme,expected to last 10-20 days, prior to beginning a one-year contractwith NAM.Back to Headline List CopyrightNORTH SEA LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996MAERSK OIL CHECKS MARKET AGAINST EXPIRY OF DANISH JACK-UP CONTRACTSMaersk Oil & Gas has circulated a check of jack-up drilling rigavailability for potential one to three-year contracts beginning during1996.  It is interested in rigs able to drill year-round in the Danishsector in up to 200 ft of water.  The firm contracts of all four jack-ups working for Maersk Oil in Denmark are due to expire during 1996.The Shelf Explorer contract runs out in April but still has two, one-year options available.  The Maersk Endeavour has a one-year optionleft to run from June, while the Neddrill 10 has two, one-year optionsfrom October and the Maersk Exerter a one-year option from November.*  Conoco is still seeking partner approval to drill a wildcat in itsremaining Dutch sector acreage, probably now spudding in the secondquarter.Back to Headline List CopyrightNORTH SEA LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996BHP ISSUES INQUIRY FOR UK JACK-UP PROGRAMMESBHP Petroleum has issued a market inquiry for two UK sector jack-uprequirements.  It is interested in rig availability for one well inIrish Sea block 110/13 spudding in April 1996 and for a four to six-month programme in the Southern North Sea starting in June 1996.Replies including indicative dayrates are requested by January 12.BHP's rig options for the Irish Sea well appear to be limited.  TheGlomar Adriatic XI is already committed for much of 1996 and ispencilled in for BHP in the fourth quarter of the year.  There appearsto be little prospect of a slot opening up for BHP in the secondquarter.  BHP already has the Trident XIV on contract through 1996 onLiverpool Bay development work and there are currently no other jack-ups in the Irish Sea.A number of jack-ups are due to come available in the North Seaincluding the Maersk Enhancer in February/March and the F G McClintockin May.  However, contractors may be unlikely to make a competitiveoffer to mobilise a rig from the North Sea for just one well unless itcan be pegged back-to-back with BHP's Southern North Sea programme.Back to Headline List CopyrightNORTH SEA LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996NORSK HYDRO REMAINS OPEN FOR EXPLORATION SEMI FOR 1997Although it has not made any formal moves in the market, Norsk Hydro islooking for a semi for general exploration work in Norway in 1997 for aperiod of up to one year.  The programme is not yet firmed up andultimately the duration of the contract is also likely to depend tosome extent on the rig selected.  With Norwegian rig availability verytight, Hydro is keeping a close watch on the market and is maintainingongoing discussions with contractors to enable it to make a quickdecision when the right rig becomes available at the right price.Norsk Hydro is also part of a consortium with Statoil and Saga awaitingfor the announcement of Norwegian 15th round licence awards beforeproceeding with the fixture of a rig for a shared deepwater drillingprogramme on the Voering Plateau starting end-1996 or early in 1997.*  Amerada, Conoco, Deminex, Mobil and Shell continue to discuss theprospects for sharing the term fixture of a semi-submersible to drillone or two wells apiece in the Norwegian sector from around the secondquarter of 1996.  Rigs which could be available include the ByfordDolphin or at a later date the Nanhai VI, which is in China.  However,it remains to be seen whether rates sought by contractors to cover thecost of the significant upgrading required for Norway will be withinthe limits set by the likes of Conoco and Shell which have alreadyabandoned one tender round late last year as rates bid were consideredto be too high.  While examining the options for rig sharing, all fiveoperators also remain open to sublet opportunities on an individualbasis.Back to Headline List CopyrightNORTH SEA LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996WEST ALPHA EN ROUTE FROM CHINA TO NORTH SEAThe semi West Alpha has left China and is en route to Singapore to pickup a wet tow back to the North Sea.  The journey is scheduled to lastabout 90 days.  The rig is committed to Esso Norge for a two-yeardevelopment drilling programme on the Balder Field starting in mid-April.  Ahead of the West Alpha, the Byford Dolphin is due in the UK orNorway between January 17 and 27 subject to weather after mobilisingfrom the Far East.  Dolphin is due to receive bids from seven yards forupgrading work including installation of additional columns and aderrick extension.  The rig is planned to be available in the North Seafrom March 1996.  The Transocean Seeker is due in the North Sea at thebeginning of February at the end of its journey from the Far East.  Ittoo is still available and is expected to enter the market in April.Elsewhere in the market, the Ocean Alliance is due out of the CromartyFirth at the weekend to return to work for BP, while the Sedco 704 isdue in the Firth for survey work before resuming operations for Shellon the Gannet Field as a drilling tender.Northwest European jack-up drilling rig utilisation dipped slightly atthe end of 1995 with the release of the Rowan California by PhillipsPetroleum in the UK and the entry of the Ensco 70 to the Verolme yardin Holland for upgrading.  The Ensco jack-up is due to return to workfor NAM at the end of February equipped with a new 15,000 psi BOP stackamong other improvements.  The California is stacked off Great Yarmouthuntil the end of January when it is due to mobilise for Wintershall inHolland.Back to Headline List CopyrightNORTH SEA LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996SIRI DISCOVERY COULD BE FAST-TRACKED FOR 1998 STARTSiri-1 is a "substantial" discovery, which "appears commercial" andcould be on stream by 1998, according to operator Statoil Denmark.  Thefind, which late last year tested at rates of 5,988 b/d of oil (NSL1037/20), is estimated by the operator to contain 150m barrels ofrecoverable oil.  The discovery well is understood to have intercepteda thick section of sands in a well defined but are really limitedstructure.  Reservoir permeability is reported as very good.   The findhas been made in Palaeocene sandstones, outside the Central Grabenarea, generating considerable excitement in the Danish Energy Ministry. Most Danish fields produce from chalk.Statoil is already looking at a floating production project for Siri.Svein Larsen, head of operations in Denmark, said:  "We will beestablishing a core team soon to get Siri quickly on stream and ourambition is to begin production by 1998."  At the moment the favouredconcept for the field, which lies in around 60 metres of water, is anFPSO.  This Spring Statoil will shoot 3D seismic and is planning anappraisal in the Autumn.The semisub Deepsea Bergen abandoned Siri-1 on December 24 and is nowback with Statoil in the Norwegian sector, where it spudded explorationwell 25/10-6S on December 26.  The  well was abandoned because the holewas too small in dimensions for production purposes.Back to Headline List CopyrightNORTH SEA LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996AMOCO ABANDONS NOEKKEN DUSTERAmoco is in the process of abandoning Noekken prospect exploration well2/8-15 as a dry hole, the NPD confirmed this week.  The semisub VildkatExplorer has been delayed by weather but is due off location later thisweek when it will head to exploration well 34/11-2S for Statoil.  Well2/8-15 was drilled to a TD of 3,725 metres and completed in rocks ofUpper Cretaceous age, said the NPD.  There was no test.Back to Headline List CopyrightNORTH SEA LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996HYDRO PREPARES TO RUN ONE TEST ON OSEBERG AREA DISCOVERYNorsk Hydro is preparing to run a single test on exploration well 30/8-1Sre, having reached a TVD of 4,767 metres with the semisub TreasureSaga.  The well encountered gas in Brent formations before beingdeepened to examine the Statfjord beneath (NSL 1031/9).  Given that theBrent shows were described as a significant discovery, it is likelythis horizon is being tested, which could imply the Statfjord provedbarren.  The operator would not confirm the interval which it wasintending to test.Meanwhile, on the western side of block 30/8, Hydro has abandonedwildcat 30/8-2 with the semisub West Vanguard, having drilled down to aTD of 2,405 metres.  The well is untested and understood to be adisappointment.  The West Vanguard was earlier this week waiting onweather to get off location.  It goes next to the Oseberg Field fordevelopment drilling duties.Back to Headline List CopyrightNORTH SEA LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996VESLEFRIKK WILDCAT TURNS UP SMALL FINDAn exploration well drilled from the Veslefrikk platform to examine aseparate structure to the west, has turned up a small find, accordingto the NPD.  Well 30/3-7S encountered hydrocarbons in Mid-Jurassicsandstones before being suspended (NSL 1036/12).  The NPD said the findwas probably small, but a planned production test will establish thetype of hydrocarbons present and reservoir characteristics.  Positivetest results would lead to the well being tied back to the Veslefrikkplatform for production.  The well was drilled to a TVD of 3,994metres.Back to Headline List CopyrightNORTH SEA LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996DRILLING ACTIVITY UPDATE, NEW SPUDS AND COMPLETIONSIn the UK sector Amerada has spudded Fife development well 31/26A-A7with the semisub High Seas Driller having completed development re-entry 31/26A-A4 on December 28.  The semisub Kan Tan IV on December 30spudded exploration well 21/16-4, south of the Durward prospect, forAmerada.  The rig had previously abandoned Chevron's Irish sectorwildcat 56/15-1 after disappointing results (NSL 1037/14).  Amocoreports the jack-up Cecil Provine completed Bessemer development well49/23-E2 as a gas producer on December 23 and the same day spuddedBeaufort development well 49/23-E3.Arco is waiting on weather to move off tight exploration well 50/26A-7,which is now complete.  It is thought the well, which is believed to beuntested, will be abandoned.  The rig goes next to spud explorationwell 49/28-17 for Arco.  BP reports it is expecting the semisub OceanAlliance out of Cromarty by next week to spud west of Shetlandappraisal 204/25B-6.  It is not clear at this stage what prospect thiswell is appraising.  It lies to the east of last year's tightexploration well 204/25B-5, southeast of Foinaven.  Elsewhere, BP isexpecting the semisub Benreoch shortly from Texaco to spud explorationwell 9/9C-16.  The rig is carrying out some construction work in theErskine area, having completed development well 23/26B-20.  BP alsoreports the semisub Transocean 8 has completed Andrew development well16/28-A3 and on January 1 spudded 16/28-A4.British Gas spudded Crosby prospect exploration well 110/14-5, with thejack-up Glomar Adriatic XI, on December 26.  The rig abandonedLaggantulloch prospect exploration well 111/15-1 as a tight hole onDecember 23.  The well is understood to be dry (NSL 1037/14).  Over theChristmas period Chevron has completed two more Britannia Fielddevelopment wells - 15/30-M4, with the semisub Sovereign Explorer, and16/26-B5, with the semisub Sedco 711.  The former spudded 15/30-M5 onDecember 26, while the latter spudded 16/26-B6 on December 28.Conoco has reached TD on exploration well 15/19-7, to the north of theMacCulloch Field.  The semisub Sedco Explorer is operating.  This wellis understood to be targeting a Piper prospect.  There has been no newsyet of any planned test programme.  On exploration well 22/19B-5,Conoco kicked off a mechanical sidetrack with the semisub Drill Star onJanuary 2.  The rig is now drilling ahead.  Kerr-McGee spudded thesecond back-to-back Janice prospect appraisal 30/17A-12, with thesemisub Transocean 9, on December 30.  Appraisal 30/17A-11 wassuspended after a successful test programme (NSL 1036/12).Phillips completed Deborah development well 48/30-14, with the jack-upRowan California, on December 21, releasing the rig to stack.  Oryx hasbeen delayed completing Lyell workover 3/2-A08z, with the semisubNeddrill 6.  This well is being converted from a producer to aninjector.  Depending on the weather the operator now expects to be ableto finish operations next week.  Shell has run into mechanical problemson both of its current Central North Sea E&A wells.  Shearwaterappraisal 22/30B-15 has still not managed to get started on a testprogramme.  The jack-up Galaxy 1 has been operating at TD since mid-November.  NSL now estimates this well is likely to be operationaluntil late-February, unless Shell postpones the testing programme.  Ondeep exploration well 22/29-6 the semisub Henry Goodrich is pluggingback and preparing to kick off a second mechanical sidetrack having runinto problems downhole.In the southern basin, Shell may soon have better news to report.  Thejack-up Britannia is reported to be operating at a TD of 10,768 ft onHamlet prospect exploration well 49/24-20 having run 7-inch liner,which could imply a test programme.  In the Northern North Sea Shellreports the semisub Sedco 712 has spudded Osprey development well211/23A-P7, having completed P4.  Texaco is understood to be close tocompleting exploration well 15/29A-11, with the semisub Glomar ArcticIII.In the Norwegian sector Amoco is drilling the first new well from theValhall WP platform - 2/8-F1.  The jack-up Maersk Guardian completedbatch setting casing early in December.  In the Dutch sector Amocoreports the jack-up Arch Rowan spudded exploration well P/11-2 onDecember 29.  Occidental spudded exploration well L/11-A2 on December23, with the jack-up Neddrill 3 and NAM reports the jack-up Ensco 70suspended exploration well L/13-17re as a gas well, following a test,on December 21.  The rig is in port undergoing an upgrade.Back to Headline List CopyrightNORTH SEA LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996ENTERPRISE BOOSTS NELSON AREA ACREAGE IN FARM-IN DEAL WITH BPEnterprise Oil is acquiring licence interests in four blocks close toits Central North Sea Nelson Field.  Under a farm-in agreement with BP,Enterprise is acquiring significant equity stakes in blocks 21/9 (30%),21/15A (30%), 21/15B (35%) and 22/12A (40%).  In return, the company ispaying BP's share of the costs of a major 3D seismic survey coveringthe three blocks (NSL 1023/10).  The survey, which got under way inOctober but was suspended the following month due to poor weather, isscheduled to be re-started early this year.In a separate deal, Enterprise is acquiring Kerr-McGee's equity inblock 21/15A, bringing its stake in the acreage to about 36.25%.  Inaddition, the company has secured a 45% holding in block 22/7,immediately northeast of Nelson.  The interest was acquired through anacreage swap with Elf in 1994 and a cash purchase from Total in 1995.Following the deals, Enterprise will have equity interests in 14 blocksin the Nelson area."These deals provide an excellent opportunity to capitalise on ourknowledge of the Nelson area where we will now have the leading acreageposition," says Mark Hope, Enterprise's UK general manager.  "Webelieve interpretation of the new seismic, together with a thoroughreview of all existing data, will provide new drilling opportunities inan area where existing infrastructure would allow small discoveries tobe developed profitably," he adds.The Nelson Field, discovered in 1988, has been producing oil at ratesof up to 190,000 b/d since coming on stream in February 1994.  Twoexisting oil finds - 21/15-2, drilled in 1981, and 22/12-1, drilled in1988 - are to be evaluated with a view to further appraisal in thefuture.Back to Headline List CopyrightNORTH SEA LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996NESTE OFFLOADS 50% STAKE IN SOVEREIGN EXPLORATIONFollowing the completion of the sale of its UK oil assets to SandsPetroleum, Neste has agreed to sell its 50% share in SovereignExploration to Northgas, a subsidiary of Northern Electric.  Early in1994 Neste and Northern Electric formed an upstream gas company basedon Neste's southern basin interests including the Victor Field.  Inaddition to Victor, Sovereign currently has holdings in the SchoonerField, due on stream at the end of this year, and the Windermeredevelopment.Back to Headline List CopyrightNORTH SEA LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996HITEC ACQUIRING MARINE CONSULTING GROUPHitec AS has made an offer for all outstanding shares of MarineConsulting Group AS valuing the company at Kr 257m ($40.5m).  The MSGboard has recommended the offer and the four major shareholders havesold a total of 50.3% of the company to Hitec.  MSG is a supplier ofoffshore loading systems.  Together with its other subsidiaries, Multi-Fluid and UDS (which it is acquiring), Hitec expects to develop newproducts with MCG, both jointly and separately.Back to Headline List CopyrightNORTH SEA LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996ABBOT LAUNCHES #7.8M BID FOR OISAbbot Group, the oil and gas services group, late last month launchedan all-share offer for OIS International which values the technicalinspection concern at #7.8m ($24.5m).  Abbot is offering one share forevery two OIS shares, with a cash alternative of 24.5p.  Abbot chairmanAlasdair Locke urged OIS shareholders to accept the offer.  "Thefundamental problems of OIS under its present management run so deepthat there can be little foreseeable chance of a significantimprovement in levels of profits," he said.  OIS shareholders shouldbenefit from improved performance of the company as part of the widerAbbot group, he added.Back to Headline List CopyrightNORTH SEA LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996CAIRN ARRANGES SHARE PLACING TO HELP FUND ACTIVITIESCairn Energy late last month undertook a placing for cash of 4,377,703new ordinary shares.  The shares, placed by Societe Generale StraussTurnball Securities, represent 5% of the issued share capital of Cairnprior to the placing.  The proceeds of the placing will be used toprovide additional flexibility for Cairn's ongoing operations and inparticular, following recent acquisition successes, its activeexploration, appraisal and development programme, said Cairn chiefexecutive Bill Gammell.Back to Headline List CopyrightNORTH SEA LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996HSE INVESTIGATES UK YARD BLAST THAT CLAIMED THREE LIVESThe Health and Safety Executive is investigating the death of threeworkers at Amec Process and Energy's Howdon yard, Tyneside, on December21, following a catastrophic pressure release.  The men were carryingout pressure tests on the pipework of a new module for Maersk Oil andGas's Tyra West project, when it is understood high-pressure nitrogenescaped into the atmosphere at high velocity.  Four other men sufferedminor injuries and shock.  The HSE said:  "Our investigation willcontinue until we have found the reason for the accident.  Theinvestigation will not only look at the physical evidence, but thoseworking at the site will be interviewed.  We will also examine whetherthere have been any breaches of health and safety law."The yard remained closed over Christmas and New Year, following thetragedy, but re-opened on January 3.  However, work on the Tyra moduleinvolved remained suspended until the end of last week while the HSEcontinued its investigations.  The HSE is expected to publish a reporton its preliminary findings shortly.Back to Headline List CopyrightNORTH SEA LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996ENSCO 92 ACCIDENT VICTIM DIESThe crewman injured on board the jack-up Ensco 92 late last year (NSL1037/18), died in hospital shortly afterwards, Arco British hasconfirmed.  The rig was working for Arco on exploration well 50/26A-7,which has now been completed.  The rig is waiting on weather to moveoff location to exploration well 49/28-17.  The HSE continues toinvestigate the circumstances of the accident.The crewman is believed to have suffered serious head and neck injurieswhen he was hit by a high-pressure release of nitrogen gas from acylinder during a lifting operation.  Initial reports suggest a"nitrogen quad" (a rack of 48 bottles of nitrogen) was being lifted bya crane when one of the slings caught under a valve releasing gas at anestimated pressure of 4,400 psi.  The casualty was knocked back againstthe engine room bulkhead.Back to Headline List CopyrightNORTH SEA LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996OIL INDUSTRY PEOPLECanadian Petroleum UK (formerly CanadianOxy):  Jim Stretch and GordonMarriott have been appointed non-executive directors.  Stretch recentlyretired as deputy managing director of Agip (UK), where he had beensince 1987; Marriott was head of facilities engineering at the DTI'soil and gas division from 1980 until his retirement in 1995.Rockwater:  Abdul Kassam, previously general manager, takes overresponsibility for opportunities in West Africa for Brown & Root.  Theresponsibility for the management of Rockwater in the UK will now beundertaken jointly by Paul Alexander, operations manager, and MarkDuncan, commercial manager.  Alexander will have overall responsibilityfor project execution, personnel issues, the company's ROV alliance,safety management and liaison between the UK and Rockwater's otheroffices worldwide.  Duncan will be in charge of business development,acquisition, client liaison and general business and contract support.Both will continue to report to managing director Chas Charles.Weir Group:  Paul Capell, previously with John Brown, has beenappointed managing director of Weir Westgarth.Back to Headline List CopyrightNORTH SEA LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996OIL INDUSTRY NEWS IN BRIEFAgip has awarded SBM Inc (a 100% subsidiary of IHC Caland), in jointventure with Saipem, an operational lease for a floating production andstorage system for a five-and-a-half-year period for the Aquila Fieldin the Southern Aegean.  The Agip Firenze will be converted for thepurpose.  The FPSO will be installed in mid-1997 in a water depth of850 metres.  The total investment will be $105m, of which IHC Calandwill provide 50%.Back to Headline List CopyrightNORTH SEA LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996OIL INDUSTRY NEWS IN BRIEFAmerada Hess, Aberdeen, has a requirement, in advance of the OSCARsystem, for oilfield equipment, sand control systems and screenscomplete with associated offshore service support for downholecompletion activities.  Replies are due back by January 19.  AquaticEngineering and Noble Denton Europe have reached agreement to providean integrated subsea marine and engineering support service to selectedclients in Aberdeen.  Aquatic will provide flexible pipeline andumbilical installation services, subsea engineering and technicalmanpower services and Noble Denton will provide supporting marine andnaval architectural services.Back to Headline List CopyrightNORTH SEA LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996OIL INDUSTRY NEWS IN BRIEFBP Norge has confirmed an award to Brown & Root Energy Services worthan estimated Kr 400m ($63m) for the provision of integrated maintenanceand technical support services both on and offshore.  It has alsoconfirmed an award, worth an estimated Kr 12m, to Dril-Quip, for theprovision of wellhead and conductor services.  CanadianOxy North SeaPetroleum has changed its name to Canadian Petroleum UK and hasrelocated to Mallard Court, Mallard Square, Staines, Middlesex TW184RH, phone +44 (0)1784 429500, fax +44 (0)1784 429550 (see alsoPeople).Back to Headline List CopyrightNORTH SEA LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996OIL INDUSTRY NEWS IN BRIEFClyde Petroleum has issued $50m Senior Loan Notes which have beenplaced with four leading US insurance companies which all participatedin Clyde's first placement of $100m Senior Notes in 1990.  The newNotes have an average interest rate of 7.8% and are repayable from 2001to 2007, with an average life of 9.3 years.  The issue was arranged forClyde by BZW.Back to Headline List CopyrightNORTH SEA LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996OIL INDUSTRY NEWS IN BRIEFDana Petroleum, the independent oil production company, plans to seek aLondon listing and raise about #16m from a placing, open offer andintermediaries offer.  The company, which produces oil in westernSiberia in partnership with some of Russia's largest energy concerns,plans to use the proceeds to develop the South Vat-Yoganskoye Field.Guinness Mahon has placed 145m new ordinary shares at 7p, while 57.7mnew shares are being offered to shareholders on a 3-for-10 basis.  Afurther 28.6m are being offered to intermediaries, also at 7p.Back to Headline List CopyrightNORTH SEA LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996OIL INDUSTRY NEWS IN BRIEFDrexel Oilfield Services has acquired Sweco Oilfield Services, adivision of Environmental Procedures.  Sweco will be merged withDrexel's Brandt division for the design, manufacture and marketing ofsolids control equipment.  Industrial Control Systems has won acontract to supply a control system for an oil treatment unit inRussia's Aksakov oilfield in the Southern Urals.  Lasmo North Sea,Aberdeen, is pre-qualifying suppliers of diving support vessels tocarry out subsea activities on an ad hoc basis during 1996.  LerwickHarbour Trust has achieved ISO 9002 accreditation.Back to Headline List CopyrightNORTH SEA LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996OIL INDUSTRY NEWS IN BRIEFMaersk has advertised requirements for the repair and service ofturbines, pumps, compressors, metering equipment, SCADA and ESDsystems, reverse osmosis water machines and a turbo expander.  Maerskis also in search of uninterruptible power supplies.  The contract willinvolve design, fabrication and testing of units to be located in apressurised unclassified area on an offshore platform.  Delivery isrequired by July 1995.  Replies are due back by February 5, 1996.Back to Headline List CopyrightNORTH SEA LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996OIL INDUSTRY NEWS IN BRIEFMelrose Energy, which made a recommended offer for Pentex Oil, reportedacceptances in respect of 19.4m shares, or 96.59%, when the offerclosed on January 2.Back to Headline List CopyrightNORTH SEA LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996OIL INDUSTRY NEWS IN BRIEFNAM, Assen, has issued a general pre-qualification to establish andmanage a list of contractors for the independent execution of work inrelation to offshore production facilities to be installed in the Dutchsector.  The work categories include construction, transport andinstallation, hook-up and commissioning.  Completed questionnaires aredue back by February 1.Back to Headline List CopyrightNORTH SEA LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996OIL INDUSTRY NEWS IN BRIEFPhillips Petroleum has a requirement for the development of a newproduction reporting system for the oilfields in the Greater Ekofiskarea.  The contract, with an estimated value of Kr 4m, will be for a 12-month period from February 1, 1996.  The operator has also published aseparate periodic information notice covering a wide range of equipmentand services for the Greater Ekofisk area.Back to Headline List CopyrightNORTH SEA LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996OIL INDUSTRY NEWS IN BRIEFMeanwhile, Sabre Instrument Valves, of Altrincham in Cheshire, has beenawarded a contract by Phillips covering all surface instrument valves,manifolds and enclosures for the Ekofisk II project.  The order is tobe phased over the next three years, covering the duration of theEkofisk re-development programme.Back to Headline List CopyrightNORTH SEA LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996OIL INDUSTRY NEWS IN BRIEFTexaco North Sea, Aberdeen, has advertised requirements for valvemanagement services for fixed and floating production systems and re-settable packers and bypass tubing systems for use with electricalsubmersible pumps.  It is also in search of marine drilling servicesfor its drilling operations throughout Europe.  Vector Internationalhas opened its first overseas operation, in Dubai, as part of its plansto expand internationally.Back to Headline List WT02-B35-34IA086-000616-B013-35http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/ey98.html 205.156.212.5 19970122000759 text/html 38228HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 00:05:45 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:40:38 GMTContent-length: 38041Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ey98.html Sample Issue Copyright NORTH SEA RIG FORECAST via NewsNet January 9, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES CONTRACTORS AIM TO TRANSFER SHARE OF RISK BACK TO OPERATORS (351 words) 1995 IS YEAR OF NORTHWEST EUROPEAN MARKET RECOVERY (332 words) 1995 NORTH SEA SEMI-SUBMERSIBLE MARKET (1668 words) INCREASE IN DEMAND IN HOLLAND AND NORWAY OFFSETS UK REDUCTION (1779 words) NORWEGIAN SEMI SUPPLY COULD INCREASE FURTHER (863 words) TRENT CUTBACK ILLUSTRATES UK JACK-UP MARKET FRAGILITY (820 words) STATOIL SENDS MARKET SIGNAL WITH DEEPSEA TRYM FIXTURE (293 words) CopyrightNORTH SEA RIG FORECAST via NewsNetJanuary 9, 1996CONTRACTORS AIM TO TRANSFER SHARE OF RISK BACK TO OPERATORSContractors who have shouldered an increased burden of the contractualand insurance risks involved in the process of offshore drilling arenow seeking to take advantage of improving market conditions to reducetheir risk profile.At the beginning of the 1980s contractors enjoyed a period of highdayrates and were required to carry minimal risks under typicaldrilling contracts with oil companies.  With the collapse of the rigmarket from the mid-1980s, contractors were forced to accept lowerrates and then increasingly onerous contractual liabilities.Responsibility for insurance and legal requirements such as third partyrisk and pollution were passed to the contractor who also had to accept"catch-all" cancellation clauses which would allow early contracttermination under virtually any eventuality and in any event at aslittle as 30 days notice.Since the beginning of 1995, led by the North Sea, the worldwidedrilling rig market, particularly for semi-submersibles, has swungheavily in favour of the contractor.  Rising demand, notably for deepwater operations, and tightening supply as worldwide activity picks uphave transformed the market fundamentals.Firstly dayrates began to rise and then as availability becameincreasingly perceived to be a problem, contractors have been able tonegotiate long-term contracts to replace the well-to-well fixtureswhich have been the standard fare for the past 10 years.With profitable operations and a degree of employment security ensuredfor the immediate foreseeable future, contractors are now turning theirattention to off-loading some of the contractual risk as contracts comeup for renewal.  While this is being resisted by some operators, thereare contractors who consider the changes are no more than ofair andequitable.However, contractors may find it harder to win back the contractualground ceded in the 1980s than to secure higher dayrates and longercontracts.  Oil company contracts managers are familiar with the marketand accept that circumstances have changed.  However, insurance andlegal managers are perhaps less influenced by commercial factors andmay never have known a time when oil companies shouldered most of therisk burden in a drilling contract.Back to Headline List CopyrightNORTH SEA RIG FORECAST via NewsNetJanuary 9, 19961995 IS YEAR OF NORTHWEST EUROPEAN MARKET RECOVERYThe past 12 months have been marked by a major recovery in theNorthwest European mobile drilling rig market.  This was mostpronounced in the semi-submersible sector where fleet contraction inrecent years left supply unable to cope with the increase in demand,driving up dayrates and drawing in equipment from around the world.  Inthe jack-up market the improvement was more modest and indeed it took arecovery in Dutch and Norwegian activity to sustain the market in theface of a fall in UK activity.During 1995 NW European semi-submersible drilling rig demand totalled34.6 rig years, up 23% on the 1994 total of 28.1.  In spite of thisrecovery NW European semi demand is still at a relatively low levelhistorically.  Since 1981, annual demand has only been lower in 1987and 1994 but activity over the past year should be viewed in thecontext of a continuing recovery in demand which began towards the endof 1994.Further evidence of the turnaround in the NW European semi market issignalled by a semi mobilising into the region for the first time since1992 and 1995 was the first year since 1992 that there was a net growthin the semi fleet which increased from 44 to 45 units.  The increase inthe number of rigs being actively marketed increased more substantiallyas two cold stacked semis rejoined the active fleet during the year andtwo others are being reactivated at year-end.  In addition, at the endof the year no less than three semis are en route to the North sea andtwo others are committed to follow.Semi departures in 1995, in spite of the tightening North Sea market,were a reflection of the growing worldwide demand for highspecification units.  Increasing deep water drilling activity in theUS, West Africa and South America created competition for rigs whichdrove up rates and severely limited opportunities to mobilise rigs backinto the North Sea.Back to Headline List CopyrightNORTH SEA RIG FORECAST via NewsNetJanuary 9, 19961995 NORTH SEA SEMI-SUBMERSIBLE MARKETWhile semi demand rose substantially in the UK in 1995, this was partlyoffset by a fall in Norwegian demand.  However, this at least ensuredthat surplus Norwegian units were able to provide some relief in anover-heating UK market.  In the UK semi demand totalled just over 26rig years in 1995, up 42% from the 1994 total of 18.3.  In Norway, areduction in development drilling cut semi demand from 9.01 rig yearsin 1994 to 7.91 in 1995, a fall of over 12%.The marked increase in UK semi activity in 1995 was entirely due anincrease in demand for development drilling.  In 1994, 9.95 rig yearsof UK semi demand was absorbed by exploration and appraisal activity,while development and re-entry requirements accounted for 8.36 rigyears.  In 1995, the exploration total was almost unchanged at 9.94 rigyears while development demand increased by 93% to 16.1.Big increases in development drilling were posted by Agip, Amerada,British Gas, BP, Chevron, Shell and Texaco.  It is likely thatexploration demand would have also increased in 1995 but the heavyfleet commitment to long-term development work meant there was ashortage of equipment for short-term exploration drilling so thatpostponements were not uncommon.In Norway, there was actually a slight increase in exploration drillingwith semis in 1995 to 4.13 rig years compared with 3.73 the previousyear.  However, reductions in development operations by Conoco, Elf,Shell and Statoil cut demand from 5.3 to 3.8 rig years.The reduction in domestic demand and rise in UK activity and ratesencouraged Norwegian contractors to move rigs to the UK.  WestVanguard, Maersk Jutlander and Transocean 8 moved to the UK early in1995 on the heals of the Sovereign Explorer and Ross Isle which madethe switch in 1994.  Having faced the mobilisation of the West Alphaand West Delta to the Far East in 1994, Norwegian operators made earlymoves in 1995 to secure rig availability for a planned increase indevelopment drilling activity from 1996 to the end of the decade.Statoil negotiated an historic 10-year co-operation deal withTransocean initially signing up four semis for long-term periodsincluding the return of the Ross Isle from the UK.  Norsk Hydro and BPfollowed with fixtures to bring the West Vanguard and Maersk Jutlanderback from the UK.  Later in the year Esso booked the return of the WestAlpha from China in 1996 for development drilling on its Balder Fieldwhile Statoil further imposed itself on the market by fixing theDeepsea Trym for three years.  The rig is due back in the North Seafrom Mexico in April 1996.The return of the Ocean Alliance, Kingsnorth Explorer, Ocean Nomad andOcean Princess to the UK was secured on the basis of confirmedcontracts but by the end of the year the owners of the Byford Dolphinand Transocean Seeker were prepared to take the speculative risk ofbeginning to mobilise from the Far East to the North Sea without acontract.  This was as much a reflection of the weak floater market inthe Asia/Pacific region as the drawing power of the North Sea.The great importance of a relatively small number of operators inunderwriting the bulk of UK demand was again emphasised in 1995.  Thetop three operators of semis, Amerada, BP and Shell accounted for 55.1%of total UK semi demand in 1995.  This was slightly down on theirmarket share in 1994 of 56.8% but in absolute terms these `Group 1'operators clocked up a total of 14.34 rig years of semi demand in thepast 12 months compared with 10.4 rig years in 1994.The next tranche of UK operators generating more than one rig year ofdemand have been classed above as `Group 2'.  In 1995, there were fouroperators in this group, Chevron, Mobil, Texaco and Total amassing atotal of 5.62 rig years of semi activity.  In 1994, only two operators,Kerr-McGee and Texaco accounted for 2.45 rig years in this intermediatecategory.The remaining operators with less than one rig year of activity apieceare classed as `Group 3'.  In 1995 there were 12 companies in thiscategory accounting for a total of 6.08 rig years of demand comparedwith 17 companies and 5.46 rig years of demand in 1994.  The reductionin the number of smaller operators and the below average increase inactivity by Group 3 operators is believed to be a consequence of thetight semi market in the UK in 1995 which prevented a number of smalleroperators proceeding with short-term exploration programmes.The forecast of UK activity split in 1996 is based on current drillingintentions with an adjustment to allow for the postponement of someplanned work due to high rig rates, lack of availability and failure tosecure partner approval.  Any curtailment in activity resulting fromtight availability is expected to impact particularly on Group 3 plans.An analysis of Norwegian operator activity reveals that the big threeof Statoil, Norsk Hydro and Saga actually sustained semi activity in1995 at 6.43 rig years compared with 6.39 the previous year.  Thereduction in Norwegian activity was in fact due to a drop in demandfrom other operators from 2.62 to 1.48 rig years.Dayrates surge in 1995 on back of semi shortageWhile it was November 1995 before every marketed semi in the region wason contract and working, it was as early as February 1995 that 100% ofmarketed semis had a contractual commitment.  Apart from a slight blipat the end of the year when Rig 42 re-entered the market (although itis not operational until April 1996) the `contracted utilisation' hasremained at 100% ever since.  Since March 1995, the North Sea RigForecast Availability Index which measures rig availability in theupcoming three month period has remained almost continually at zero.With `contracted utilisation' at 100% and availability at zero, theinevitable consequence was strong upward pressure on dayrates whicheffectively doubled during the course of the year.  At the beginning ofthe year the dayrate range for a standard short-term fixture of a thirdgeneration rig in the UK was #20,000 ($31,200) to #36,000 ($56,000).The fixture which set the top of the range was scheduled for an Auguststart while the bottom the range was fixed by a one-well fixture of asecond generation unit.  A third generation semi was fixed in Januaryfor a 12-month period at $40,000 a day, while a similar unit was fixedto drill a high pressure, high temperature well at #28,000 ($43,680).As operators scrambled to secure availability for 1995 and beyond ratesrose rapidly.  As early as March a second generation semi was fixed forthree months from mid-year at $70,000 a day.  A number of operatorsattempted to resist the dayrate tide, setting negotiating limits at$60,000 and then $70,000 only to see these swept aside.  Towards theend of the year the acceleration in rates inevitably levelled out sothat the range for short-term, standard fixtures finished the year at#44,500 ($69,000) to #48,500 ($75,000).  The range for term fixturesfor this class of rig at the end of 1995 was #48,500 ($75,000) to#54,800 ($85,000).While activity in Norway fell in 1995, dayrates were buoyed by UKdemand and the rise in UK rates.  However, taking account of higheroperating costs, Norwegian sector rates generally lagged UK rates formuch of 1995, a reversal of the historical norm.  The squeeze on rigavailability in the region did ensure that at least some Norwegiancontractors were able to secure contributions from operators towardsthe mandatory pipe-handling upgrades which came into force in 1995.In January 1995, the dayrate range for a short-term fixture of a thirdgeneration semi in Norway was $55,000 to $60,000.  By the end of theyear the range is considered to be $85,000 to $91,000.  Term fixturesof third generation units began the year in the range $65,000 to$72,000 and ended the year in the range $75,000 to $95,000.While Statoil agreed standard term fixtures with Transocean for foursemis starting in 1996 at rates between $75,000 and $85,000, late inthe year an operator grouping of Conoco, Shell and Elf dropped plans tofix a semi for two years because they were not prepared to pay inexcess of $85,000 and in some cases over $100,000 for an upgradedsecond generation semi.  Shortly after,  Statoil stunned contractors byfixing a 20-year old semi Deepsea Trym (ex La Muralla) for three yearsat $75,000 but it remains to be seen whether Statoil's message to themarket has the salutary impact that may have been intended.No Norwegian semi fixtures broached the $100,000 barrier in 1996,partly due to operator resistance and partly the lack of pure fourthgeneration demand.  However, in the UK a number of semi fixtures wereconcluded at dayrates above $100,000.  The contract which led the waywas for deepwater drilling in 1997 and 1998.  Mobil fixed the JackBates for five wells in water depths up to 4,500ft west of Shetland ata dayrate of $118,000 plus a lump sum of $12.5m to cover mobilisationand upgrading.  A slot was assigned to Marathon for a deep water welloff Eire at a rate believed to be in the region of $144,000 including apro rata apportionment of the lump sum costs.At the beginning of 1995 rates for short-term, high specificationfixtures in the UK were in the range #28,000 ($43,000)to #43,500($68,000).  By the end of the year the range was #52,000 ($80,000) to#71,000 ($110,000) for fixtures starting in 1996, a virtual doublingover the course of the year.  At the end of 1995 deep water demandremained high worldwide maintaining upward pressure on rates at the topof the market.Back to Headline List CopyrightNORTH SEA RIG FORECAST via NewsNetJanuary 9, 1996INCREASE IN DEMAND IN HOLLAND AND NORWAY OFFSETS UK REDUCTIONIn spite of an 8.6% fall in UK activity, demand for jack-ups offshoreNorthwest Europe grew in 1995 by 8.4% compared with the previous year.Rising demand in Holland and Norway compensated for the UK slippage.There was also a slight reduction in Danish demand while the first wellwas drilled offshore France for 10 years.In 1995 jack-up demand in the region totalled 31.79 rig years, comparedwith 29.33 the previous year.  UK activity slipped back from 17.86 to16.33 rig years with one factor being the initial impact of thereduction in UK gas prices arising from the continuing privatisation ofthe gas supply industry.  In Holland, there was a recovery from thevery low level of activity in 1994 when there was concern about thefiscal regime and prospectivity.  As a result demand rose in 1995 to atotal of 7.06 rig years compared with 4.88 the previous year, anincrease of almost 45%.Norway also posted an increase in jack-up activity in 1995 as long-termdevelopment drilling operations got underway on a number of fields inthe Southern Norwegian sector of the North Sea.  Demand totalled 4.74rig years including time spent in the yard by two rigs which wereupgraded on contract.  This compared with a total of 2.67 rig years in1994.Danish activity slipped back slightly in 1995 to 3.46 rig yearscompared with 3.92 the previous year but after a cutback to threedrilling units in 1994, Maersk Oil & Gas resumed a four-rig operationin the fourth quarter of 1995.  Amerada Hess was the only otheroperator to drill offshore Denmark with a jack-up in 1995 althoughStatoil drilled a well at the end of the year with the semi DeepseaBergen.In the UK, British Gas has lost two-thirds of its market share in theindustrial gas supply sector and now faces the loss of its domesticmonopoly from 1997, some five years earlier than previously expected.As a result the former state utility has over-contracted and is facedwith managing a growing surplus of gas.  While the problem is atemporary feature of the liberalisation of the supply industry it isexpected to take some years to work through the system.As a consequence of the fall in gas prices Conoco deferred plans todevelop the Viking Fs field, where two development wells were planned,and suspended its contract with the Neddrill 4.  Gaps opened in Shell'sdrilling sequence with the jack-up Britannia as drilling to sustaincontract deliveries to British Gas was deferred.  In the second half ofthe year some operators experienced problems securing partner approvalfor planned exploration wells due to the weak medium term outlook forUK gas prices.  Other early consequences such as Phillips postponementof additional drilling on the Judy Field and Shell's delay in the startof its planned Shearwater development had no impact on the 1995 jack-upmarket.The NW European jack-up fleet was relatively stable in 1995, startingthe year totalling 34 units and ending the year at 35.  Early in 1995the Neddrill Trigon left for Argentina and a contract with Total.Effectively this was the only departure of a North Sea rig during theyear although the Perro Negro 5 arrived from Italy to drill a well forElf in the Bay of Biscay offshore France and then left again.  Apartfrom the brief visit of the Saipem jack-up there were two otheradditions to the jack-up fleet.  Global Marine completed the extensiveupgrading of the former British Gas accommodation/slant drilling unitBay Driller which entered competitive operations as the Glomar AdriaticXI.  Santa Fe brought its heavy-duty jack-up Monitor back fromAustralia where it had been mobilised by Esso in 1994.Looking at UK jack-up demand in terms of operator activity, just threecompanies, Mobil, Phillips and Shell maintained more than two rig yearsof activity during 1995.  In total these three `Group 1' companiesaccounted for 7.05 rig years of activity.  There were five companies,Amoco, Arco, BHP, BP and Conoco in the `Group 2' middle range whicheach clocked-up between one and two rig years with jack-ups in the UKaccounting for a total of 6.83 rig years of demand.  The remainingeight `Group 3' operators which generated less than one rig year ofactivity apiece accounted for a total of just 2.3 rig years of activityin 1995.This profile of operator activity is somewhat different from 1994 whenoverall UK activity was slightly higher.  Group 1 activity was less in1994 with just two operators, Phillips and Shell amassing a total of5.7 rig years between them.  There was more Group 2 activity with sixcompanies, Amoco, Arco, BP, Conoco, Elf and Mobil maintaining a totalof eight rig years of jack-up activity.  Group 3 comprised a total of13 companies which generated a total of 4 rig years of demand.Like the semi market the UK jack-up market in 1995 was reliant on asmaller number of operators.  There were fewer operators drilling justone or two wells in 1995 than in 1994.  This was a consequence of adrop in UK jack-up exploration activity (see below) which may have beenpartly due to smaller operators dropping planned wells due to reducedgas price expectations and partly due to the generally tight North Seajack-up market which left few opportunities to secure a rig at shortnotice.The outlook suggests no individual operator will sustain more than tworig years of demand during 1996, increasing the proportion of Group 2and Group 3 operators in the market.UK jack-up development drilling up, but exploration downDevelopment drilling and production related operations using jack-upunits increased in the UK in 1995 by almost 27% in spite of the slightoverall drop in UK demand.  The converse is that jack-up explorationoperations measured in terms of rig demand dropped by 47% compared with1994.Increases in development drilling and re-entry operations by Amoco,Arco, Conoco, Lasmo, Mobil and Phillips lifted activity to a total of11.9 rig years in 1995.  However, an across the board fall inexploration drilling resulted in jack-up demand for e&a work fallingfrom 8.5 rig years in 1994 to 4.5 in 1995.Partly exploration fell in 1995 because the UK upstream activity cyclehad moved into a development drilling phase, but in the second half ofthe year fears about weak gas prices in the medium term had an impacton exploration.  The tight rig market in the region also left fewopportunities for smaller operators to pick up a rig at short notice.It is evident from the analysis above that fewer small UK operatorsdrilled with jack-ups in 1995.Development drilling and production-related activity with jack-ups alsoincreased in the Netherlands in 1995.  In 1994, there was just 2.37 rigyears of jack-up demand on development operations but in 1995 thisincreased to 4.33 as a result of additional activity by Unocal,Wintershall, Occidental and NAM with only Elf Petroland bucking thetrend by increasing its commitment to exploration in 1995.  There wasalso a slight increase in jack-up demand for exploration drilling inHolland in 1995 with 2.67 rig years of demand generated compared with2.52 in 1994.Jack-up rates rise on balanced marketThe Northwest European jack-up market maintained a fairly closesupply/demand balance in 1995 and while rates rose significantly at thebeginning of the year they quickly reached a plateau.  Althoughutilisation levels were broadly similar to the semi market, the jack-upmarket lacked both the severity of the short-term semi shortage and thefears about medium term availability which sustained the semi raterise.In 1995, utilisation of jack-ups averaged 87.2% calculated on the basisof rigs in employment and 98.8% based on the percentage of marketedrigs with current or future contract commitments.  This compared with83.8% and 92.5% respectively for the same measures in 1994.After being weak for much of 1994, jack-up availability began totighten at the end of the year and then all but disappeared by March1995, at least on a short-term basis.  The North Sea Rig ForecastAvailability Index which remained in the range of 20-40% throughout1994, fell to 18% at the end of 1994 and then quickly to zero by theend of March 1995.At the beginning of 1995 the dayrate range for short-term jack-upfixtures for standard UK sector operations was $26,000 to $29,000.  ByMarch 1995 the range was $35,000 to $45,000 and changed relativelylittle the rest of the year apart from some firming of the bottom endof the range to a maximum of $41,000 in the fourth quarter.In spite of the rising rates and tight short-term availability therewas no switch in the UK from short-term to long-term fixing and throughmuch of the year fixture volume remained low so that there was littleupward pressure on dayrates after the initial hike in the firstquarter.  The term fixtures that did take place mirrored or slightlylagged the short-term range indicating contractors shared operatorsviews that medium and long-term availability was not a concern.  At thevery end of the year there were indications of the bottom-end of therange falling away slightly due to rising first quarter availabilitybut this was based on evidence from the Dutch sector.The market for heavy-duty jack-ups in the UK in 1995 was influencedmore by semi rates than the jack-up market.  Short-term rates began theyear in the range $55,000 to $65,000 and ended the year between $80,000and $90,000.  The peak rate for this class of rig during the year wasfor a long-term contract starting in the fourth quarter of 1996 whichwas fixed in October 1995 at $105,000.  In the first half of the year aterm fixture was concluded for Central UK sector operations in 1996 at$75,000.In Norway, rates for heavy-duty jack-up fixtures ranged from a low of$72,000 for a one-well in-fill fixture, to a high of around $106,000for one-year plus options starting in the fourth quarter of 1996.However, two other term fixtures in Norway were closer to the bottomend of this range at initial rates of $75,000 and $82,000.Dayrates in the Netherlands in 1995 were similar to those in the UKranging from just over $30,000 at the beginning of the year to a peakof just under $42,000.  Two term contracts were agreed under floatingrate mechanisms linked to the market.Back to Headline List CopyrightNORTH SEA RIG FORECAST via NewsNetJanuary 9, 1996NORWEGIAN SEMI SUPPLY COULD INCREASE FURTHERStatoil's fixture of the semi Deepsea Trym (ex La Muralla) for a three-year period from May 1995 ensures the return of yet another semi to theNorwegian sector in 1996 although it will be nine years since theOdfjell purchase last worked in the North Sea as the Nortrym.  TheDeepsea Trym is due to leave Mexico in February to mobilise to theNorth Sea.The Norwegian sector semi fleet currently totals nine units but  withthe confirmation of the mobilisation of the Deepsea Trym is on courseto increase to at least 12 by May.  The West Alpha left China in thefirst week of 1996 to begin a three month tow back to the Norway whereit will begin a two-year contract with Esso in April.  The MaerskJutlander has for some time been committed to return from the UK toNorway in May 1996 to begin a 27-month contract with BP.While the current forecast for Norwegian activity in 1996 is based on12 rigs in operation from May, it remains possible that the total couldbe 13.  Without a 13th semi moving into Norway it will be difficult forAmerada, Conoco, Deminex, Mobil and Shell to drill planned explorationwells in 1996.  However, Conoco, Shell and Elf earlier abandoned atender to fix a semi for two years from 1996 due to high dayrates andthe low technical merit so of the rigs offered.Now Conoco and Shell are considering the options again with a view to apotential co-operation with Amerada, Deminex and Mobil.  Drilling rigsunder consideration are believed to include the Byford Dolphin,currently en route speculatively from the Far East, and the Nanhai VI,currently in China but being marketed by Stena Drilling against apotential purchase.  Whether a contract is agreed is very muchdependent on the commercial aspects of the deal.  All the operatorsalso remain interested in sublet opportunities with other Norwegianoperators.  For example, it may be that Statoil could have some slotsavailable in its schedule with the Deepsea Trym but this is not yetclear.A number of other issues remain outstanding before the 1996 Norwegiansector semi picture is finalised.  Statoil has still to fix a secondadditional exploration semi contract to start during 1996.  The fourthgeneration Transocean semi Ross Rig remains available from the thirdquarter of 1996 and would appear to be the most flexible solution forStatoil if commercial terms can be agreed.  Norsk Hydro, Saga andStatoil await the outcome of the 15th Licence Round awards beforeselecting a rig for anticipation deep water operations from the end of1996 or early in 1997.  While Saga remains a proponent of the EfExapproach of using a converted second generation unit, it is thoughtStatoil may prefer a more conventional fourth generation unit.  Thismight be another reason for fixing the Ross Rig for 1996 explorationslot.Statoil is also considering bids from Halliburton, Smedvig andTransocean for construction and operation of a novel Swath catamaranvessel for completion and workover operations on the Aasgard Field.However, it is understood that tender prices are well above the levelthat Statoil envisaged in its initial evaluation of the concept and itremains to be seen whether the project can survive a higher capitalcost.In the UK, some of Shell's plans for the latter part of 1996 remainunclear.  The company has deferred its planned Kingfisher developmenton which pre-drilling was scheduled to start in the fourth quarter of1996.  A letter of intent had been awarded to Sonat Offshore for thesemi John Shaw to drill at least six wells.  The John Shaw is now backin the market but Shell could still take the rig for one of twopotential outstanding requirements.It needs a semi for four to seven wells on the Curlew development,again from the fourth quarter of 1996 but it is not yet clear whetherShell will operate the semi itself or will leave that to the leadcontractor for the project development as a whole.  Shell also has arequirement for an additional semi for an exploration programme in theUK from sometime in the second half of 1996.  If no suitable rigs areavailable from Shell's Win 90s lead drilling contractors then thisprogramme could be deferred.  However, as well as the John Shaw fromSonat, the Sedco Forex semi Sedco 711 is also available from the thirdquarter.Shell is also understood to have indicated an interest in taking anassignment of the Benreoch from BP but it is not yet clear whether anyslots will be available.  BP has extended the Benreoch for 12 monthsfrom May 1996 but as yet does not have a full programme for the rig.Vacant slots could still be filled internally by BP but it isunderstood that both Conoco and Shell have been approached as potentialsub-lessors should BP fail to fill the schedule.  Elsewhere BPcontinues to await development approval for the Schiehallion Fieldbefore making rig commitments for the drilling programme from late 1996and early 1997.Back to Headline List CopyrightNORTH SEA RIG FORECAST via NewsNetJanuary 9, 1996TRENT CUTBACK ILLUSTRATES UK JACK-UP MARKET FRAGILITYThe vulnerability of UK jack-up demand in 1996 to cutbacks wasillustrated in December by Arco's decision to terminate its contractwith the Maersk Enhancer.  Arco has decided to drill one less well onthe Trent platform so that the rig is available from early Februaryalthough the notice period for contract termination is not up until mid-March.  Previously Arco had planned to drill on Trent until Junefollowed by some exploration drilling during platform installationbefore returning, potentially with the Enhancer to undertake completiontiebacks until late in the year.Ranger's Southern UK drilling plans for 1996 have been blowing hot andcold as the implications of the gas price outlook are digested by theoperator and its partners.  Until late in 1995, Ranger was planningmore than one well in the third quarter of 1996.  Then the wholeprogramme appeared in danger but now it seems to be back on the railsthough with perhaps just one well surviving.Uncertainty also surrounds Wintershall's Windermere development inblocks 49/9B and 49/4B.  Project go-ahead is still outstanding and thelonger it is delayed the more difficult it will be for Wintershall tostart development drilling in 1996.In November, BP cutback its southern UK sector drilling plans andtrimmed the F G McClintock contract back from one year from November1995 to just one well.  Now BP has firmed-up a second well for the rigand will keep it until May 1996.  BP's Southern UK jack-up programmestill remains somewhat uncertain thereafter.  It is expected that itwill retain the Neddrill 7 in the second half of the year but isthought likely to release the McClintock.While some southern UK gas exploration and development drilling plansfor 1996 continue to be fragile, increasing Dutch activity continues totake up the slack.  Allowances made for anticipated UK cutbacks andassumptions made about Dutch activity mean that there is no net changein the 1996 forecast of jack-up demand which remains at 34 rig years.As expected Occidental has extended the Neddrill 3 in Holland from Juneuntil February 1997 and is shortly due to take delivery of the Neddrill4 for a one-year programme.  Elf Petroland has fixed the Cecil Provinefor two wells plus an option from March 1996 when the rig is due to bereleased by Amoco in the UK.  However, the Arch Rowan, which inDecember moved from the UK to Holland to drill a well for Amoco, islikely to return to the UK for Amoco in the first quarter beforecrossing back to Amoco in Holland in the second half of the year.Wintershall is close to fixing a jack-up for a Netherlands programme oftwo firm wells plus three optional wells from March 1996, an earlierstart than previously expected.  The Rowan California is believed to beemerging as a front-runner for the contract.  The rig was stacked offGreat Yarmouth in the UK at the end of 1995 after being released byPhillips Petroleum.  Conoco Netherlands is still waiting for partnerapproval to drill a 21-day exploration well which is unlikely nowbefore the second quarter at the earliest.The Neddrill 9 still has a two to three-month gap in its schedule fromApril ahead of a well for RWE-DEA and a 300-day contract with ClydeNetherlands which is due to start in August although a start as late asOctober is still possible.In the UK, Elf has issued tender invitations for the provision of twojack-ups for the second phase of development drilling on theElgin/Franklin project, each for a firm period of 30 months plusoptions for four six-month wells and six one-month completions.  Onerig is for delivery mid-1997 and the other mid-1998.  It is believedthat one of the requirements is effectively a market check against theGalaxy I which Elf has already fixed for a minimum of 18 months fromOctober 1996 but this has not yet been confirmed.  Newbuildings areexpected to be bid to Elf for the 1998 commencement but this couldprove to be in competition with the Galaxy.  The earlier start datecould suit the Magellan or the Rowan Gorilla II and Gorilla IV (both inthe US) while the Rowan newbuild Rowan Gorilla V is not due to bedelivered before 1998.It is now clear the jack-up Neddrill Trigon, currently in Argentina,will return to the North Sea in 1996 although the arrival date is stillsubject to Total options.  The earliest arrival is May and the latestis September.  The rig is believed to be in line for a two-yearcontract with Saga in Norway for a development drilling programme onthe Varg Field, although possibly not starting until late 1997.However, Saga has yet to confirm the fixture although it is expected todo so later in January.Back to Headline List CopyrightNORTH SEA RIG FORECAST via NewsNetJanuary 9, 1996STATOIL SENDS MARKET SIGNAL WITH DEEPSEA TRYM FIXTUREStatoil sent a strong signal on rates to Norwegian drilling contractorswhen it fixed the second generation semi Deepsea Trym (ex La Muralla)for a firm three year period from May 1996 at a fixed dayrate of$75,000.  The rig is currently in Mexico and it appears that Statoilwill not directly compensate mobilisation and upgrading costs likely tobe well in excess of $10m.  Odfjell Drilling purchased La Murallaagainst the Statoil contract for a price believed to be in the regionof $27m.Other Norwegian contractors have recently been bidding secondgeneration rigs into Norway at rates in excess of $100,000 a day.Apart from making a significant saving over a three-year contractStatoil may also be hoping that it can use its dominant market positionin controlling half the Norwegian sector semi fleet to put a cap onrapidly rising rates.  It would appear to be signalling to contractorsthat it is not prepared to accept any rate even if it might be dictatedby the market at large.In the UK a term fixture of a third generation semi confirmed thecurrent market range at up to $85,000 while a fourth generation semiwas fixed for a deep water well west of Shetland in 1996 at a rate of$110,000.Rates for jack-up fixtures in Holland in December are thought to havebeen coloured by the anticipation of increasing rig availability in thefirst quarter of 1996.  As a result fixtures were agreed at ratesbelieved to be around $38,500 and $39,000 a day.  In the UK a short-term fixture was agreed at a rate believed to be in the region of$41,000 based on a tender round which closed at the end of October.Back to Headline List